COACHELLA - CITY CODE 
2003 
____________ 
A Codification of the General 
Ordinances of the City 
Of Coachella, CA 
____________ 
Beginning with Supp. No. 10, 
Supplemented by Municipal Code Corporation 
____________ 
  
PREFACE 
The Coachella City Code is a codification of the general and permanent ordinances of Coachella, CA. The ordinances were compiled, edited and indexed by the editorial staff of Matthew Bender & Company under the direction of Caroline Hernandez, Coachella deputy city clerk. 
Beginning with Supplement 10, Municipal Code Corporation will be keeping this code current by regular supplementation. 
The code is organized by subject matter under an expandable three-factor decimal numbering system which is designed to facilitate supplementation without disturbing the numbering of existing provisions. Each section number designates, in sequence, the numbers of the title, chapter, and section. Thus, Section 2.12.040 is Section .040, located in Chapter 2.12 of Title 2. In most instances, sections are numbered by tens (.010, .020, .030, etc.), leaving nine vacant positions between original sections to accommodate future provisions. Similarly, chapters and titles are numbered to provide for internal expansion. 
In parentheses following each section is a legislative history identifying the specific sources for the provisions of that section. This legislative history is complemented by an ordinance disposition table, following the text of the code, listing by number all ordinances, their subjects, and where they appear in the codification; and beginning with Supplement No. 10, legislation can be tracked using the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
A subject-matter index, with complete cross-referencing, locates specific code provisions by individual section numbers. 
This supplement brings the Code up to date through Ordinance 1130, passed January 23, 2019. 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310 
800-262-2633 
HOW TO USE YOUR CODE 
This Code is organized to make the laws of the city as accessible as possible to city officials, city employees and private citizens. Please take a moment to familiarize yourself with some of the important elements of this Code. 
Numbering System. 
The numbering system is the backbone of a Code of Ordinances; Municipal Code Corporation uses a unique and versatile numbering structure that allows for easy expansion and amendment of this Code. It is based on three tiers, beginning with title, then chapter, and ending with section. Each part is represented in the code section number. For example, Section 2.04.010 is Section .010, in Chapter 2.04 of Title 2. 
Title. 
A title is a broad category under which ordinances on a related subject are compiled. This Code contains about 15 to 20 titles. For example, the first title is Title 1, General Provisions, which may contain ordinances about the general penalty, code adoption and definitions. The titles in this Code are separated by tabbed divider pages for quick reference. Some titles are Reserved for later use. 
Chapter. 
Chapters deal with more specific subjects, and are often derived from one ordinance. All of the chapters on a related subject are grouped in one title. The chapters are numbered so that new chapters which should logically be placed near certain existing chapters can be added at a later time without renumbering existing material. For example, Chapter 2.06, City Manager, can be added between 2.04, City Council, and Chapter 2.08, City Attorney. 
Section. 
Each section of the code contains substantive ordinance material. The sections are numbered by "tens" to allow for expansion of the code without renumbering. 
Tables of Contents. 
There are many tables of contents in this Code to assist in locating specific information. At the beginning of the code is the main table of contents listing each title. In addition, each title and chapter has its own table of contents listing the chapters and sections, respectively. 
Ordinance History Note. 
At the end of each code section, you will find an "ordinance history note," which lists the underlying ordinances for that section. The ordinances are listed by number, section (if applicable) and year. (Example: (Ord. 272 § 1, 1992).) 
Beginning with Supplement No. 10, a secondary ordinance history note will be appended to affected sections. Ordinance history notes will be amended with the most recent ordinance added to the end. These history notes can be cross referenced to the code comparative table and disposition list appearing at the back of the volume preceding the index. 
Statutory References. 
The statutory references direct the code user to those portions of the state statutes that are applicable to the laws of the municipality. As the statutes are revised, these references will be updated. 
Cross-Reference Table. 
When a code is based on an earlier codification, the cross-reference table will help users find older or "prior" code references in the new code. The cross-reference table is located near the end of the code, under the tabbed divider "Tables." This table lists the prior code section in the column labeled "Prior Code Section" and the new code section in the column labeled "Herein." 
As of Supplement No. 10, this table will no longer be updated. 
Ordinance List and Disposition Table. 
To find a specific ordinance in the code, turn to the section called "Tables" for the Ordinance List and Disposition Table. This very useful table tells you the status of every ordinance reviewed for inclusion in the code. The table is organized by ordinance number and provides a brief description and the disposition of the ordinance. If the ordinance is codified, the chapter (or chapters) will be indicated. (Example: (2.04, 6.12, 9.04).) If the ordinance is of a temporary nature or deals with subjects not normally codified, such as budgets, taxes, annexations or rezones, the disposition will be "(Special)." If the ordinance is for some reason omitted from the code, usually at the direction of the municipality, the disposition will be "(Not codified)." Other dispositions sometimes used are "(Tabled)," "(Pending)," "(Number Not Used)" or "(Missing)." 
Beginning with Supplement No. 10, this table will be replaced with the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
Code Comparative Table and Disposition List. 
Beginning with Supplement No. 10, a Code Comparative Table and Disposition List has been added for use in tracking legislative history. Located in the back of this volume, this table is a chronological listing of each ordinance considered for codification. The Code Comparative Table and Disposition List specifies the ordinance number, adoption date, description of the ordinance and the disposition within the code of each ordinance. By use of the Code Comparative Table and Disposition List, the reader can locate any section of the code as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
Index. 
If you are not certain where to look for a particular subject in this code, start with the index. This is an alphabetical multi-tier subject index which uses section numbers as the reference, and cross-references where necessary. Look for the main heading of the subject you need, then the appropriate subheadings: 
BUSINESS LICENSE 
See also BUSINESS TAX 
Fee 5.04.030 
Required when 5.04.010 
The index will be updated as necessary when the code text is amended. 
Instruction Sheet. 
Each supplement to the new code will be accompanied by an Instruction Sheet. The Instruction Sheet will tell the code user the date of the most recent supplement and the last ordinance contained in that supplement. It will then list the pages that must be pulled from the code and the new pages that must be inserted. Following these instructions carefully will assure that the code is kept accurate and current. Removed pages should be kept for future reference. 
Page Numbers. 
When originally published, the pages of this code were consecutively numbered. As of Supplement No. 10, when new pages are inserted with amendments, the pages will follow a "Point Numbering System". (Example: 32, 32.1, 32.2, 32.2.1, 32.2.2., 33). Backs of pages that are blank (in codes that are printed double-sided) will be left unnumbered but the number will be "reserved" for later use. 
Electronic Submission. 
In the interests of accuracy and speed, we encourage you to submit your ordinances electronically if at all possible. We can accept most any file format, including Word, WordPerfect or text files. If you have a choice, we prefer Word, any version. You can send files to us as an e-mail attachment, by FTP, on a diskette or CD-ROM. Electronic files enable us not only to get you your code more quickly but also ensure that it is error-free. Our e-mail address is: ords@municode.com . 
For hard copy, send one copy of all ordinances passed to: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
P.O. Box 2235 
Tallahassee, FL 32316 
Customer Service. 
If you have any questions about this Code or our services, please contact Municipal Code Corporation at 1-800-262-2633 or: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310  
Title 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Chapters:  
Chapter 1.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 
 
1.04.010 - How code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as the "Coachella Municipal Code," and may be so cited. 
(Prior code § 1-1)  
1.04.020 - Rules of construction. 
In the construction of this code, and of all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council: 
"City, in the city" means mean the city of Coachella, California. The words "in the city" means and includes all territory over which the city now has or shall hereafter acquire jurisdiction for the exercise of its police powers or other regulatory powers. 
"Computation of time" means, unless otherwise specifically provided, the time within which an act is required to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last; except that the last day shall be excluded if it is Sunday or a holiday. 
"Council" means the city council of the city of Coachella, California. 
"County" means the county of Riverside, in the state of California. 
"Day" means the period of time between any midnight and the midnight following. 
"Daytime, nighttime." "Daytime" is the period of time between sunrise and sunset. "Nighttime" is the period of time between sunset and sunrise. 
"Delegation of authority" means whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department or other officer of the city to do some act or perform some duty, or granting some right to him or her as such official, it shall be construed to authorize such department head or officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to do the required act or perform the required duty, or it shall grant to them such right, unless the terms of the provisions designate otherwise. 
"Gender" means a word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be implied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
"Interpretation" means, in the interpretation and application of any provision of this code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirement adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of this code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than any general provisions imposed by this code, the provisions imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be applicable. 
"Joint authority" means whenever a joint authority is given to three or more persons or officers, it shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of them. 
"Month" means a calendar month. 
"Number" means the singular number includes the plural and the plural number includes the singular. 
"Oath" includes an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
"Official time" means Pacific standard time or Pacific day-light-saving time, as may be in current use in the city. 
"Officials, officers, departments, etc." means whenever references are made to officials, board, commissions, departments or other municipal agents by title only, such reference shall be read as though followed by the words "of the city of Coachella, California." 
"Or, and." "Or" may be read "and" and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
"Owner" when applied to real estate, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint interest or other fee interest in the whole or a part of such real estate. 
"Person" includes any person, firm partnership, association, organization, business trust, corporation or company. 
"Personal property" includes every species of property, except real property, as defined in this section. 
"Preceding, following" means next before and next after, respectively. 
"Process" includes a writ or summons issued in the course of judicial proceedings of either a civil or criminal nature. 
"Property" includes real property and personal property. 
"Real property" includes land, tenements and hereditaments. 
"Shall, may." "Shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive. 
"Signature" or "subscription; mark" includes a mark when the signer or subscriber cannot write, such signer's or subscriber's name being written near the mark by a witness who writes his or her own name near the signer's or subscriber's name; but, a signature or subscription by mark can be acknowledged or can serve as a signature or subscription to a sworn statement only when two witnesses so sign their own names thereto. 
"State" means the state of California. 
"Street" includes streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public ways in the city and shall include all parts thereof constituting the designated right-of-way. 
"Tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, includes any person holding a written or an oral lease of, or who occupies the whole or a part of, such building or land, either alone or with others. 
"Tenses" includes the past and future tenses, and the future includes the present. 
"Week" consists of seven consecutive days. 
"Writing" includes any form of recorded message capable of comprehension by ordinary visual means. Whenever any notice, report, statement or record is required or authorized by this code, it shall be made in writing in the English language, unless expressly provided otherwise. 
"Year" means a calendar year unless otherwise provided. 
(Prior code § 1-2)  
1.04.030 - Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this code, so far as they are the same as those of ordinances existing at the time of the effective date of this code, shall be considered as continuations thereof insofar as they apply to conditions existing prior to the effective date of this code. 
(Prior code § 1-3)  
1.04.040 - Catchlines of sections. 
The catchlines of several sections of this code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, unless otherwise expressly provided, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(Prior code § 1-4)  
1.04.050 - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding for violation of such ordinance pending at the time of the repeal. 
(Prior code § 1-5)  
1.04.060 - Severability of parts of code. 
It is declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this code shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality, invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this code. 
(Prior code § 1-6)  
1.04.070 - Amendments to code—Effect of new ordinances—Amendatory language. 
All ordinances passed subsequent to this municipal code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this code, may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this code and printed for inclusion herein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section or subsection or any portion thereof, such repealed portions may be excluded from such code by omission from reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code by the city council. 
Amendments to any of the provisions of this code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this code in the following language: 
 "That section _______ of the Coachella Municipal Code, is hereby amended to read as follows: ..." 
The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the code is to be added, the following language may be used: 
 "That the Coachella Municipal Code of Ordinances is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered _______ which said section reads as follows: ..." 
The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. 
All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, with reference to the subject matter, as the case may be. 
(Prior code § 1-7)  
1.04.080 - Altering code. 
It is unlawful for any person to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this code or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city of Coachella to be misrepresented. 
(Prior code § 1-10)  
1.04.090 - Code enforcement officer—-Authority to arrest. 
The city manager may designate an employee or employees of the city to act as code enforcement officers. Pursuant to California Penal Code Section 836.5, the code enforcement officers of the city may make arrests for violations of this code or other city ordinances, and may issue citations for misdemeanors and infractions pursuant to California Penal Code Chapter 5C (commencing with Section 853.6) and this code, for violations of those provisions of such code which the code enforcement officers have the duty to enforce. 
(Prior code § 1-11)  
Chapter 1.08 - GENERAL PENALTY 
Sections: 
 
1.08.010 - General penalty. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to violate, or fail to comply with, any of the requirements of this code or the provisions of any code adopted by reference by this code, or any provision of any ordinance of the city not included within this code. Any person violating any such provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this code, or any code adopted by reference by this code, or any other city ordinance, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, unless the violation is specifically designated as constituting only an infraction. Any violation charged as a misdemeanor may be reduced to an infraction for good cause at the discretion of the city prosecutor. 
Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this code, or any provision of any code adopted by reference by this code, or of any other city ordinance, is committed, continued, maintained, allowed, or permitted by such person, and may be punished accordingly. 
B.  Except in cases where a different penalty is prescribed by any ordinance of this city, any person convicted of an infraction for violation of an ordinance of the city is punishable by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first violation, a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second violation of the same section of this code within one year, and a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a third violation of the same section of this Code within one year. A fourth violation, and all subsequent violations, of the same section of this Code within one year shall be prosecuted as a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and up to six months imprisonment per violation. 
C.  Except in cases where a different punishment is prescribed by any ordinance of the city, any person convicted of a misdemeanor for violation of an ordinance of the city is punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand doollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment in the county jail not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Prior code § 1-8) 
(Ord. No. 1098, § 2, 12-14-16)  
1.08.020 - Working of prisoners. 
A.  Any person imprisoned for the violation of any ordinance of the city may be required to perform labor on the streets, public works, or public property within the city. 
B.  Such labor shall only be required to be performed as directed by the chief of police and no prisoner shall be required to labor for more than eight hours during any twenty-four (24) hour period of his or her imprisonment. 
(Prior code § 1-9)  
Chapter 1.10 - COST RECOVERY PROGRAM 
 
1.10.010 - Violations deemed public nuisances. 
Any condition created, caused, committed, or maintained in violation of any provision of this code, or any code adopted by this code, or any state or federal law enforceable by the city, shall be deemed a public nuisance that may be abated by the city by any means permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. 1078, § 1, 9-9-15)  
1.10.020 - Nuisance abatement cost recovery. 
The city is entitled to recover all costs, expenses, fines, fees, and attorneys' fees incurred related to any nuisance abatement or code enforcement activity ("nuisance costs"). For purposes of this chapter, "nuisance abatement activity" includes any action by the city intended to cause or compel compliance with any provision of this code, any adopted codes, or any applicable State or federal laws, such as any code enforcement activity, nuisance abatement activity, city staff activity, legal actions, administrative actions, criminal actions, civil actions, or rehabilitative efforts. For purposes of this chapter, nuisance costs include, but are not limited to, administrative fines, administrative expenses, administrative overhead, city staff time, city variable and fixed expenses, inspection costs, investigation costs, enforcement costs, abatement costs, litigation costs and fees, prosecution costs and fees, attorneys' costs and fees, cost recovery expenses, and collection costs. 
Any final administrative, criminal, or civil action determining responsibility for the existence of a code violation shall constitute conclusive evidence of the city's right to recover its nuisance costs from the identified responsible party. For purposes of this chapter, "final administrative, criminal, or civil actions" include, but are not limited to, administrative notices after all appeals have been exhausted or the appeal period has expired, administrative citations after all appeals have been exhausted or the appeal period has expired, administrative hearing decisions, criminal convictions, and civil orders and judgments. 
(Ord. No. 1078, § 1, 9-9-15; Ord. No. 1098, § 3, 12-14-16)  
1.10.030 - Attorneys' fees. 
The prevailing party in any administrative, criminal, civil, judicial, or special action or proceeding to abate a nuisance or enforce this code may recover its reasonable attorneys' fees. In no such action or proceeding shall an award of attorneys' fees to a prevailing party exceed the amount of reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the city in the action or proceeding. For purposes of this chapter, "administrative, criminal, civil, judicial, or special actions and proceedings" include, but are not limited to, inspection warrants, abatement warrants, administrative notices, administrative orders, administrative citations, administrative hearings, permit revocations, criminal prosecutions, civil actions, cost recovery hearings or actions, and any such related writs or appeals. 
(Ord. No. 1078, § 1, 9-9-15)  
1.10.040 - Collection remedies. 
In addition to all other cost recovery options available at law and equity, and at the discretion of the city, all recoverable nuisance costs, including attorneys' fees, as permitted by this chapter, may be collected as a personal obligation of all responsible parties jointly and severally, may be made a judgment lien against the nuisance property, and may be made a special assessment against the nuisance property. 
(Ord. No. 1078, § 1, 9-9-15)  
1.10.050 - Cost invoice. 
A.  The cost recovery procedures delineated in this chapter are in addition to all other cost recovery options available to the city at law and equity. 
B.  The city shall serve an invoice identifying all nuisance costs incurred in any nuisance abatement or code enforcement related activity ("invoice") on all responsible parties and all parties with a recorded interest in the nuisance property (collectively "interested parties"). The invoice shall specify the case number for the action, and shall identify the legal owner, the street address, the assessor's parcel number, and the legal description of the nuisance property, as available and applicable. The invoice shall specify that the responsible parties shall have forty-five (45) calendar days to pay all of the city's nuisance costs or else they will become a lien and a special assessment against the nuisance property for the amount of the assessment. The invoice shall specify how payment may be remitted to the city. The invoice shall also specify that the interested parties shall have fifteen (15) calendar days from the date of service to request a hearing regarding the amount of the nuisance costs, and it shall specify the procedure for requesting that hearing. The invoice shall specify that the failure to timely and properly request a hearing shall constitute a waiver of the interested parties' right to dispute the nuisance costs or further challenge the city's cost recovery rights and shall constitute a failure to exhaust their administrative remedies. 
C.  When requesting a hearing pursuant to this section, the requesting party must provide the city with the following information in writing within the required fifteen (15) calendar days: 
1.  The case number for the action identified in the invoice. 
2.  The requestor's full legal name. 
3.  The requestor's home address. 
4.  The requestor's address for service if different than the requestor's home address. 
5.  The requestor's phone number. 
6.  The amount of nuisance costs disputed. 
7.  The grounds for all disputes. 
(Ord. No. 1078, § 1, 9-9-15)  
1.10.060 - Service. 
A.  All notices and documents required to be served on interested parties pursuant to this chapter may be served in any of the following ways: 
1.  Personally service. 
2.  First-class mail to last known address. 
3.  Certified mail to last known address. 
4.  First-class mail to nuisance property. 
5.  Certified mail to nuisance property. 
6.  Posting on the nuisance property. 
B.  Service shall be deemed effective on the date personally served or mailed, as applicable. 
C.  Failure of any interested party to receive any notice or document properly served pursuant to this section shall not affect the validity of the notice or document, the validity of its service, nor the city's cost recovery rights. 
D.  All notices and documents required to be served on the city pursuant to this chapter must be personally served or mailed to the city clerk's office. If mailed, the notice or document must be received by the city within the time specified for service. 
(Ord. No. 1078, § 1, 9-9-15)  
1.10.070 - Nuisance costs hearing. 
A.  Hearing officer . If a hearing to dispute the invoice is timely and properly requested by an interested party ("requestor"), an administrative hearing shall be set before a neutral hearing officer selected by the city ("hearing officer"). 
B.  Hearing date . The city shall set the hearing before the hearing officer between fifteen (15) and sixty (60) days after the timely and proper request for the hearing is received by the city, or on a date otherwise agreed to by all parties to the hearing. The city's representatives and all requestors shall be entitled to be present and heard at the hearing. 
C.  Hearing notice . The city shall provide at least ten (10) calendar days advance notice of the hearing date, time, and location to all requestors. The hearing notice shall specify that failure to appear at the hearing shall constitute a waiver of the right to dispute the invoice and a failure to exhaust the requestors' administrative remedies. 
D.  Hearing rules . The hearing officer shall conduct an informal hearing and shall consider all relevant evidence presented at the hearing in determining the amount of the nuisance costs to be assessed. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply to this hearing. 
E.  Hearing officer's decision . At the hearing, or within five days thereafter, the hearing officer shall issue a decision approving or modifying the amount of the nuisance costs ("decision"). The decision shall identify the legal owner, the street address, the assessor's parcel number, and the legal description of the nuisance property, as available and applicable. All the costs of the hearing shall be borne by the non-prevailing parties. If any cost recovery is upheld, even in part, the city shall be the prevailing party. If cost recovery is entirely denied, the requestor shall be the prevailing party. If the city is the prevailing party, the confirmed amount of the nuisance costs shall include all costs incurred related to the hearing. If the city is the prevailing party, the decision will order the responsible parties to pay the confirmed nuisance costs to the city within thirty (30) days, and shall specific that any confirmed nuisance costs not paid within thirty (30) days shall become a lien and a special assessment against the nuisance property. The hearing officer's decision shall be final. The city shall serve notice of the hearing officer's decision on all interested parties. 
(Ord. No. 1078, § 1, 9-9-15)  
1.10.080 - Nuisance abatement lien. 
A.  If the nuisance costs are not paid when due, the city may record a lien against the nuisance property for any unpaid nuisance costs. The city shall serve the owners of the nuisance property by certified mail with a copy of the lien prior to recording. 
B.  In the event the lien is discharged, released, or satisfied, notice of the discharge shall be recorded. 
C.  If the lien is not satisfied within ninety (90) days, the city may foreclose on the lien. 
D.  The lien shall be in the form substantially as follows: 
NOTICE OF LIEN 
(Claim of City of Coachella) 
Pursuant to Coachella Municipal Code ("CMC") chapter 1.10, on or about [MONTH] [DAY], [YEAR], the City of Coachella ("City") instituted a nuisance abatement action against the herein describe parcel of real property intended to cause or compel compliance with the CMC. The City has incurred costs, expenses, and fees that have not been reimbursed by the responsible parties. Accordingly, the City is entitled to, and hereby claims, a lien against the nuisance property in the amount of $[AMOUNT] until this amount has been paid in full and discharged of record. The record owner of the nuisance property is [RECORD OWNER NAME]. The nuisance property is the parcel of real property located in the City of Coachella, County of Riverside, State of California at [STREET ADDRESS], Coachella, California [ZIP], Assessor's Parcel Number [APN]. The legal description for the nuisance property is: 
[LEGAL DESCRIPTION] 
Dated: [MONTH] [DAY], [YEAR] 
___________ 
City Manager 
City of Coachella, California 
[ACKNOWLEDGEMENT] 
(Ord. No. 1078, § 1, 9-9-15)  
1.10.090 - Special assessment. 
A.  If the nuisance costs are not paid when due, the city may levy a special assessment against the nuisance property for any unpaid nuisance costs. The special assessment may also be recorded against the nuisance property. The city shall serve all parties with an interest in the nuisance property by certified mail with a copy of the special assessment prior to recording. The recording shall specify that the property may be sold after three years by the tax collector for the unpaid delinquent assessments. 
B.  Notice of the special assessment shall be provided to the tax collector for the county, whereupon it shall be the duty of the tax collector to add the amounts of the special assessment to the next regular tax bills levied against the nuisance property, and shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure under foreclosure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. 
C.  After recordation, the special assessment may be foreclosed on as a lien in the manner and means provided by law. 
D.  The recorded special assessment shall be in the form substantially as follows: 
NOTICE OF LIEN AND 
SPECIAL ASSESSMENT 
(Claim of City of Coachella) 
Pursuant to Coachella Municipal Code ("CMC") chapter 1.10, on or about [MONTH] [DAY], [YEAR], the City of Coachella ("City") instituted a nuisance abatement action against the herein describe parcel of real property intended to cause or compel compliance with the CMC. The City has incurred costs, expenses, and fees that have not been reimbursed by the responsible parties. Accordingly, the City is entitled to, and hereby claims, a lien and special assessment against the nuisance property in the amount of $[AMOUNT] until this amount has been paid in full and discharged of record. The record owner of the nuisance property is [RECORD OWNER NAME]. The nuisance property is the parcel of real property located in the City of Coachella, County of Riverside, State of California at [STREET ADDRESS], Coachella, California [ZIP], Assessor's Parcel Number [APN]. The legal description for the nuisance property is: 
[LEGAL DESCRIPTION] 
Dated: [MONTH] [DAY], [YEAR] 
___________ 
City Manager 
City of Coachella, California 
[ACKNOWLEDGEMENT] 
(Ord. No. 1078, § 1, 9-9-15)  
Title 2 - ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL 
Chapters:  
Chapter 2.04 - CITY COUNCIL 
Sections: 
 
2.04.010 - Compensation of city council members. 
A.  California Government Code Section 36516 provides for compensation for each member of the city council based upon the population of the city. The city has a population of thirty-eight thousand four hundred eighty-six (38,486) as of January 2007, according to the California Department of Finance. 
B.  Pursuant to California Government Code Section 36516, each member of the city council shall receive an increase in his or her monthly salary, beginning on the starting date of the term of office for which candidates or city council members are elected in the November 2018 election. Beginning on the date on which a council member is sworn into a new term of office the new salary of each council member shall be seven hundred and eleven dollars and five cents ($711.05). 
(Ord. 997 § 1, 2008: Ord. 874 § 1, 2002: prior code § 2-17) 
(Ord. No. 1127, § 2, 10-10-18)  
2.04.020 - Increase or decrease in council member's salary. 
Following any new and later estimates of population made by the department of finance placing the city in a population group other than that set forth in Section 2.04.010, the salary is payable to each member of the council shall be increased or decreased accordingly to equal the sum prescribed for that population group in Section 36516 of the Government Code; provided, however, that the salary as so increased or decreased shall become payable only on and after the date upon which one or more members of the council become eligible therefor by virtue of beginning a new term of office following the next succeeding general municipal election held in the city. 
(Prior code § 2-18)  
2.04.030 - Resolving tie votes at elections by holding special run-off elections. 
A.  Subdivision (b) of Section 15651 of the California Elections Code authorizes cities to resolve a tie vote in an election by holding a special run-off election involving those candidates who received an equal number of votes and the highest number of votes. 
B.  When, in an election for any elective office of the city, two or more candidates receive an equal number of votes and the highest number of votes, a special run-off election shall be held between or among those candidates in order to determine the winner of the election. If a special run-off election is necessary, the city council, at its next regular or special meeting after the election at which there was a tie vote (but not before certifying the results of the election) shall call for a special run-off election to be held in the city on a Tuesday not fewer than forty (40) nor more than one hundred twenty-five (125) days after the administrative or judicial certification of the election that resulted in a tie vote. If a regular election is to be held throughout the city within that time period, the special run-off election shall be held on the same day as, and consolidated with, the regular election. 
(Ord. 872 § 1, 2002)  
2.04.040 - Time and place of regular meetings. 
The city council shall meet regularly on the second and fourth Wednesdays of each month at six p.m. at the Coachella City Council Chambers, City Hall located at 1515 Sixth Street, Coachella, California. The mayor may schedule closed sessions of the city council to commence at any time prior to or after such regular meetings. When a closed session shall be scheduled before a regular meeting of the city council, such closed session shall begin at five p.m. 
(Ord. 952 § 1, 2006: Ord. 865 § 1, 2002: Ord. 855 § 3, 2001: prior code § 2-19)  
2.04.050 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1074, § 1, adopted April 8, 2015, repealed § 2.04.050, which pertained to election of mayor to be presiding officer and derived from prior code, § 2-22; and Ord. 877, § 2, adopted in 2002.  
2.04.060 - Duties of presiding officer. 
The mayor shall assume the chair of the presiding officer immediately after his or her election. The presiding officer shall preserve strict order and decorum at all regular and special meetings of the council. He or she shall state every question coming before the council, announce the decision of the council on all subjects and decide all questions of order, subject, however, to an appeal to the council in which event a majority vote of the council shall govern and conclusively determine such question of order. He or she shall vote on all questions, his or her name being called last. He or she shall sign all ordinances and resolutions adopted by the council during his or her presence. In the event of the absence of the mayor, the presiding officer shall sign ordinances or resolutions as then adopted. 
(Prior code § 2-23)  
2.04.070 - Quorum—Compelling attendance. 
A majority of all the members elected to the council shall constitute a quorum at any regular or special meeting of the council. In the absence of a quorum, the presiding officer, shall, at the instance of any two members present, compel the attendance of absent members. 
(Prior code § 2-26)  
2.04.080 - Silence constitutes affirmative vote. 
Unless a member of the council states that he or she is not voting, his or her silence shall be recorded as an affirmative vote. 
(Prior code § 2-31)  
2.04.090 - Enforcement of decorum. 
The chief of police, or such member or members of the police department as he or she may designate, shall be sergeant-at-arms of the council meetings. He, she or they shall carry out all orders and instructions given by the presiding officer for the purpose of maintaining order and decorum at the council meeting. Upon instructions of the presiding officer, it shall be the duty of the sergeant-at-arms, or any of them present, to place any person who violates the order and decorum of the meeting under arrest, and cause him or her to be prosecuted under the provisions of this code, the complaint to be signed by the presiding officer. 
(Prior code § 2-33)  
2.04.100 - Special committees. 
All special committees shall be appointed by the presiding officer, unless otherwise directed by the council. 
(Prior code § 2-35)  
2.04.110 - Committee of the whole. 
The only standing committee of the council shall be the committee of the whole. The mayor shall be the presiding officer of the committee of the whole, and the rules of proceedings in the council shall be observed in the committee of the whole as far as the same may be applicable. 
(Prior code § 2-36)  
2.04.120 - Members may file protests against council action. 
Any member shall have the right to have the reasons for his or her dissent from, or protest against, any action of the council entered on the minutes. 
(Prior code § 2-37)  
2.04.130 - Approval of claims against city. 
No account or other demand against the city shall be allowed until the same has been considered and reported upon by the committee of the whole. 
(Prior code § 2-38)  
2.04.140 - Preparation of ordinances. 
All ordinances shall be prepared by the city attorney. No ordinance shall be prepared for presentation to the council unless ordered by a majority vote of the council, or requested in writing by the mayor, city manager, or prepared by the city attorney on his or her own initiative. 
(Prior code § 2-39)  
2.04.150 - Prior approval of documents by administrative staff. 
All ordinances, resolutions and contract documents shall, before presentation to the council, have been approved as to form and legality by the city attorney or his or her authorized representative, and shall have been examined and approved for administration by the mayor or city manager, or his or her authorized representative, where there are substantive matters of administration involved. 
(Prior code § 2-40)  
2.04.160 - Consent calendar. 
The city manager or mayor shall designate noncontroversial items not requiring a roll call vote as consent calendar items. When the consent calendar is called, any council member may move that the matter be discussed and voted upon individually. Those items not brought up separately shall be approved in one vote as to all items on the calendar, as though each one was voted upon individually. 
(Prior code § 2-41)  
2.04.170 - Robert's Rules adopted. 
The proceedings of the council shall be governed under "Robert's Rules of Order" on all matters pertaining to parliamentary law, but no ordinance, resolution, proceeding or other action of the council shall be invalidated or the legality thereof otherwise affected by the failure or commission to observe or follow such rules. 
(Prior code § 2-42)  
Chapter 2.08 - CITY OFFICERS GENERALLY 
Sections: 
 
2.08.010 - Compensation of the city clerk and city treasurer established. 
The compensation of the city clerk and the city treasurer is fixed as follows: 
City clerk (per month plus health benefits in the same amount as paid to management employees and council members) 	$300.00 
City treasurer (per month plus health benefits in the same amount as paid to management employees and council members) 	$300.00 
 
(Prior code § 2-1)  
2.08.020 - Clerk's, treasurer's salaries additional to expenses. 
The salaries prescribed for the city clerk and treasurer shall be exclusive of any amounts payable to the city clerk or city treasurer as reimbursements for actual and necessary expenses incurred by him or her in the performance of official duties for the city. 
(Prior code § 2-2)  
2.08.030 - When clerk's and treasurer's salaries paid. 
The salaries of the city clerk and treasurer shall be paid on the first day of each month following the rendition of the services of such officials to the city. 
(Prior code § 2-3)  
2.08.040 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1074, § 3, adopted April 8, 2015, repealed § 2.08.040, which pertained to hours of city clerk's office and derived from prior code, § 2-3.1.  
2.08.050 - Filing fee for candidates for elective office. 
A.  A filing fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) is established for candidate's nomination papers for elective offices at municipal elections held in the city. 
B.  The filing fee shall be paid to the city clerk by each candidate for an elective office at the time the candidate's nomination paper is filed with the city clerk. 
C.  The city clerk shall pay to the city treasurer all fees received which shall be deposited in the general fund. 
(Prior code § 2-6)  
2.08.060 - Political sign regulations. 
Applicants who wish to post temporary political signs shall comply with the following requirements: 
A.  Each temporary political sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area; 
B.  The aggregate area of signs on a single parcel shall not exceed eighty (80) square feet; 
C.  Temporary political signs shall not be nailed to trees, nor affixed upon any public property or public utility poles and shall not be located in any public right-of-way; 
D.  All temporary political signs shall be removed within ten (10) days after the applicable election date. The applicant shall be personally responsible for the removal of the political signs; and 
E.  No fee or permit shall be required for the right to erect political signs but the applicant or his or her agent shall file with the city community development department a map or sketch or otherwise adequately locate where the signs will be erected. The applicant shall state that he or she has obtained the consent of private property owners for the placement of temporary political signs on their property. 
(Prior code § 3-35)  
2.08.070 - City treasurer—Duties. 
A.  The city treasurer shall perform the following duties on behalf of the city: 
1.  Those duties specified by statute including, but not limited to, those enumerated in Government Code Sections 41001 through 41005, 43623, 43880, 43884 and 53828. 
2.  Those duties pertaining to the investment of city funds pursuant to Articles 1 and 2 of Chapter 4 of Part 1 of Division 2 of Title 5 of the Government Code (commencing with Section 53600). 
3.  Such other duties as may be delegated to the city treasurer by resolution of the city council, but only as permitted by state law. 
B.  The city treasurer shall have the powers conferred by statute, by this section, or by any resolution of the city council, and those powers necessary and reasonable to perform the duties of the office of city treasurer as defined in this section. 
(Ord. 935 § 1, 2005)  
Chapter 2.10 - ELECTED MAYOR 
 
2.10.010 - Findings. 
In November of 2004, the residents of the city of Coachella approved Measure A, which amended the Coachella Municipal Code to make the office of mayor an elected office of the city with a term of two years. 
(Ord. No. 1074, § 2, 4-8-15)  
2.10.020 - Purposes. 
A.  The city council intends by adding this chapter to ensure the complete and seamless transition of the office of mayor from an appointed to an elected position as required by the voters, and to ensure compliance with state and local laws. 
B.  The city council does not intend by this chapter to expand or restrict the scope of the office beyond what is provided under state law. (Gov. Code §§ 34900 et seq.) 
(Ord. No. 1074, § 2, 4-8-15)  
2.10.030 - Eligibility. 
To hold office as elected mayor, a person must, at the time he or she assumes office, be an elector of the city and a registered voter of the city at the time the nomination papers were issued to the candidate as set forth under state law. (Gov. Code § 34904.) If the residence of the mayor changes to a place outside the boundaries of the city, the office of the mayor shall become vacant. 
(Ord. No. 1074, § 2, 4-8-15)  
2.10.040 - Term. 
The elected mayor shall serve a term of two years. 
(Ord. No. 1074, § 2, 4-8-15)  
2.10.050 - Duties and powers. 
A.  The mayor shall be the presiding officer at the meetings of the city council. If the mayor is absent or unable to act, the mayor pro tempore shall serve until the mayor returns or is able to act. The mayor pro tempore shall have all the powers and duties of the mayor. The mayor shall be the official head of the city for all ceremonial purposes. 
B.  For all other purposes, the mayor is a member of the city council and has all of the powers and duties of a member of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1074, § 2, 4-8-15)  
2.10.060 - Selection of mayor pro tempore. 
A mayor pro tempore shall be chosen in the manner provided in Government Code section 36801. 
(Ord. No. 1074, § 2, 4-8-15)  
2.10.070 - Vacancy. 
In the case of a vacancy in the office of the mayor for any reason, the city council shall fill the vacancy by appointment. If the council fails to fill it within sixty (60) days, it shall call an election to fill the vacancy to be held on the next established election date to be held not less than one hundred fourteen (114) days thereafter. A person appointed or elected to fill a vacancy shall hold office for the unexpired term of the former incumbent. (Gov. Code § 34902 (a).) 
(Ord. No. 1074, § 2, 4-8-15)  
Chapter 2.12 - CITY MANAGER 
Sections: 
 
2.12.010 - Office created—Appointment and tenure. 
The office of city manager of the city is established and created pursuant to the provisions of Section 34851 et seq. of the Government Code. The city manager shall be appointed by the city council wholly on the basis of his or her administrative and executive ability and qualifications and shall hold office for and during the pleasure of the city council. 
(Prior code § 2-53)  
2.12.020 - Residence. 
Residence in the city at the time of appointment of a city manager shall not be required as a condition of the appointment, but within one hundred eighty (180) days thereafter, the city manager must become a resident of the city, or the city council shall declare the office of city manager to be vacant. 
(Prior code § 2-54)  
2.12.030 - Eligibility of council member. 
No person elected as a council member of the city shall, subsequent to such election, be eligible for appointment as city manager until one year has elapsed after such council member shall have ceased to be a member of the city council. 
(Prior code § 2-55)  
2.12.040 - Bond. 
The city manager shall furnish a corporate surety bond, to be approved by the city council, in such sum as may be determined by the city council and which shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties imposed upon the city manager as prescribed in this chapter. The premium for such bond shall be a proper charge against and shall be paid by the city. 
(Prior code § 2-56)  
2.12.050 - Temporary manager. 
The city manager shall appoint, subject to the approval of the city council, one of the other officers or department heads of the city to serve as manager pro tempore during any temporary absence or disability of the city manager. In case of absence or disability of the city manager and his or her failure to so appoint a manager pro tempore, the city council may designate some qualified city employee to perform the duties of the city manager during the period of absence or disability of the city manager. 
(Prior code § 2-57)  
2.12.060 - Compensation. 
The city manager shall receive such compensation as the city council shall from time to time determine and fix by resolution, and the compensation shall be a proper charge against such funds of the city as the city council shall designate. 
(Prior code § 2-58)  
2.12.070 - Reimbursement for expenses. 
The city manager shall be reimbursed for all sums necessarily incurred or paid by him or her in the performance of his or her duties or incurred when traveling on business pertaining to the city under direction of the city council; reimbursement shall only be made, however, when a verified itemized claim, setting forth the sums expended for such business for which reimbursement is requested has been presented to the city council for approval and has been so approved. 
(Prior code § 2-59)  
2.12.080 - Duties generally. 
The city manager shall be the administrative head of the government of the city under the direction and control of the city council except as otherwise provided in this chapter. He or she shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all the affairs of the city which are under his or her control. In addition to his or her general powers as administrative head, and not as a limitation thereon, it shall be his or her duty and he or she shall have the powers set forth in the following sections. 
(Prior code § 2-60)  
2.12.090 - Law enforcement duties. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager to enforce all laws and ordinances of the city and to see that all franchises, contracts, permits, licenses and privileges granted by the city council are faithfully observed. 
(Prior code § 2-61)  
2.12.100 - Authority over employees. 
It shall be the duty of the manager and he or she shall have the authority to control, order and give directions to all heads of departments and to subordinate officers and employees of the city under his or her jurisdiction through their department heads. 
(Prior code § 2-62)  
2.12.110 - Power of appointment, removal, promotion, and demotion. 
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the city manager to appoint, remove, promote, and demote any officers and employees of the city, except the city clerk, city attorney, and city treasurer, subject to the provisions of any personnel ordinance and resolutions, rules and regulations that may be adopted by the city council. However, the city manager shall have complete authority to appoint, remove, promote, and demote, with or without cause, any person who holds any of the following positions: assistant city manager; human resources director; public works director; city engineer; community development director; finance director; and any other position that may be created at the level of director or higher. 
(Ord. 965 § 1, 2007: prior code § 2-63)  
2.12.120 - Administrative organization. 
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the city manager to recommend to the city council such reorganization of offices, positions, departments or units under his or her direction as may be indicated in the interest of efficient, effective and economical conduct of the city's business. 
(Prior code § 2-64)  
2.12.130 - Recommendations to council. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager to recommend to the city council for adoption such measures and ordinances as he or she deems necessary or expedient. 
(Prior code § 2-65)  
2.12.140 - Attendance at council meetings. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager to attend all meetings of the city council unless excused therefrom, except when his or her removal is under consideration. 
(Prior code § 2-66)  
2.12.150 - Financial reports. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager to keep the city council at all times fully advised as to the financial conditions and needs of the city. 
(Prior code § 2-67)  
2.12.160 - Budgets. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager to prepare and submit the proposed annual budget, and to supervise the administration of the budget after its adoption. 
(Prior code § 2-68)  
2.12.170 - Approval of expenditures. 
No expenditures shall be submitted or recommended to the city council except on report and approval of the city manager, provided, however, that provisions of this section with respect to the actual purchase of supplies shall not apply to purchases made when required under a sealed bid presented to the council. 
(Prior code § 2-69)  
2.12.180 - Approval of warrants before payment. 
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the city manager to approve all warrants drawn on the city before payment thereof. 
(Prior code § 2-70)  
2.12.190 - To make investigations—Generally. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager to make investigations into the affairs of the city and any department or division thereof. 
(Prior code § 2-71)  
2.12.200 - Investigation of complaints—Enforcement of franchises, permits and privileges. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager to investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the city government and in regard to the service maintained by public utilities in the city, and to see that all franchises, permits or privileges granted by the city are faithfully performed and observed. 
(Prior code § 2-72)  
2.12.210 - Supervision of public property. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager to exercise general supervision over all public buildings, public parks and over all other public property under the control and jurisdiction of the city council. 
(Prior code § 2-73)  
2.12.220 - Job to be full time. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager to devote his or her entire time to the duties of his or her office in the interests of the city. The city manager shall not be employed or work in any other capacity. 
(Prior code § 2-74)  
2.12.230 - Additional duties. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager to perform such other duties and exercise such other powers as may be delegated from time to time by ordinance or resolution or other action of the city council. 
(Prior code § 2-75)  
2.12.240 - Council-manager relations. 
The city council and its members shall deal with the administrative services of the city only through the city manager, except for the purpose of inquiry, and neither the city council nor any members thereof shall give orders to any subordinates of the city manager. The city manager shall take his or her orders and instructions from the city council only when sitting in a duly held meeting of the city council and no individual council member shall give any orders or instructions to the city manager; but nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent any council member from discussing matters of the city with the city manager. 
(Prior code § 2-76)  
2.12.250 - Departmental cooperation. 
It shall be the duty of all subordinate officers and the city clerk, city treasurer and city attorney to assist the city manager in administrating the affairs of the city efficiently, economically and harmoniously so far as may be consistent with their duties as prescribed by law and ordinances of the city. 
(Prior code § 2-77)  
2.12.260 - Attendance—Participation in meetings of boards—Commissions. 
The city manager shall attend any and all meetings of the planning commission, and any other commissions, boards or committees created by the city council upon his or her own volition or upon direction of the city council. At such meetings which the city manager attends, he or she shall be heard by such commissions, boards or committees as to all matters upon which he or she wishes to address the members thereof, and he or she shall inform such members as to the status of any matter being considered by the city council. He or she shall cooperate to the fullest extent with the members of all commissions, boards or committees appointed by the city council. 
(Prior code § 2-78)  
2.12.270 - Removal authorized—Notice. 
The removal of the city manager shall be only upon a three-member vote of the whole council in regular council meeting, subject, however, to the provisions of the next succeeding sections. In case of his or her intended removal by the city council, the city manager shall be furnished with a written notice stating the council's intention to remove him or her and the reason therefor, at least thirty (30) days before the effective date of his or her removal. 
(Prior code § 2-79)  
2.12.280 - Hearing on removal. 
Within seven days after the delivery to the city manager of such notice he or she may by written notification to the city clerk, request a hearing before the city council. Thereafter, the city council shall fix a time for the hearing which shall be held at its usual meeting place, but before expiration of the thirty (30) day period, at which the city manager shall appear and be heard. Such hearing may be private at the option of the manager. 
(Prior code § 2-80)  
2.12.290 - Suspension pending removal hearing. 
After furnishing the city manager with written notice of intended removal, the city council may suspend him or her from duty, but his or her compensation shall continue until his or her removal by the council passed subsequent to the aforesaid hearing. 
(Prior code § 2-81)  
2.12.300 - Discretion of council in removal. 
In removing the city manager, the city council shall use its uncontrolled discretion and its action shall be final and shall not depend upon any particular showing or degree of proof at the hearings; the purpose of which is to allow the city manager to present to the city council his or her grounds of opposition to his or her removal prior to its action. 
(Prior code § 2-82)  
2.12.310 - Limitation in removal. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter enumerated, the city manager shall not be removed from office during or within a period of ninety (90) days next succeeding any general municipal election held in the city at which election a member of the city council is elected. The purpose of this provision is to allow any newly elected member of the city council or a reorganized city council to observe the actions and ability of the city manager in the performance of the powers and duties of his or her office. After the expiration of the ninety (90) day period, the provisions of the preceding sections as to the removal of the city manager shall apply and be effective. 
(Prior code § 2-83)  
2.12.320 - Performance contract with city council. 
A contract for performance of the duties to be performed by the city manager may be entered into between the city council and the city manager. 
(Prior code § 2-84)  
Chapter 2.16 - DIRECTOR OF FINANCE 
Sections: 
 
2.16.010 - Position created. 
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 40805.5 of the Government Code of the state of California, there is created and established the office of director of finance of the city. 
(Prior code § 2-95)  
2.16.020 - Declared subordinate to manager. 
The director of finance shall be under the jurisdiction of the city manager. 
(Prior code § 2-96)  
2.16.030 - Bond required. 
Pursuant to the requirements of Section 37209 of the Government Code, the director of finance before entering upon the duties of his or her office shall execute a bond in the penal sum of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). 
(Prior code § 2-97)  
2.16.040 - Statutory duties—To maintain records. 
The financial and accounting duties imposed upon the city clerk by Section 40802 through 40805 of the Government Code are transferred to the director of finance. He or she shall maintain all records readily reflecting the financial condition of the city and all of its departments. 
(Ord. 890 § 1, 2003: prior code § 2-98)  
2.16.050 - Additional duties. 
In addition to the duties set forth in Section 2.16.040, the director of finance shall perform the following duties: 
A.  Compile all financial information necessary for the preparation of the city's budget and make such information available to the officer whose responsibility it is to prepare the budget. 
B.  Prepare a monthly statement of all receipts and disbursements in sufficient detail to show the financial condition of the city and each of its departments. 
C.  Handle the issuance of all licenses for the city. 
D.  Supervise and be in charge of all payroll records. 
E.  Maintain a record of all insurance policies and keep the city manager or city administrative officer informed of their expiration dates. 
F.  See that all taxes, assessments, license fees and other revenues of the city, or for whose collection the city is responsible, and all money receivable by the city from the county, state or federal government, or from any court, department or agency of the city, are collected. 
G.  Perform such other duties as are from time to time assigned to him or her by the city manager or city administrative officer. 
H.  The director of finance shall adjust all taxes provided for in this code on a fiscal year basis. All adjustments shall be based on the Bureau of Labor Statistics' Consumer Price Index for all Urban Consumers. The said CPI on January 1, 1978 equaled one hundred (100). No adjustments shall take effect until the director's report is ordered filed by the city council. The city council may reject but may not modify any one or more of the adjustments in any report before ordering this report filed. 
(Prior code § 2-99)  
2.16.060 - Performance contract with city council. 
A contract for performance of the duties to be performed by the director of finance may be entered into between the city council and the director of finance. 
(Prior code § 2-100)  
Chapter 2.20 - CITY ATTORNEY 
Sections: 
 
2.20.010 - Office of city attorney. 
A.  The office of city attorney is established which shall consist of one person holding the office of city attorney who shall be appointed by the city council and such assistant city attorneys as may be appointed by the city attorney. All persons holding the office of city attorney or assistant city attorney shall be admitted and licensed to practice law in California. The person appointed to the office of city attorney shall possess sufficient experience, knowledge and judgment in municipal law as may be required by the city council. 
B.  The city attorney and each assistant city attorney shall take and sign an oath of office and file same with the city clerk prior to assuming the duties of the office provided that no oath shall be required by any lawyer contracted as special counsel by the city attorney. 
C.  For purposes of the Governmental Tort Claims Act, the city attorney and each assistant city attorney is deemed to be an employee of the city; but such designation shall not apply to any lawyer contracted as special counsel by the city attorney. 
(Prior code § 2-201)  
2.20.020 - Duties of the city attorney. 
A.  The city attorney shall be legal counsel to the city on legal matters affecting or pertaining to the city. In such capacity, the city attorney shall advise the city council, the mayor and city council members, all boards and commissions of the city, the city manager, the city clerk, the city treasurer and the heads of each department of the city on all legal matters affecting or pertaining to the city which are brought to the attention of the city attorney by the mayor, city council members or the city manager, or the city manager's designee provided that the city attorney, at all times, shall represent the interests of the city. 
B.  The duties of the city attorney shall include the following: 
1.  Attend regular meetings of the city council unless excused by the mayor or the city council; 
2.  Attend special meetings of the city council as may be requested by the mayor or city manager; 
3.  Attend regular or special meetings of the planning commission as may be requested by the mayor or city manager; 
4.  Approve or prepare all ordinances and resolutions and sign them; 
5.  Prepare and/or approve all contracts, not including purchases authorized by the purchase ordinance, to which the city is a party including the negotiation thereof as may be necessary and sign them prior to their approval by the city council; 
6.  Prosecute all civil actions in favor of the city as may be authorized by the city council; 
7.  Prosecute any civil actions in favor of the city which are authorized by statute if the statute provides for the recovery of attorneys fees and if, in the opinion of the city attorney it is reasonably likely that the city would recover attorneys fees sufficient to pay for the cost of litigation; 
8.  Prosecute all violations of this code which constitute infractions or misdemeanors except where the same is conducted by the district attorney of the county of Riverside at no cost to the city; 
9.  Report to the city council on the legal affairs of the city in the manner and time as requested by the city council; 
10.  Review and supervise all liability claims filed against the city; and 
11.  Such duties and functions as the city council may delegate by contract or resolution. 
(Prior code § 2-202)  
2.20.030 - Authority of the city attorney. 
The city attorney is vested with the following authority and functions: 
A.  Appear on behalf of the city and represent the interests of the city in all actions or proceedings, whether legal, equitable or mandamus, to which the city or its officials, officers and employees may became parties. 
B.  Contract or hire special counsel to provide legal services and experts to provide specialized knowledge to the city provided that all such contracts shall be approved by the city council and that the cost of such services shall not exceed the amounts authorized by the city council. 
C.  Delegate any duty of such office to an assistant city attorney or special counsel as determined by the city attorney. For that purpose, the city attorney may hire any lawyer to act as special counsel to the city attorney or for the city subject to the consent of the city council. 
D.  Negotiate and/or review all contracts not including purchases authorized by the purchase ordinance, to which the city is a party, approve and sign said contracts and recommend their approval to the city council. 
E.  Join, as Amicus, those appeals to which the city is not a party but the outcome of which would affect the interests of the city. 
F.  Prosecute all civil actions in favor of the city as may be authorized by the city council. 
G.  Prosecute any civil actions in favor of the city which are authorized by statute if such statute provides for the recovery of attorneys fees and if, in the opinion of the city attorney it is reasonably likely that the city would recover attorneys fees sufficient to pay for the cost of litigation. 
H.  Prosecute all violations of this code which constitute infractions or misdemeanors except where the same is conducted by the district attorney of the county of Riverside at no cost to the city. 
(Prior code § 2-203)  
2.20.040 - Cooperation with the city attorney. 
A.  All elected officials, officers, appointees, employees, contractor employees and contractors of the city shall provide reasonable assistance and cooperation to the city attorney in the performance of the duties and functions described in this chapter. 
B.  All officers, appointees, employees, contractor employees and contractors of the city shall disclose all information known to them about any matter that may affect or pertain to the legal interests of the city. 
C.  No officer, appointee, employee or contractor employee of the city shall enter into any contract, not including purchases authorized by the purchase ordinance, on behalf of the city without the prior written consent of the city attorney and the approval of the city council. Likewise, no officer, appointee, employee or contractor employee of the city shall negotiate any contract, not including purchases authorized by the purchase ordinance, on behalf of the city without the advise, consent and direction of the city attorney. Any contract negotiated or entered into on behalf of the city contrary to the requirements of this chapter shall be null and void and they shall not bind the city. 
(Prior code § 2-204)  
2.20.050 - Annual appropriation. 
The city council shall appropriate, in its sole judgment, sufficient funds in the annual budget to fund the duties and the costs of the office of the city attorney. The city manager and the city attorney shall adopt mutually satisfactory procedures for the expenditure and accounting of such funding. 
(Prior code § 2-205)  
2.20.060 - Compensation. 
The city council shall determine the compensation of the city attorney by resolution and/or written agreement. The city council may grant the same benefits available to the management employees of the city or the equivalent of such benefits except for a car allowance. The city council may provide for the reimbursement of the city attorney's reasonable travel and lodging expenses when necessary to perform the city's business or attend seminars on municipal matters. 
(Prior code § 2-206)  
2.20.070 - Term of office. 
The person appointed to the office of city attorney shall hold such office for the term prescribed by the city council provided that such term shall not exceed five years from the date of any appointment or from the date of any renewal of such term or appointment. 
(Prior code § 2-207)  
2.20.080 - Written agreement. 
The city council may enter into a written agreement with the city attorney prescribing the term of such appointment and such other terms and conditions of employment as may be deemed necessary and reasonable including compensation and duties provided that such agreement may not conflict with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 2-208)  
Chapter 2.24 - CONFLICT OF INTEREST 
Sections: 
 
2.24.010 - Previous codes rescinded. 
All previously adopted resolutions approving various separate conflict of interest codes are rescinded. 
(Prior code § 2-131)  
2.24.020 - Incorporation of state provisions. 
A.  The Political Reform Act, Government Code Section 81000, et seq., requires state and local government agencies to adopt and promulgate conflict of interest codes. The fair political practices commission has adopted a regulation, 2 Cal. Code of Regs. Section 18730, which contains the terms of a standard conflict of interest code. It can be incorporated by reference and may be amended by the fair political practices commission after public notice and hearing to conform to amendments in the political reform act. Therefore, the terms of 2 Cal. Code of Regs. Section 18730 and any amendments to it duly adopted by the fair political practices commission are incorporated by reference and, along with the appendix adopted by resolution of the city council in which members and employees are designated and disclosure categories are set forth, constitute the conflict of interest code of the city. 
B.  The city council may adopt a resolution amending the designated positions and disclosure categories of the appendix as it deems necessary upon recommendation of the city manager or city attorney. 
C.  The designated employees shall file statements of economic interest with the filing officer who will make the statements available for public inspection and reproduction (Gov. Code Section 81008). Upon receipt of the statements of the officers and employees designated by Government Code Section 87200, the agency shall make and retain a copy and forward the original of these statements to the California Fair Political Practices Commission or as otherwise required by Government Code Section 87500. 
(Prior code § 2-132)  
2.24.030 - City clerk delegated as filing clerk. 
Pursuant to Section 5(C) of the Conflict of Interest Code, all designated employees shall file their statements with the city clerk to whom the city council delegates the authority to carry out the duties of filing officer. 
(Ord. 890 § 2, 2003: prior code § 2-133)  
Chapter 2.28 - PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1072, § 2, adopted Feb. 11, 2015, amended Ch. 2.28 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 2.28, §§ 2.28.010—2.28.060, pertained to parks and recreation commission, and derived from Prior code § 16-1; Ord. No. 1047, § 2, adopted Jan. 9, 2013; Ord. No. 1053, § 2, adopted Sept. 11, 2013; and Ord. No. 1066, adopted June 11, 2014. 
 
2.28.010 - Powers and duties. 
There shall be a parks and recreation commission consisting of five members and one alternate member; all members shall be adults. Their duties shall include: 
1.  Act in an advisory capacity to the city council in all matters pertaining to parks and recreation. 
2.  Promote and stimulate interest in recreational programs. 
3.  Recommend policies for improving parks and playgrounds. 
4.  To consider, advise and make recommendations to the city council relative to: 
a.  Methods and policies for the acquisition, planning, development and improvement of public recreation facilities, including parks, playgrounds and special use facilities and including the selection of contract consultants for the implementation of such activities; 
b.  Permits, fees and charges to be made for recreation programs and for the use of public recreation facilities, including parks, playgrounds, and special use facilities; 
c.  Rules and regulations for the use of existing public recreation facilities, including parks, playgrounds and special use facilities, with an emphasis on equal opportunity of use and on minimizing adverse environmental impacts. 
5.  The city council shall respect the responsibilities of the commission and, accordingly, will endeavor, in good faith, to refer matters pertaining to parks and recreation to the commission for advice and recommendations. Notwithstanding the forgoing, nothing in this code shall prohibit the city council from acting on urgent or other matters without referring the same to the commission. 
(Ord. No. 1072, § 2, 2-11-15)  
2.28.020 - Appointments. 
The community members of this commission must live within the city and shall serve a term of four years. A vacancy occurring before expiration of a term shall be filled by appointment for the remainder of the term by the city council. The term of each community member commissioner shall expire on December 31 of the year that occurs no more than four years after the date of the appointment. 
(Ord. No. 1072, § 2, 2-11-15)  
2.28.030 - Vacancies. 
In the event a member of the commission has three consecutive unexcused absences from meetings of the commission, the city council may declare the office of such member vacant. Vacancies, whether scheduled or unscheduled, shall be filled by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1072, § 2, 2-11-15)  
2.28.040 - Membership. 
Membership on this commission shall be as follows: 
A.  The total membership of the commission shall be made up of five adults in the following manner: 
i.  Three adult resident community members appointed by the city council to serve without compensation; 
ii.  The city council shall appoint a member of the city council to serve as a commissioner; 
iii.  The desert recreation district general manager or a designated representative shall serve as a commissioner. 
B.  Alternate parks and recreation commissioner. 
i.  The alternate parks and recreation commissioner shall attend parks and recreation commission meetings as a nonvoting, nonparticipating member. In the event of an absence of a regular parks and recreation commissioner, the alternate parks and recreation commissioner shall sit with the commission as a voting, participating member. 
(Ord. No. 1072, § 2, 2-11-15)  
2.28.050 - Election of officers. 
At the first meeting of the commission, and thereafter at its first meeting of each subsequent year, the members shall elect a chair and vice chair. In the absence or disability of the chair or vice chair, the commission may designate a temporary chair. 
(Ord. No. 1072, § 2, 2-11-15)  
2.28.060 - Meetings. 
1.  The commission shall meet once a month. All its meetings shall be held in accordance with the Ralph M. Brown Act and shall be open to the public except as provided by law. 
2.  A quorum shall be a majority of the commission. No action of the commission shall be valid without the affirmative vote of at least three members. 
(Ord. No. 1072, § 2, 2-11-15)  
Chapter 2.32 - PLANNING COMMISSION 
Sections: 
 
2.32.010 - Commission created—Membership. 
A city planning commission is created. The city planning commission shall consist of five regular members and one alternate member, each of whom shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the council. Members of the planning commission may be residents of the city or business persons in the community who do not reside in the city. All members of the city council shall be nonvoting, ex-official members of the commission. 
(Ord 890 § 3, 2003: prior code § 18-1)  
2.32.020 - Terms of commission members. 
Each person appointed to the planning commission shall be appointed for a term of four years or less. The term of each planning commissioner shall expire on December 31st of the year that occurs no more than four years after the date of the appointment. The terms of members of the council who serve as ex-official shall correspond to their official tenure as council members. 
(Ord. 890 § 4, 2003: prior code § 18-2)  
2.32.030 - Filling vacancies on commission. 
If a vacancy shall occur in the planning commission otherwise than by expiration of a term, it shall be filled by the alternate planning commissioner, unless the city council determines otherwise. 
(Prior code § 18-3)  
2.32.040 - Compensation of commission. 
The members of the planning commission shall not receive any compensation for their services unless the city council shall, by resolution, provide otherwise. 
(Prior code § 18-4)  
2.32.050 - Organization—Chairperson, chairperson pro tempore and secretary. 
Immediately upon their appointment, the members shall organize the city planning commission, and shall elect a chairperson and a chairperson pro tempore from among their membership. The terms of office for such chairperson and chairperson pro tempore shall be for a one-year period. The city manager shall designate from among the city staff, a secretary, who shall be compensated for such service in such amount, and in such manner as the city council may, by resolution, from time to time designate. 
(Prior code § 18-5)  
2.32.060 - Commission meetings—Quorum—Absences. 
A.  The city planning commission shall meet twice each month on the first and third Wednesday of each month. All meetings shall be held at the council chambers in the city hall and shall commence at six p.m. Special meetings may be called at any time by the presiding officer of the planning commission, or by a majority of the members of the commission by providing notice pursuant to Government Code § 54956. If an applicant requests a special meeting, a meeting fee of three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) shall be paid by the applicant prior to the meeting to offset the cost of convening the special meeting. 
B.  Three members of the commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business and a concurring vote of three members shall be necessary to effectuate any action, decision, finding or order of the planning commission unless a higher number of votes is required by statute. The office of any member who attends less than seventy-five (75) percent of all meetings of the planning commission within any six-month period shall require review by the city council. The city council expressly reserves the right to terminate the term of any member of the planning commission when, in the discretion of the council, such termination will best serve the interests of the city. 
(Ord. 919 § 1, 2005: prior code § 18-6)  
2.32.070 - Alternate planning commissioner. 
The alternate planning commissioner shall attend planning commission meetings as a nonvoting, nonparticipating member. In the event of an absence of a regular planning commissioner, the alternate planning commissioner shall sit with the commission as a voting, participating member. 
(Prior code § 18-7)  
2.32.080 - Automatic referral to city council of actions by planning commission which waive, vary, change, etc.—Requirements of nondiscretionary provisions of uniform codes. 
A.  The city council finds that nondiscretionary provisions of uniform codes adopted by the city and/or nondiscretionary provisions of this code should not under normal circumstances be waived, varied, changed, altered, increased or decreased with respect to the requirements thereof. 
B.  Should the planning commission undertake action which waives, varies, changes, alters, increases or decreases any nondiscretionary provision of any uniform code adopted by the city or of any nondiscretionary provision of this code, then, in that event, the city clerk shall put on the agenda such action by the planning commission for consideration by the city council at the next scheduled city council meeting. 
C.  This provision shall not be construed in any way to limit or otherwise change the authority granted to the planning commission as set forth in Title 17 of this code. 
(Prior code § 18-8)  
Chapter 2.36 - COMMUNITY REDEVLOPMENT AGENCY 
Sections: 
 
2.36.010 - Need declared. 
It is found and declared pursuant to Section 33101 of the Health and Safety Code, that there is a need for the redevelopment agency created by such Section 33100 to function in the city, and such agency is authorized to transact business and exercise its powers, under the Community Redevelopment Law. 
(Prior code § 18-18)  
2.36.020 - Council designated agency. 
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 33200 of the Health and Safety Code, the city council declares itself to be the agency provided in Section 2.36.010 in this chapter, and all the rights, powers, duties, privileges and immunities vested by the Community Redevelopment Law in such agency shall be, and are, vested in this city council. 
(Prior code § 18-19)  
Chapter 2.40 - INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 
Sections: 
 
2.40.010 - Purposes. 
The California Industrial Development Financing Act, Title 10 (commencing with Section 91500), Government Code (the act), has established an industrial development authority of this city for the achievement of specified public purposes. The public purposes are the increasing of opportunities for useful employment or otherwise contributing to economic development. The need for the establishment of an industrial development authority in the achievement of such purposes is based upon findings that industry requires the new and alternative method of capital finance that such authorities can provide in order for it to undertake the acquisition, construction or rehabilitation of facilities, the use of which will serve those public purposes. 
(Prior code § 18-31)  
2.40.020 - Findings. 
There is a need in the city for the acquisition, construction or rehabilitation of facilities for the use of industry which will increase employment opportunities or otherwise con-tribute to economic development, and further, the new and alternative method of capital finance that industrial development authorities can provide will aid in satisfying that need. 
(Prior code § 18-32)  
2.40.030 - Declarations. 
A.  Need. There is a need in the city for an industrial development authority to provide industry with an alternative and additional method of finance in accordance with state policy as set forth in the act. 
B.  Organization. The industrial development authority of this city established by the act is declared organized and shall function under the name "Coachella Industrial Development Authority," and be authorized to transact business and exercise all of the powers and other authority conferred upon industrial development authorities by such act. 
(Prior code § 18-33)  
Chapter 2.44 - BOARD OF APPEALS 
Sections: 
 
2.44.010 - Established. 
A board of appeals is established to hear and decide appeals of acts, determinations or orders made by the building official, or the building official's designees, pertaining to the application and interpretation of the Uniform Administrative Code, the Uniform Building Code, the Uniform Housing Code, the Uniform Code for Abatement of Dangerous Buildings and all other technical codes adopted by the city. 
(Prior code § 2-176)  
2.44.020 - Members. 
A.  The board of appeals shall consist of three members who shall be qualified by experience or training to pass upon matters pertaining to building construction and building service equipment and who are not employees of the city. Such persons need not be residents of the city. Each member shall be appointed by a majority vote of the city council for a two year term; but each member shall serve at the pleasure of the city council. 
B.  Any member of the board of appeals may be removed from office, with or without cause, at any time by the city council. No such removal shall be effective unless a motion to that effect is made at a meeting of the city council and is carried by the affirmative votes of not less than three members of the city council. 
C.  Whenever a vacancy occurs on the board of appeals, such vacancy shall be filled in the manner set forth in subsection A of this section. Where a vacancy occurs leaving an unexpired term, the subsequent appointment shall be made for the balance of such unexpired term. 
D.  Each member of the board of appeals shall be entitled to such compensation as may be set by the city council. Such members shall be entitled to reimbursement for expenses incurred in the performance of their duties if the same is approved, in advance, by the city council. The board of appeals shall not have the authority to expend or authorize the expenditure of any public funds. 
(Prior code § 2-177)  
2.44.030 - Organization. 
Annually, the board of appeals shall elect one of its members to act as chairperson and one of its members to act as secretary. Such election shall take place at the first regular meeting after the appointment of the initial board, and annually thereafter. 
(Prior code § 2-178)  
2.44.040 - Meetings. 
A.  All meetings of the board of appeals shall be conducted in accordance with the Brown Act. 
B.  The board of appeals shall adopt rules of procedures for conducting its meetings and business with the approval of the city attorney. It shall keep a record of its proceedings. 
C.  Any member of the board of appeals who is absent, without sufficient cause, from two successive regular meetings of the board of appeals shall be deemed to have vacated his or her office. An absence due to illness or other unavoidable cause shall be deemed an excused absence provided notice thereof is given to the secretary of the board by such member as soon as practicable. 
D.  A quorum shall consist of two members, and any action by the board of appeals shall require an affirmative vote of not less than two members. 
(Prior code § 2-179)  
2.44.050 - Powers generally. 
The board of appeals is vested with the power to hear and decide appeals of acts, determinations or orders made by the building official, or the building official's designees, pertaining to the application and interpretation of the Uniform Administrative Code, the Uniform Building Code, the Uniform Housing Code, the Uniform Code for Abatement of Dangerous Buildings and all other technical codes adopted by the city. 
(Prior code § 2-180)  
2.44.060 - Appeals to the board of appeals. 
This section shall govern appeals of any and all acts, determinations or orders of the building official, or the building official's designees. 
A.  Any person affected by any act, determination or order of the building official, or the building official's designee, may appeal same to the board of appeals. The appeal shall be filed in writing with the city clerk within thirty (30) days from the date of service of the notice or the action of the building official, or the building official's designees, from which the appeal is being taken; provided, however, that if the building or structure is in such a condition as to make it immediately dangerous to life, limb, property, or safety of the public, occupants, or adjacent property, and is ordered vacated and is posted in accordance with Section 404 of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings or Section 1104 of the Uniform Housing Code, such appeal shall be filed within ten (10) days from the date of service. 
B.  Unless an appeal is filed within such time period, any action determination or order of the building official, of the building official's designee, from which an appeal may be taken shall become final; and the board of appeals shall lack jurisdiction to act on any appeal from such final actions, determinations or orders. No appeal shall be valid unless accompanied by the appropriate fee. 
C.  The appeal shall identify the specific action, determination or order of the building official, or the building official's designees, from which the appeal is taken, specify the grounds for the appeal and identify the relief requested from the board of appeals, contain the names, addresses, and signatures of all parties named as appellants, and the verification of at least one appellant as to the truth of the matters stated in the appeal. The board of appeals shall lack jurisdiction to consider or act upon any matter not contained in said statement of appeal. 
D.  A verbatim transcript of the hearing before the board of appeals on the subject matter of the appeal shall be prepared provided that the appellant shall so request it in writing and deposit the cost of its preparation with the city clerk within ten (10) days of the filing of the notice of appeal. 
E.  Upon receipt of the appeal, the building official, or the building official's designees, shall prepare the record before the board of appeals on the subject matter of the appeal. The building official, or the building official's designees, shall prepare a written response to the appeal. The response shall contain a recommendation on the appeal, proposed findings to deny the appeal and proposed finings to support the appeal together with any appropriate conditions. The response shall be made available at least seventy-two (72) hours prior to the hearing on the appeal. 
F.  After receipt of the appeal, the board of appeals shall set the matter for hearing. The hearing shall be held within thirty (30) days after the date of filing the appeal or as soon thereafter as may be practicable. Written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing to each appellant shown on the appeal by the secretary by causing such notice to be delivered to the appellant by personal service or by mailing a copy thereof, postage prepaid, addressed to the appellant at the address shown on the appeal. 
G.  The board of appeals may deny the appeal or may grant the appeal, in whole or in part, together with any conditions which could have been imposed by the building official, or the building official's designees. 
H.  Within ten (10) days, or as soon thereafter as may be practicable but not to exceed ninety (90) days, following the conclusion of the hearing, the board of appeals shall render its findings and decision in writing. A copy of the decision shall be delivered to the appellant by personal service or by mailing a copy thereof, postage prepaid, addressed to the appellant at the address shown on the appeal, and a duplicate copy shall be delivered to the building official, or the building official's designees. Such notice shall contain the following admonition: 
Judicial review of any administrative decision of the board of appeals may be had pursuant to Section 1094.5 of the Code of Civil Procedure only if the petition for writ of mandate pursuant to such section is filed with the superior court no later than ninety (90) days following the date on which the decision becomes final. 
(Prior code § 2-181)  
2.44.070 - Procedure for conduct of hearing on appeal. 
This section shall govern the conduct of the hearing on appeal. 
A.  Hearings need not be conducted according to the technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses. Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is the type of evidence about which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs, including hearsay evidence provided that such evidence alone shall be insufficient to support a finding unless it would be admissible over objection in civil actions in courts of competent jurisdiction in this state. The chairperson may preclude the introduction of any irrelevant evidence. 
B.  At any hearing pursuant to this chapter, the board of appeals shall hear oral evidence taken only on oath or affirmation. 
C.  The board of appeals may take official notice of any fact which may be judicially noticed by the courts of this state or of official records, rules and regulations of the board of appeals, and official records of departments and ordinances of the city, provided that the parties are informed of the matters to be noticed, the matters are noted in the record, and the parties be given a reasonable opportunity to refute the officially noticed matters. 
D.  The board of appeals may inspect any building or premises involved in the appeal during the course of the hearing provided that: 
1.  Notice of the inspection shall be given to the parties prior to the inspection; 
2.  The parties shall be given an opportunity to be present during the inspection; 
3.  Upon completion of the inspection, the board of appeals shall state for the record the material facts observed and the conclusions drawn therefrom; 
4.  Each party shall have the right to rebut or explain the matters so stated by the board of appeals; and 
5.  No party or person may examine any member of the board of appeals. 
E.  Each party shall be entitled to the following procedural rights: 
1.  To call and examine witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues of the hearing; 
2.  To introduce documentary and physical evidence; 
3.  To cross-examine opposing witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues of the hearing; 
4.  To impeach any witness regardless of which party first called the witness to testify; 
5.  To rebut the evidence; and 
6.  To be represented by anyone who is lawfully permitted to do so. 
F.  Any action or decision of the board of appeals on an appeal shall require a majority vote of the board of appeals. In the absence of such a majority vote, any appeal and related request shall be deemed to have been denied by the board of appeals. 
G.  Any action taken on any appeal shall be taken by a roll call vote of the members of the board of appeals. Any abstention by any member who was present at the hearing shall constitute an affirmative vote on any motion regarding the appeal. 
H.  The building official shall ensure that a record of any such hearing shall be made and duly preserved, provided that a deposit is made prior to the hearing and that the total cost thereof is paid before such record is made available. 
I.  Any hearing conducted under this section may be continued from time to time. If such a hearing is continued at the request of an appellant, such a continuance shall constitute a waiver of any applicable time period in which to take action on the appeal. 
(Prior code § 2-182)  
Chapter 2.48 - PEACE OFFICER STANDARDS AND TRAINING 
Sections: 
 
2.48.010 - Officer training—Desire for state aid declared. 
The city declares that it desires to qualify to receive aid from the state under the provisions of Chapter 1 of Title 4, Part 4 of the California Penal Code, being Section 13500 et seq. 
(Prior code § 19-1)  
2.48.020 - Same—Standards. 
Pursuant to Section 13522 of the California Penal Code, the city while receiving aid from the state pursuant to such Chapter 1 will adhere to the standards for recruitment and training established by the California Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training. 
(Prior code § 19-2)  
2.48.030 - Selection and training standards of public safety dispatchers. 
A.  Adherence to State Standards. Pursuant to Section 13510(d), Chapter 1, the Coachella police department will adhere to standards for recruitment and training established by the California Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training (P.O.S.T.). 
B.  Authority to Make Inquiries. Pursuant to Section 13512, Chapter 1, the commission and its representatives may make such inquiries as deemed appropriate by the commission to ascertain that the Coachella police department's public safety dispatch personnel adhere to the standards and training established by the Commission on Peace Officers Standards and Training. 
(Prior code § 19-3)  
Chapter 2.52 - POLICE RESERVE FORCE 
Sections: 
 
2.52.010 - Established. 
There is established in the city a reserve police force, under and subject to the control of the chief of police. The reserve police unit shall consist of volunteers who shall serve gratuitously. 
(Prior code § 19-27)  
2.52.020 - Supervision. 
The police reserve force will perform their duties under the direct authority of the following: 
A.  The chief of police; 
B.  The appointed sergeant of the police reserves; and 
C.  The appointed officers of the police reserves. 
(Prior code § 19-28)  
2.52.030 - Appointment—Tenure. 
The officers of the police reserves shall be appointed by the chief of police, and shall serve in their appointed capacities for such time as they are faithfully and truly performing the proper function of their office. 
(Prior code § 19-29)  
2.52.040 - Regulations authorized. 
In order to effectuate the purpose of the police reserve, the chief of police may, by order, establish rules and regulations to govern the organization, including the fixing of specific duties of members, and for the maintenance of discipline. 
(Prior code § 19-30)  
2.52.050 - To be voluntary. 
All duties performed by members of the police reserve organization shall be on a strictly voluntary basis. 
(Prior code § 19-31)  
2.52.060 - Minimum level of participation. 
The police reserve will consist of members who are willing and able to engage in duties and training that is kept up to a minimum level of participation, as determined by the chief of police. 
(Prior code § 19-32)  
2.52.070 - Number of officers. 
The number of reserve police officers shall not exceed unlimited active members. 
(Prior code § 19-33)  
2.52.080 - Chain of command. 
The chain of command of the police reserve force will be organized in the following manner: 
A.  Chief of police; 
B.  The sergeant of the police reserve; and 
C.  Officer in charge, who shall be a regular police officer appointed by the chief of police. 
(Prior code § 19-34)  
2.52.090 - Duties of officer in charge. 
The officer in charge of the police reserve will assume command of, and supervise, the duties, training and activities of the police reserve, and shall be responsible for the discharge of the administrative duties of the organization. 
(Prior code § 19-35)  
2.52.100 - Meetings required. 
There will be a general meeting of the police reserve once each month, or at any time that the chief of police or reserves may deem it necessary. 
(Prior code § 19-36)  
2.52.110 - Dues—Charges prohibited. 
There shall not be any fees, charges or dues required of any member of the police reserve. 
(Prior code § 19-37)  
2.52.120 - Qualifications for membership. 
To be a member of the police reserve, each individual must: 
A.  Be a loyal, patriotic citizen of the United States of America; 
B.  Be twenty-one (21) years of age or older; 
C.  Be of good moral character, free from any criminal convictions other than minor misdemeanor violations; 
D.  Be in good health and physical condition, and free from any defects that might make it impossible for the member to carry out assigned duties; 
E.  In addition to the above, each person desiring to join the police reserve must comply with the following: 
1.  Proper application shall be made upon forms that will be available at the police department, 
2.  All applicants must be willing to swear to and execute a loyalty oath as prescribed by law, 
3.  All applicants must be sworn in as reserve police officers by the city clerk, and 
4.  All applicants must comply with the proper procedure of being screened, fingerprinted and otherwise registered by the identification bureau of the police department; 
F.  All members shall reside in, or within a reasonable distance of the city. 
(Prior code § 19-38)  
2.52.130 - Termination of membership. 
A.  Any member of the police reserve may terminate his or her membership at any time upon tendering his or her resignation with the chief of police. 
B.  Upon termination of membership for any reason, all members so doing will turn in to the chief of police all badges, identification cards, or any other evidence of membership in the reserves. 
(Prior code § 19-39)  
2.52.140 - Equipment and uniforms. 
The following rules will apply in regard to the personal equipment of the police reserve: 
A.  Each member shall furnish, at his or her own expense, sidearms, uniform, or any other equipment required by the chief of police. 
B.  The specific lack of any equipment shall not restrict the training or membership activities of any police reserve officer except in those cases where the specific lack of certain equipment would not allow for the proper performance of duties. 
C.  In no case shall any member of the police reserve loan, transfer or otherwise lose personal control over, any police badges, identification cards or other evidence of official police authority that has been issued to him or her. 
D.  The official police reserve uniform shall consist of the following: 
1.  A sun-tan officer's shirt and Coachella police name patches; 
2.  A sun-tan officer's cap with black visor and black band, and official reserve badge; 
3.  A black necktie; 
4.  Sun-tan uniform trousers; 
5.  Black Sam Browne or sidearm belt; 
6.  Black sidearm holster and accessories; 
7.  Black shoes; 
8.  Reserve police officer's badge; and 
9.  Those reserves who so desire, may purchase the all-wool summer weight sun-tan uniform worn by regular police officers. 
E.  The use and wearing of the reserve police officer's uniform shall be subject to the following rules: 
1.  The uniform shall only be worn when the officer is on assigned duty. 
2.  Use of, wearing of, or displaying any police reserve uniform or badge for private purpose, or for any unauthorized purpose, is prohibited. 
3.  Only the complete police reserve uniform shall be worn. 
4.  Police reserves who do not have a uniform shall wear plain clothes when on duty. 
F.  The use and wearing of sidearms by police reserve officers shall be subject to the following rules: 
1.  A sidearm shall be carried and worn only when a reserve police officer is on assigned duty. 
2.  Officers in plain clothes will wear sidearms as a concealed weapon unless otherwise ordered. 
3.  The wearing, use, displaying and general possession of a sidearm by a reserve officer shall be accomplished in such a manner as to indicate the use of good sense, caution, restraint, and in general, to reflect favorably upon the entire organization. 
4.  All police reserves who wear sidearms are urged to receive the proper training, and to engage in supervised practice, so as to promote safe use and accurate proficiency with the sidearm. 
G.  When on assigned duty, all police reserves shall have the following equipment on their person: 
1.  A pocket notebook; 
2.  A pen or pencil; 
3.  A flashlight (night duty); and 
4.  A police whistle. 
(Prior code § 19-40)  
2.52.150 - Duty regulations. 
The following regulations shall apply to the performance of all assigned duties by members of the police reserve: 
A.  All reserve police officers of any rank shall consider themselves subordinate to and under the command and supervision of any regular police officer of the police department when the police reserve is on assigned duty. 
B.  The chief of police may, if so desired, appoint a regular police officer to supervise the appointed or assigned duty activities of the members of the police reserve. 
C.  Reserve police officers shall not perform regular police duties unless ordered to by proper authority or in case of emergency or disaster. 
D.  All police reserve duty shall be on a purely voluntary basis. 
E.  When on assigned duty, police reserves shall be subject to the following: 
1.  All police department rules and regulations are to be observed and followed. 
2.  Members shall not report for duty, or assume any duty, or wear the uniform, while under the influence of any intoxicating liquor. 
3.  Police reserve officers shall exercise courtesy, kindness, consideration and service for the public in all their official acts. 
F.  When police reserves are not on assigned duty, they shall conduct themselves in such a manner that they will not reflect to the discredit of the regular police department or the police reserve. 
G.  In time of emergency or disaster, refusal to assume assigned duty shall be considered just cause for dismissal from membership in the police reserve. 
H.  All acts of misconduct, violation of regulations, etc., will be promptly investigated and, if circumstances render it necessary, the membership of the individual concerned shall be terminated. All such terminations to be passed on finally by the chief of police. 
I.  Disaster service workers who are on assigned duty or are receiving authorized instructions or training, are protected in case of death or injury by the following sections of the California Labor Code: 4351, 4352, 4353 and all subsequent amendments and additions to the labor code. 
J.  All police reserves shall report on or off duty according to the following rules: 
1.  A reserve police officer shall report on duty to the person in charge at either the police station or at the designated field station. 
2.  A reserve police officer shall report promptly, on time, at the designated place, and if unable to do so, shall notify the assigning officer in time for a replacement to be found. 
3.  At the completion of a tour of duty, a reserve officer will fill out and turn in the approved officer's report form. 
K.  Unless there has been express and detailed approval of the chief of police, no member of the police reserve is to accept compensation for performance of assigned duties. In addition, no member of the police reserve shall use his or her membership in the organization as a basis for accepting any compensation for off-duty activities. 
(Ord. 890 § 5, 2003; prior code § 19-41)  
2.52.160 - Training. 
In order to become proficient in the discharge of assigned duties, and to give trained service in the event of emergency or disaster, all police reserves will engage in training activities as outlined by the chief of police and reserve police sergeant as follows: 
A.  Training classes in the various phases of civil defense; 
B.  Practical police patrol training as outlined and planned by the chief of police; 
C.  Firearm training under the supervision of the chief of police; and 
D.  All other training deemed necessary for the proper creation of a well-trained police reserve. 
(Prior code § 19-42)  
2.52.170 - False personation. 
It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to wear, carry or display a police reserve identification card or insignia, or otherwise deceitfully represent himself or herself to be connected with the police reserve, unless he or she is in fact a member thereof. 
(Prior code § 19-43)  
Chapter 2.56 - EMERGENCY SERVICES 
Sections: 
 
2.56.010 - General purposes. 
The declared purposes of this chapter are to provide for the preparation and carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property within this city in the event of an emergency; the direction of the emergency organization; and the coordination of the emergency functions of this city with all other public agencies, corporations, organizations, and affected private persons. 
(Prior code § 8-1)  
2.56.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, "emergency" means the actual or threatened existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within this city caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, or earthquake, or other conditions, including conditions resulting from war or imminent threat of war, but other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy, which conditions are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment, and facilities of this city, requiring the combined forces of other political subdivisions to combat. 
(Prior code § 8-2)  
2.56.030 - Disaster council membership. 
The Coachella disaster council is created and shall consist of the following: 
A.  City manager, chairperson; 
B.  Assistant to city manager, vice chairperson; 
C.  Fire chief; 
D.  Police chief; 
E.  Two public works supervisors; 
F.  Sanitation superintendent; 
G.  Community development director; and 
H.  Finance director. 
(Prior code § 8-3)  
2.56.040 - Disaster council powers and duties. 
It shall be the duty of the Coachella disaster council, and it is empowered, to develop and recommend for adoption by the city council, emergency and mutual aid plans and agreements and such ordinances and resolutions and rules and regulations as are necessary to implement such plans and agreements. The disaster council shall meet upon call of the chairperson or, in his or her absence from the city or inability to call such meeting, upon call of the vice chairperson. 
(Prior code § 8-4)  
2.56.050 - Director and assistant director of emergency services. 
A.  There is created the office of director of emergency services. The city manager shall be the director of emergency services. 
B.  There is created the office of assistant director of emergency services, who shall be appointed by the director. 
(Prior code § 8-5)  
2.56.060 - Powers and duties of the director of emergency services. 
A.  The director is empowered to: 
1.  Request the city council to proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a "local emergency" if the city council is in session, or to issue such proclamation if the city council is not in session. Whenever a local emergency is proclaimed by the director, the city council shall take action to ratify the proclamation within seven days thereafter or the proclamation shall have no further force or effect. 
2.  Request the governor to proclaim a "state of emergency" when, in the opinion of the director, the locally available resources are inadequate to cope with the emergency. 
3.  Control and direct the effort of the emergency organization of this city for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter. 
4.  Direct operation between and coordination of services and staff of the emergency organization of this city; and resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise between them. 
5.  Represent this city in all dealings with public or private agencies on matters pertaining to emergencies as defined in this chapter. 
6.  In the event of the proclamation of a "local emergency" as provided in this chapter, the proclamation of a "state of emergency" by the governor or the director of the state office of emergency services, or the existence of a "state of war emergency," the director is empowered: 
a.  To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency; provided, however, such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the city council; 
b.  To obtain vital supplies, equipment, and such other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of life and property and to bind the city for the fair value thereof and, if required immediately, to commandeer the same for public use; 
c.  To require emergency services of any city officer or employee and, in the event of the proclamation of a "state of war emergency" in the county in which this city is located or the existence of a "state of war emergency," to command the aid of as many citizens of this community as he or she deems necessary in the execution of his or her duties; such persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits, and immunities as are provided by state law for registered disaster service workers; 
d.  To requisition necessary personnel or material of any city department or agency; and 
e.  To execute all of his or her ordinary power as city manager all of the powers conferred upon him by this chapter or by resolution or emergency plan pursuant hereto adopted by the city council, all powers conferred upon him or her by any statute, by any agreement approved by the city council, and by any other lawful authority. 
B.  The director of emergency services shall designate the order of succession to that office, to take effect in the event the director is unavailable to attend meetings and otherwise perform his or her duties during an emergency. Such order of succession shall be: 
1.  Assistant to city manager; 
2.  Police chief; 
3.  Fire chief. 
C.  The assistant director shall, under the supervision of the director and with the assistance of emergency service chiefs, develop emergency plans and manage the emergency programs of this city; and shall have such other powers arid duties as may be assigned by the director. 
(Prior code § 8-6)  
2.56.070 - Emergency organization. 
All officers and employees of this city, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency, and all groups, organizations, and persons who may be [in] agreement or operation of law, including persons impressed into service under the provisions of Section 2.56.060(A)(6)(c) of this chapter, be charged with duties incident to the protection of life and property in this city during such emergency, shall constitute the emergency organization of the city. 
(Prior code § 8-7)  
2.56.080 - Emergency plan. 
The Coachella disaster council shall be responsible for the development of the city emergency plan which plan shall provide for the effective mobilization of all of the resources of this city, both public and private, to meet any condition constituting a local emergency, state of emergency, or state of war emergency; and shall provide for the organization, powers and duties, services, and staff of the emergency organization. Such plan shall take effect upon adoption by resolution of the city council. 
(Prior code § 8-8)  
2.56.090 - Expenditures. 
Any expenditures made in connection with emergency activities, including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection of the city. 
(Prior code § 8-9)  
2.56.100 - Punishment of violations. 
It shall be a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment for not to exceed six months, or both, for any person, during an emergency, to: 
A.  Willfully obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him or her by virtue of this chapter. 
B.  Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, if such act is of such a nature as to give or be likely to give assistance to the enemy or to impair the lives or property of inhabitants of this city, or to prevent, hinder, or delay the defense or protection thereof. 
C.  Wear, carry, or display, without authority, any means of identification specified by the emergency agency of the state. 
(Ord. 890 § 6, 2003: prior code § 8-10)  
2.56.110 - Excessive price increases during a state of emergency. 
A.  Findings. As a result of the recent disasters throughout the state of California, such as the October 1993 fire storms and the Northridge earthquake on January 17, 1994, and the resulting states of emergency, consumers have sought to purchase emergency supplies, food and other consumer goods necessary for their health and safety. Though no general shortage of consumer goods is evident, numerous consumers have reported cases of excessive price increases for consumer items, such as gasoline and food items, many times above the prices in effect prior to the disasters. Though price increases may be necessary where a merchant has incurred higher expenses, the reported price increases clearly exceed those that would be reasonable and just to recapture any increase of operation expenses. 
B.  Legislative Intent. It is the intention of the city council, in adopting this section, to protect citizens from excessive and unjustified increases in the prices charged during any abnormal disruption of the marketplace for consumer goods and services vital and necessary for the health, safety, and welfare of consumers resulting from emergency or major disaster for which a state of emergency for the city is proclaimed or for which a local disaster or emergency is declared by the President of the United States or Governor of California. 
C.  Excessive Price Increases Prohibited. Upon a proclamation of public emergency involving or threatening the lives, property or welfare of the citizens or for which a local disaster or emergency is declared by the President of the United States or the Governor of California and for a period of thirty (30) days from the date such declaration is terminated, it is unlawful for any person, contractor, business or other entity to sell or offer to sell any consumer food items, repair or reconstruction services, emergency or medical supplies, or gasoline for an amount which exceeds ten (10) percent of the price charged by such person, contractor, business or other entity for said goods or services on the day prior to the proclamation of emergency, unless such person, business contractor or other entity can prove that an increase in price was directly attributable to additional costs imposed on it by the supplier of the goods or for labor and materials used to provide the service. 
D.  Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
1.  A "consumer food item" is any article which is used or intended for use for food, drink, confection or condiment by man or other animal. 
2.  "Repair" or "reconstruction services" are those contractor services for repairs to residential and commercial property of any type which are damaged as a result of a disaster. "Contractor services" are services as defined by Business and Professions Code Sections 7025, 7026, 7026.1 and 7026.3. 
3.  "Emergency supplies" include, but are not limited to, water, water purification devices or tablets, flashlights, lanterns, radios, batteries, candles, blankets, soaps, tents, cooking and heating fuels and diapers. 
4.  "Medical supplies" include but are not limited to prescription and nonprescription drugs, bandages, gauze, splints and isopropyl alcohol. 
5.  "Gasoline" includes all octane levels of unleaded, leaded, diesel and alternative fuels. 
E.  Hearing. If there is reasonable cause to believe that a person has violated the provisions of this section, the city manager shall, prior to authorizing the filing of a criminal complaint, conduct a hearing upon due notice and an opportunity to be heard. At the conclusion of such hearing, the city manager may, in his or her discretion, order a criminal complaint to be filed. The city manager may for good cause, disperse with the requirement of conducting a hearing prior to the filing of a criminal complaint. 
(Prior code § 8-11)  
Chapter 2.60 - PUBLIC LIBRARY 
Sections: 
 
2.60.010 - Established. 
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 27301 of the Education Code, the city council does establish the Coachella Municipal Public Library. 
(Prior code § 12-1)  
2.60.020 - Location. 
The public library shall be quartered in the west wing of the city hall. 
(Prior code § 12-2)  
2.60.030 - Management. 
The municipal public library shall be managed by a board of library trustees, consisting of five members, who shall be appointed by the mayor of the city, with the consent of the members of the city council. 
(Prior code § 12-3)  
Chapter 2.64 - CODE OF ETHICS 
Sections: 
 
2.64.010 - Title and legislative intent. 
This chapter shall be known as and may be cited as "Code of Ethics Act." The legislative intent of the city council in enacting this chapter is to protect the city and public from the potential conflict of interest and harm which may occur when former officials and employees use their former city positions or take with them information which is not readily available to or accessible by the public or press upon leaving city government and thereafter attempt to use such information or influence for private economic advantage or gain. It is the declared intent of the city council that the provisions of Code of Civil Procedure Section 1021.5 should be applicable to private enforcement of this chapter. 
(Ord. 967 § 1, 2007)  
2.64.020 - Declaration of policy. 
The proper operation of municipal government requires that public officials and employees be independent, impartial and responsible to the people, that governmental decisions and policy be made in the proper channels of the governmental structure, and that public office is not used for personal gain. 
(Ord. 967 § 2, 2007)  
2.64.030 - Definitions. 
Unless the contrary is stated or is clearly apparent from the context, the definitions set forth in this section shall govern the interpretation of this chapter. 
"Administrative agency" means every city office, department, division, agency, board and commission, but does not include the courts or any agency in the judicial branch of government. 
"Administrative, legislative, quasi-judicial or other proceeding" means any proceeding, application, request for approval, ruling, enactment, amendment or other determination, contract, claim, controversy, investigation, charge, accusation, arrest, or other particular matter involving a specific party or parties in any administrative agency action or proceeding and includes, but is not limited to, administrative adjudicatory proceedings, or proceedings involving the issuance, amendment, awarding or revocation of a permit, license, grant, or contract, or the sale or purchase of goods or property. 
"Employee" means every employee of the city, including, without limitation, exempt employees, classified and contract employees. 
"Person" means an individual, partnership, limited partnership, trust, estate, association, corporation, or other entity. 
"Public official" or "official" means every member, officer or consultant of the city, including, without limitations, all elective officials of the city and the members of all official boards, commissions and committees of the city. 
"Represent" means to make a formal or informal appearance, communicate either orally or in writing, act as an agent or attorney for, advise, aid, counsel, consult or assist in representation of any person. 
(Ord. 967 § 3, 2007)  
2.64.040 - Responsibilities of public office. 
Public officials and employees are bound to uphold the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the state of California and to carry out the laws of the nation, state and municipality. Public officials and employees are bound to observe in their official acts the highest standards of morality and to discharge faithfully the duties of their official regardless of personal consideration, recognizing that conduct in both their official and private affairs should be above reproach. 
(Ord. 967 § 4, 2007)  
2.64.050 - Dedicated service. 
Public officials and employees should not exceed their authority or breach the law or ask others to do so and they should work in full cooperation with other public officials and employees unless prohibited from so doing by law or officially recognized confidentiality of their work. 
(Ord. 967 § 5, 2007)  
2.64.060 - Fair and equal treatment. 
Preferential consideration of the request or petition of any individual citizen or group of citizens shall not be given. No person shall receive special advantages beyond that which are available to any other citizen. 
(Ord. 967 § 6, 2007)  
2.64.070 - Use of public property. 
No official or employee shall request or permit the use of city-owned vehicles, equipment, materials or property for personal convenience or profit, except when such services are available for the public generally or are provided as municipal policy for the use of such official or employee in the conduct of official business. No public official or employee shall use the time of any city employee during working hours for personal convenience or profit. 
(Ord. 967 § 7, 2007)  
2.64.080 - Obligations to citizens. 
No public official or employee in the course of his or her official duties shall grant any special consideration, treatment or adventure to any citizen beyond that which is available to every other citizen in the same circumstances. 
(Ord. 967 § 8, 2007)  
2.64.090 - Conflict of interest—General. 
A.  Conflict with proper discharge of duties—No public official or employee, while serving as such, shall have any interest, financial or otherwise, direct or indirect, or engage in any business or transaction or professional activity, or incur any obligation of any nature which is in substantial conflict with the proper discharge of his or her duties in the public interest and of his or her responsibilities as prescribed by the Constitution and laws of the state of California and the ordinances and resolutions of the city. 
B.  Incompatible Employment or Financial Interests. 
1.  No public official or employee shall accept other employment which he or she has reason to believe will either impair his or her independence of judgment as to his or her official duties or require or induce him or her to disclose confidential information acquired in the course of and by reason of his or her official duties. 
2.  No public official or employee shall acquire any financial interest in or accept any employment concerning any project which has been the subject of a discretionary approval by the city or any commission, board, department, or employee if such public official or employee participated in any manner in considering or recommending the approval or disapproval of such project and if such employee has reason to believe that interest will either impair his or her independence of judgment as to his or her official duties or require or induce him or her to disclose confidential information acquired or induce him or her to disclose confidential information acquired in the course of and by reason of his or her official duties. 
C.  Future Employment. 
1.  No official or employee subject to this chapter shall make, participate in making, or use his or her official position to influence any city government decision directly related to any person with whom he or she is negotiating or has any arrangement concerning prospective employment. 
2.  No former official or employee shall, for a period of one year after termination of city service or employment, be employed by or otherwise receive compensation from a person or entity that negotiated or entered in a contract with the city within twelve (12) months prior to the officer or employee personally and substantially participated in making decisions related to the negotiations or the award of the contract. 
3.  No public official or employee shall acquire any financial interest in or accept any employment concerning any project which has been or will be the subject of a discretionary approval by the city or any commission, board, department, or employee thereof within two years previous to such interest or employment if such public official or employee participated in any manner in considering or recommending the approval or disapproval of such project. 
D.  Disclosure of Confidential Information. No public official or employee shall willfully and knowingly disclose for pecuniary gain to any other person confidential information acquired by him or her in the course of and by reason of his or her official duties nor shall any public official or employee use any such information for the purpose of pecuniary gain. 
(Ord. 967 § 9, 2007)  
2.64.100 - Compliance with state law. 
Public officials and employees shall comply with applicable provisions of state law relating to conflicts of interest and generally regulating the conduct of public officials and employees. 
(Ord. 967 § 10, 2007)  
2.64.110 - Code establishes minimum standards. 
This code shall be deemed to set forth the minimum ethical standards to be followed by all officials and employees. 
(Ord. 967 § 11, 2007)  
2.64.120 - Representation by former official or employee before administrative agency—Appearance or communication—Prohibition. 
No city elected or appointed official or employee shall for compensation represent, for a period of one year after leaving city office or employment, any person other than the city of Coachella before any administrative agency, officer or employee thereof, for the purpose of influencing an administrative, legislative or quasi-judicial action or proceeding. 
(Ord. 967 § 12, 2007)  
2.64.130 - Exemptions from the prohibition of Section 2.64.120. 
The prohibitions contained in Section 2.64.120 of this chapter shall not apply: 
A.  To prevent any former official or employee designated therein from making or providing a statement, which is based on his or her special knowledge in the particular area that is the subject of the statement, provided that no compensation is thereby received other than that regularly provided for by law or regulation for witnesses; or 
B.  To prevent any former official or employee designated therein from communicating solely for the purpose of furnishing information if the administrative agency to which the communication is directed, makes findings in writing that (1) the designated former official or employee has outstanding and otherwise unavailable qualifications; (2) the designated former official or employee is acting with respect to a particular matter which requires such qualifications; and (3) the public interest would be served by the participation of the designated former official or employee; or 
C.  To any former official or employee designated therein who has left city employment or service for other government employment or service as long as he or she is employed or serves in that capacity. 
(Ord. 967 § 13, 2007)  
2.64.140 - Exclusion of violator—Petition—Hearing. 
Upon the petition of any interested person or party or resident of the city of Coachella, the court, administrative agency, or hearing officer serving in an administrative capacity for the county, in any judicial, quasi-judicial administrative, legislative or other proceeding may, after notice and an opportunity for a hearing, exclude any person found to be in violation of this chapter from further participation, or from assisting or counseling any other participant in the proceeding. 
(Ord. 967 § 14, 2007)  
2.64.150 - Criminal penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, the penalty shall be a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed one year. 
(Ord. 967 § 15, 2007)  
2.64.160 - Civil action. 
In addition to the relief provided in Sections 2.64.140 and 2.64.150 hereof, any interested person or party or resident of the city of Coachella may initiate a civil action to prevent violation of this chapter and to enforce this chapter. 
If a person in such civil action is found to be in violation of this chapter, such person shall be required by the court to pay any compensation received back to the payor and shall also pay a civil fine in an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for a first violation and in an amount not to exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for a second or additional violation. Such civil fines shall be payable to the city of Coachella. 
Any person initiating civil action pursuant to this section shall file a copy of the complaint with the city clerk of the city of Coachella within the ten (10) calendar days of filing with the court. 
(Ord. 967 § 16, 2007)  
2.64.170 - Ordinance application prospective. 
The requirements imposed by this chapter shall not apply to any person who left city service prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter except that any such person who returns to the city service on or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall thereafter be covered hereby. 
(Ord. 967 § 17, 2007)  
Chapter 2.68 - PUBLIC ARTS COMMISSION 
 
2.68.010 - Necessity and purpose. 
A.  Necessity Declared. It is hereby found and declared that there is a need for a public arts commission within the city. 
B.  Purpose. The purpose of the public arts commission shall be to act in an advisory capacity to the city council on matters pertaining to the enrichment of the community through fine arts, visual arts, performing arts, arts education, historic preservation and cultural issues; to serve as an advocate for cultural activities and programs within the city; to implement the city's art in public places program, and to encourage the integration of cultural affairs into the social and economic fabric of the city to improve the quality of life for city residents. 
(Ord. No. 1034, § 1, 1-11-12)  
2.68.020 - Membership; qualifications; terms of office. 
A.  Membership and Qualifications. The City of Coachella Planning Commission shall act in the capacity as the public arts commission. 
B.  Term. The term of each public arts commission member shall be the same term assigned in their capacity as a planning commission member as specified in Section 2.32.020 of the Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 1034, § 2, 1-11-12)  
2.68.030 - Meetings; quorum; change in meeting place. 
A.  Meetings. The meetings of the public arts commission will be conducted before or after the regular meetings of the planning commission as stated in Section 2.32.060(A) of the Municipal Code. At least one regular meeting per month shall be held. The chairperson and vice-chairperson of the planning commission shall serve as the chairperson and vice-chairperson of the public arts commission. Rules shall be adopted for transaction of business. Meetings shall at all times be open to the public. Meetings shall be held in the council chambers except when such chambers are required for any meeting of the city council, or when the commission determines that a meeting should be held in a different location due to the subject matter being considered. 
B.  Quorum. The public arts commission shall comply with the requirements for quorum of the planning commission as stated in Section 2.32.060(B) of the Municipal Code. 
C.  Change in Meeting Place. Notice of a change in meeting place shall be posted in front of the council chambers. 
(Ord. No. 1034, § 3, 1-11-12)  
2.68.040 - Absences from meetings. 
All members of the public arts commission shall comply with the attendance requirements for members of the planning commission as stated in Section 2.32.060(B) of the Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 1034, § 4, 1-11-12)  
2.68.050 - Term limits. 
All members of the public arts commission shall comply with the term limits for members of the planning commission as stated in Section 2.32.020 of the Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 1034, § 5, 1-11-12)  
Title 3 - CODE ENFORCEMENT 
Chapters:  
Chapter 3.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS 
Sections: 
 
3.04.010 - Purposes. 
The purposes of this chapter are to provide a just, equitable and practicable method for preventing, discouraging and/or abating certain conditions which endanger the life, limb, health, property, safety or welfare of the general public and to provide city staff with precise enforcement regulations that can be effectively applied and administered in a fair, expedient, and cost efficient manner. 
(Prior code § 14½-1)  
3.04.020 - Definitions. 
A.  General Definitions. The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall, for the purposes of this title, have the meanings ascribed to them in this chapter: 
"Abatement" means the removal of a certain condition or conditions which endanger the life, limb, health, property, safety or welfare of the general public. 
"Abandoned" applied to a building, means a building that is unoccupied and is in such a state of neglect that a reasonable person would believe that the building has not been used for its intended, lawful purpose and/or has not been lawfully occupied for an extended period of time. 
"Abandoned" applied to real property, means real property that is vacant and undeveloped, and/or real property that has not been lawfully developed and/or improved and which is more than two years delinquent in payment of the assessed real property taxes owing upon such property. 
"Administrative hearing officer" means the individual who shall conduct administrative appeal hearings and render decisions pursuant to the administrative appeal procedures set forth in this chapter. 
"Administrative citation" means a formal notice that is issued by a code enforcement officer or other authorized enforcement agent to a person who has committed an infraction or misdemeanor violation in lieu of issuing a criminal field citation or filing a criminal complaint. 
"Assessment" means the special assessment which may be assessed against a parcel of land as authorized by Government Code Section 38773.5 to recover the city's cost of abatement of a public nuisance. 
"Building official" means the individual designated by the city manager as the person authorized to serve as the city's building official for the purposes of administering various uniform codes, including the building, administrative, plumbing, mechanical, electrical, abatement of dangerous buildings, sign and swimming pool codes. 
"Building permit" means the permit granted by a ministerial process which permits the construction or modification of a building or structure in accordance with the municipal code and applicable statutes, codes, rules and regulations. 
"Certificate of occupancy" means the certificate required by the Uniform Building Code and administered by the building official or his or her designee as may be authorized by law indicating that work has been completed in compliance with building and zoning codes. 
"Code enforcement chief" means the individual designated by the city manager to cause inspections and to take such actions as may be required by the provisions of this chapter for the purpose of enforcing certain prescribed provisions of the municipal code, and all applicable statutes, rules, codes and regulations. 
"Code enforcement officers" means those individuals employed by the city and/or designated by the code enforcement chief or his or her designee to conduct inspections and to take such actions as may be required by the provisions of this chapter for the purpose of enforcing certain prescribed provisions of the municipal code and all applicable statutes, rules, codes and regulations. 
"Conditional use permit" means the permit granted by a ministerial process wherein a specific use is approved subject to specific conditions in accordance with the municipal code and applicable statutes, codes, rules and regulations. 
"Declaration" means the formal document written by an individual under penalty of perjury describing the individual's observations, actions, and/or investigation. 
"Field citation" means a document that is issued by a code enforcement officer or other authorized enforcement agent to a person who has been arrested for committing an infraction or misdemeanor violation, which may be signed by the violator as a promise to appear at court at a designated date and time, which, together with sufficient evidence of the violator's identity, shall permit the violator to avoid being taken into custody. 
"Issuing division" or "department" means the division or department of the city who issued a citation and/or notice pursuant to its authority set forth in this chapter. 
"Issuing officer" or "authorized agent" means the code enforcement officer or other authorized agent of the city who issued a citation or notice pursuant to this chapter. 
"Legal interest" means possessing a legal or equitable interest in real property, including but not limited to a leasehold interest. 
"Lien" means the legal document generally recorded against real property to secure the payment of a debt. 
"Municipal code" means the municipal code of the city and all applicable statutes, rules, codes and regulations adopted and incorporated therein by reference through a duly adopted ordinance or resolution of the city council. 
"Notice of public nuisance" means a formal notice informing an owner or user of real property about the existence of certain conditions which constitute a public nuisance. 
"Notice of violation" means an informal notice informing a party about the existence of a certain condition or situation which constitutes an infraction or misdemeanor violation of the municipal code, a public nuisance, or a violation of any applicable statute, rule, code or regulation. 
"Owner" means any person having a legal or equitable interest in property. "Owner" applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant, tenant in common, joint tenant, of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
"Plain view" means an unintrusive observation by or a sound heard by an individual's own natural senses from a location upon which the observing or listening individual is legally justified to be present. 
"Planning commission" means the planning commission of the city. 
"Permit" means a document issued by the city which allows a use, activity, event, or structure in accordance with the municipal code and applicable statutes, codes, rules and regulations. 
"Person" includes any person, firm, association, organization, partnership, business trust, company or corporation. 
"Property owner" means an owner of record of a parcel of land identified on the last equalized assessment roll of the county or as otherwise known to a code enforcement officer or other authorized enforcement agent. 
"Remedies" means the enforcement options available to the city to gain compliance with a law or regulation. 
"Secured" as applied to a building, means that reasonable actions have been taken to prohibit unlawful entry into the building, including, at a minimum, locked windows and doors. 
"Statute" means any law or regulation enacted by the California State Legislature. 
"Stop work order" means the order issued by the building official or authorized agent as authorized by the Uniform Building Code requiring that construction cease due to apparent code violations. 
"Tenant" or "occupant" applied to a building or land, includes any person who lawfully occupies the whole or part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
"Unoccupied" applied to a building, dwelling or structure means a building, dwelling or structure that is not occupied or otherwise utilized by any person with a legal right to hold possession or to exercise dominion or control over such building, dwelling or structure such that a reasonable person would believe that such building, dwelling or structure has not been lawfully occupied or utilized for an extended period of time. 
B.  Uniform Building Code Definitions. The words and phrases when used in this chapter in relation to the Uniform Building Code shall, for the purposes of this chapter, have the meanings ascribed to them in the Uniform Building Code. 
C.  Uniform Administrative Code Definitions. The words and phrases when used in this chapter in relation to the Uniform Administrative Code shall, for the purposes of this chapter, have the meanings ascribed to them in the Uniform Administrative Code. 
D.  Uniform Plumbing Code Definitions. The words and phrases when used in this chapter in relation to the Uniform Plumbing Code shall, for the purposes of this chapter, have the meanings ascribed to them in the Uniform Plumbing Code. 
E.  Uniform Mechanical Code Definitions. The words and phrases when used in this chapter in relation to the Uniform Mechanical Code shall, for the purposes of this chapter, have the meanings ascribed to them in the Uniform Mechanical Code. 
F.  National Electrical Code Definitions. The words and phrases when used in this chapter in relation to the National Electrical Code shall, for the purposes of this chapter, have the meanings ascribed to them in the National Electrical Code. 
G.  Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings Definitions. The words and phrases when used in this chapter in relation to the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings shall, for the purposes of this chapter, have the meanings ascribed to them in the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings. 
H.  Uniform Sign Code Definitions. The words and phrases when used in this chapter in relation to the Uniform Sign Code shall, for the purposes of this chapter, have the meanings ascribed to them in the Uniform Sign Code. 
I.  Uniform Fire Code Definitions. The words and phrases when used in this chapter in relation to the Uniform Fire Code shall, for the purposes of this chapter, have the meanings ascribed to them in the Uniform Fire Code. 
J.  California Fire Code Definitions. The words and phrases when used in this chapter in relation to the California Fire Code shall, for the purposes of this chapter, have the meanings ascribed to them in the California Fire Code. 
K.  Uniform Swimming Pool Code Definitions. The words and phrases when used in this chapter in relation to the Uniform Swimming Pool Code shall, for the purposes of this chapter, have the meanings ascribed to them in the Uniform Swimming Pool Code. 
L.  Non-Defined Terms. Where terms are not specifically defined in this chapter, in this code, in any applicable statute, rule, code or regulation, or in any of the Uniform Codes adopted and incorporated by reference by this code, they shall have the meanings set forth their ordinary accepted meanings within the context with which they are used. The most current edition of Webster's Third New International Dictionary of the English Language, Unabridged, shall be construed as providing ordinary accepted meanings for any duly adopted city policy or regulation. 
M.  Plural. Words used in the singular include the plural and the plural the singular. 
N.  Feminine and Masculine. Words used in the masculine gender include the feminine and the feminine the masculine. 
(Prior code § 14½-26)  
3.04.030 - Reference applies to amendments. 
Whenever a reference is made to any part of the municipal code or to any ordinance of the city, reference applies to all amendments and additions now or hereafter made. 
(Prior code § 14½-27)  
3.04.040 - Acts by deputy. 
Whenever a power is granted to, or a duty is imposed upon a public officer, or employee, the power may be exercised, or the duty may be performed by a deputy of such officer or employee or by a person otherwise duly authorized pursuant to law or ordinance, unless this chapter or the municipal code expressly provides otherwise. 
(Prior code § 14½-28)  
3.04.050 - Prohibited acts—Including, causing, permitting or suffering. 
Whenever in this chapter any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall include causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering or concealing the fact of such act or omission. 
(Prior code § 14½-29)  
3.04.060 - Computation of time. 
The time in which any act provided by this chapter is to be done is computed by excluding the first day and including the last, unless the last day is a holiday which is also excluded. If the last day for the performance of any act set forth in this chapter is a holiday, then the time in which to perform the act is extended to and including the next day which is not a holiday. If the last day for the performance of any act provided by this chapter is Saturday or Sunday, then the time in which to perform the act is extended to and including the next Monday. 
(Prior code § 14½-30)  
Chapter 3.08 - ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY 
Sections: 
 
3.08.010 - Concurrent enforcement authority with police department. 
The code enforcement chief shall have concurrent enforcement authority with the police chief regarding any violation of this code resulting in a misdemeanor, an infraction or a public nuisance, unless otherwise provided by this chapter, this code, applicable statutes, rules, codes and regulations or resolution of the city council. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed or interpreted as providing the code enforcement chief with the authority to enforce any provision of the California Penal Code, the California Vehicle Code or any other statute that is specifically required to be enforced solely by the city's local law enforcement agency under the authority of the police chief. 
(Prior code § 14½-51)  
3.08.020 - Animal regulations. 
The code enforcement chief shall have concurrent enforcement authority with the city's animal control officer regarding any violation of this code pertaining to animals unless otherwise provided in this code, any applicable statute, rule, code or regulation or resolution of the city council. 
(Prior code § 14½-52)  
3.08.030 - No smoking regulations. 
The Riverside County health department shall have primary enforcement authority regarding any violation of the no smoking regulations set forth in California Labor Code Section 6404.5. Nothing in this section, however, shall preclude or prohibit the sheriff's department, the police department or code enforcement division from exercising any enforcement authority regarding the Labor Code provisions. 
(Ord. 891 § 1, 2003: prior code § 14½-53)  
3.08.040 - Uniform Building Code violations. 
The building official or his or her designee as may be authorized by law shall have concurrent enforcement authority with any other city official regarding violations of the Uniform Building Code as adopted pursuant to Section 15.08.010 unless such concurrent authority is prohibited by the Uniform Building Code or any other applicable statutes, codes, rules and/or regulations. 
(Prior code § 14½-54)  
3.08.050 - Uniform Administrative Code violations. 
The building official or his or her designee as may be authorized by law shall have concurrent enforcement authority with any other city official regarding violations of the Uniform Administrative Code as adopted pursuant to Section 15.04.010 unless such concurrent authority is prohibited by the Uniform Administrative Code or any other applicable statutes, codes, rules and/or regulations. 
(Prior code § 14½-55)  
3.08.060 - Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings violations. 
The building official or his or her designee as may be authorized by law shall have concurrent enforcement authority with any other city official regarding violations of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings as adopted pursuant to Section 15.28.010 unless such concurrent authority is prohibited by the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings or any other applicable statutes, codes, rules and/or regulations. 
(Prior code § 14½-56)  
3.08.070 - Uniform Fire Code violations. 
The fire chief shall have exclusive enforcement authority regarding any violation of the Uniform Fire Code as adopted pursuant to Section 8.28.010, unless otherwise provided in writing by the fire chief pursuant to the Uniform Fire Code or any other applicable statutes, codes, rules and/or regulations. 
(Prior code § 14½-57)  
3.08.080 - California Fire Code violations. 
The fire chief shall have exclusive enforcement authority regarding any violation of the California Fire Code as adopted pursuant to Section 8.28.010, unless otherwise provided in writing by the fire chief pursuant to the California Fire Code or any other applicable statutes, codes, rules and/or regulations. 
(Prior code § 14½-58)  
3.08.090 - Uniform Plumbing Code violations. 
The building official or his or her designee shall have concurrent enforcement authority with any other city official regarding violations of the Uniform Plumbing Code as adopted pursuant to Section 15.16.010 unless such concurrent authority is prohibited by the Uniform Plumbing Code or any other applicable statutes, codes, rules and/or regulations. 
(Prior code § 14½-59)  
3.08.100 - Uniform Mechanical Code violations. 
The building official or his or her designee shall have concurrent enforcement authority with any other city official regarding violations of the Uniform Mechanical Code as adopted pursuant to Section 15.20.010 unless such concurrent authority is prohibited by the Uniform Mechanical Code or any other applicable statutes, codes, rules and/or regulations. 
(Prior code § 14½-60)  
3.08.110 - National Electrical Code violations. 
The building official or his or her designee shall have concurrent enforcement authority with any other city official regarding violations of the National Electrical Code as adopted pursuant to Section 15.12.010 unless such authority is prohibited by the National Electrical Code or any other applicable statutes, codes, rules and/or regulations. 
(Prior code § 14½-61)  
3.08.120 - Uniform Sign Code violations. 
The building official or his or her designee shall have concurrent enforcement authority with any other city official regarding violations of the Uniform Sign Code as adopted pursuant to Section 15.32.010 unless such concurrent authority is prohibited by the Uniform Sign Code or any other applicable statutes, codes, rules and/or regulations. 
(Prior code § 14½-62)  
3.08.130 - Uniform Swimming Pool Code violations. 
The building official or his or her designee shall have concurrent enforcement authority with any other city official regarding violations of the Uniform Swimming Pool Code as adopted pursuant to Chapter 16.18 unless such concurrent authority is prohibited by the Uniform Swimming Pool Code or any other applicable statutes, codes, rules and/or regulations. 
(Prior code § 14½-63)  
3.08.140 - Zoning regulations. 
The community development director or his or her designee shall have concurrent enforcement authority with any other city official regarding violations of the city's zoning regulations as adopted pursuant to Chapter 17.02 of this code unless such concurrent authority. is prohibited by any other applicable statutes, codes, rules and/or regulations. 
(Prior code § 14½-64)  
3.08.150 - California Red Light Abatement Law. 
The police chief or his or her designee shall have concurrent enforcement authority with any other city official regarding any violation of the California Red Light Abatement Law as set forth in California Penal Code Sections 11225 through 11235 unless such concurrent authority is prohibited by the Red Light Abatement Law. 
(Prior code § 14½-65)  
3.08.160 - Mobile Home Parks Act. 
The building official or his or her designee shall have the concurrent enforcement authority with any other city official regarding any violation of the Mobile Home Parks Act as set forth in California Health and Safety Code Sections 18200 through 18700 unless such concurrent authority is prohibited by the Mobile Home Parks Act. 
(Ord. 891 § 2, 2003: prior code § 14½-66)  
3.08.170 - State housing law. 
The building division, housing division, the fire department and code enforcement division shall have concurrent enforcement authority regarding the state housing law as prescribed in California Health and Safety Code Sections 17910 through 17995. 
(Prior code § 14½-67)  
3.08.180 - Weeds and rubbish. 
The code enforcement chief or his or her designee shall have concurrent enforcement authority with any other city official regarding any violation of this code, and/or any applicable statute, rule, code, or regulation relating to overgrown weeds or the accumulation of rubbish, refuse or dirt. 
(Prior code § 14½-68)  
3.08.190 - Persons to retain exclusive authority. 
Nothing in this chapter shall limit or otherwise restrict any employee, agent or official of the city from exercising any exclusive authority to enforce any law or regulation as provided by any applicable statute, rule, code, regulation, or policy. 
(Prior code § 14½-69)  
Chapter 3.10 - NUISANCES 
Sections: 
 
3.10.010 - Maintenance and abatement of nuisances. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide standards to maintain property in a clean and pleasing condition, to protect property values in the surrounding neighborhood or community and to provide for the reasonable enjoyment of property by neighbors. 
B.  Scope. The provisions of this section shall apply to all properties within the city, except those properties zoned for and being used for agricultural purposes. 
C.  Reserved. 
D.  Public Nuisances. 
1.  Attractive Nuisances. It is unlawful and it shall be a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of any premises or property in the city to maintain on any such premises or property any condition that constitutes an attractive nuisance including, but not limited to, the following: (a) abandoned, damaged or broken equipment, machinery or household items; (b) unprotected hazardous or unfilled pools or ponds; and (c) unfenced or otherwise unprotected wells or excavations. 
2.  Landscaping. It is unlawful and it shall be a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of any premises or property in the city to maintain any front and visible side yards without acceptable landscaping, except for improved surfaces such as walks and driveways. Acceptable landscaping shall include any ground cover, decorative rock, redwood bark, lawn and/or other material as determined to be acceptable or required by the city's community development director or his or her designee. 
3.  Weeds. It is unlawful and it shall be a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of any premises or property in the city to maintain such premises or property in a manner that has resulted in overgrown weeds to be present on any front and visible side yards and sidewalks. 
4.  Trees and Shrubs. It is unlawful and it shall be a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of any premises or property in the city to maintain such premises or property in such a manner that has resulted in: (a) trees and shrubs with dead or fallen limbs or branches to present a safety hazard or restrict, impede or obstruct the use of a public right-of-way, easement, sidewalk or roadway; or (b) trees, shrubs and plants to grow out into or over a public right-of-way, easement, sidewalk or roadway where such growth restricts, impedes or obstructs pedestrian or vehicular use of said public right-of-way, easement, side-walk or roadway. 
5.  Fire Hazard. It is unlawful and it shall be a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of any premises or property in the city to maintain such premises or property in such a manner that has resulted in the accumulation of dry or dead plant matter, combustible refuse and waste or any other matter which by reason of its size, manner of growth and location, constitutes a fire hazard to any building, improvement, crop or other property. 
6.  Vehicle Parking. It is unlawful and it shall be a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of any premises or property in the city to permit on such premises or property any operable vehicle, recreational vehicle, motor home, trailer, camper, camper shell and boat to be parked or stored outside of a garage or carport on an unimproved surface. 
7.  Occupied Vehicles. It is unlawful and it shall be a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of any premises or property in the city to permit on such premises or property any parked operable vehicle, recreational vehicle, motor home, trailer, camper, camper shell and boat to be occupied by any person or persons overnight. 
8.  Maintenance of Private Walkways, Driveways and Other Improved Surfaces. It is unlawful and it shall be a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of any premises or property in the city to maintain on such premises or property any walkway, driveway or other improved surface in a manner that results in the disrepair of such surfaces or creates unsafe conditions. 
9.  Parking Lot Striping and Handicapped Markings. It is unlawful and it shall be a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of any premises or property in the city to fail to maintain in good condition any parking lot striping and handicapped markings on such premises or property. 
10.  Termites, Insects, Vermin or Rodents. It is unlawful and it shall be a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of any premises or property in the city to maintain such premises or property that results in creating a habitat for termites, insects, vermin or rodents that presents a threat to the health and safety of the public and/or a threat to property. 
11.  Sewage. It is unlawful and it shall be a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of any premises or property in the city to fail to properly connect any inhabited improvements on such premises or property to a sewage disposal system or sanitary sewer and/or to permit sewage seepage. 
12.  Abandoned or Vacated Building or Structures. It is unlawful and it shall be a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of any premises or property in the city to abandon or permanently vacate or cause to be abandoned or permanently vacated, any building or structure, so that it becomes accessible to unauthorized persons including, but not limited to, juveniles and vagrants, for unlawful or hazardous use, or to allow the same to become infested with vermin or rodents, or to become a menace to the health or safety of the public. 
13.  Offensive Odors. It is unlawful and it shall be a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of any premises or property in the city to permit or maintain on such premises or property stagnant water, refuse, rubbish, garbage, dead animal carcasses, offal, animal excrement or other waste materials which emit odors that are unreasonably offensive to the physical senses of a reasonable person of normal sensitivity or which may cause or attract insects. 
14.  Garbage Containers. It is unlawful and it shall be a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of any premises or property in the city to maintain such premises or property with garbage or trash containers stored in front yards and visible from the public right-of-way, except when in places of collection on scheduled waste collection days. 
15.  Hazardous Substances and Waste. It is unlawful and it shall be a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of any premises or property in the city to permit any hazardous substances or hazardous waste to be unlawfully released, discharged, placed or deposited upon any premises or onto any city property. 
16.  Visibility Hazard. It is unlawful and it shall be a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of any premises or property in the city to maintain such premises or property in such a manner as to cause a hazard to the public by obscuring the visibility of any public right-of-way, road intersection or pedestrian walkway. 
17.  Illegal, Nonconforming Building or Structure. It is unlawful and it shall be declared a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of any premises or property in the city to maintain upon any such premises or property any building or structure, or any part thereof, which has been constructed or is maintained in violation of any applicable state or local law or regulation relating to the condition, use or maintenance of such building or structure. 
18.  Maintenance, Repair, Restoration or Dismantling Vehicle or Large Machinery or Equipment. It is unlawful and it shall be declared a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of any premises or property in the city to allow or perform on such premises or property the maintenance, repair, restoration or dismantling of any vehicle, large machinery or large equipment upon any residential property, walkway, or easement visible from a public street or sidewalk or from au adjoining property. This prohibition shall not apply to work which is specifically authorized by state or local law or regulation and shall not apply to minor repair or maintenance of vehicles, machinery or equipment which belong to the person residing at the property, and which is either performed inside an enclosed structure such as a garage or performed outside but is not visible for longer than seventy-two (72) consecutive hours. 
19.  Visual Blight. It is unlawful and it shall be declared a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of any premises or property in the city to maintain any such premises or property or improvement thereon in such a manner as to cause or to allow the premises, property or improvement to become defective, unsightly, or in such other condition of deterioration or disrepair as the same may cause substantial depreciation of the property values or similar detriment to surrounding properties, as well as an adverse effect on the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city. Visual blight conditions include, but is not limited to, any of the following conditions: (a) the presence of any improvement including, but not limited to, buildings, garages, carports, wooden fences, block walls, roofs or gutters in which the condition of the patio, stucco, siding or other exterior coating has become so deteriorated as to permit decay, excessive checking, cracking or warping so as to render the improvement or property unsightly and in a state of disrepair; (b) the presence of any improvement with cracked or broken windows, roofs in disrepair, damaged porches or broken steps; (c) the presence of any improvement which is abandoned, boarded up, partially destroyed or left in a state of partial construction or repair for more than ninety (90) days; (d) the presence of abandoned, damaged or broken equipment or machinery which is visible from a public street or sidewalk or from an adjoining property; or (e) the presence of excessive junk, refuse and garbage which is visible from a public street or sidewalk or from an adjoining property. 
20.  Swimming Pools, Ponds and Other Bodies of Water. It is unlawful and it shall be a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of any premises or property in the city to maintain upon any such premises or property any swimming pool, pond, or other body of water which is abandoned, unattended, unfiltered, or not otherwise maintained resulting in the water becoming polluted. 
21.  Public Toilets. It is unlawful and it shall be a public nuisance for any person to fail to maintain the floors, walls, ceilings, lavatory, urinal and toilet bowl of any public toilet free from any accumulation of dirt, filth or corrosion and/or to fail to supply a public toilet with toilet paper, hand washing facilities, soap and individual towels with a receptacle for their disposal. 
22.  Privies. It is unlawful and it shall be a public nuisance for any person to construct or maintain a privy within the city in any manner that does not comply with the Health and Safety Code. 
23.  Safety Hazard. It is unlawful and it shall be a public nuisance for any person to maintain any premises or property within the city in a manner that presents an imminent safety hazard and/or which creates a present and immediate danger to life, property, health or public safety. 
24.  Disruptive Activities. It is unlawful and it shall be a public nuisance for any person to operate or maintain any premises or property within the city in a manner that has resulted in repeated disruptive activities including, but not limited to, disturbances of the peace, public drunkenness, drinking in public, harassment of passersby, sale of stolen goods, public urination, theft, assaults, batteries, acts of vandalism, excessive littering, illegal parking, loud noises between the hours of ten p.m. and six a.m., traffic violations, curfew violations, or police detentions and arrests. 
25.  Land Use Entitlements. It is unlawful and it shall be a public nuisance for any person to maintain any premises or property within the city which fails to comply with any condition imposed on any entitlement, permit, contract, or environmental document issued by or approved by the city in connection with the premises or property or improvement located thereon. 
26.  Animals. It is unlawful and it shall be a public nuisance for any person to: (a) keep on any premises or property within the city any animal which by any sound, cry or behavior causes annoyance or discomfort to a reasonable person of normal sensitivity or any animal in unsanitary conditions; (b) keep on any premises or property within the city more animals than permitted under this code or any applicable state or federal law; or (c) keep on any premises or property within the city any animal deemed to be illegal under this code or any applicable state or federal laws. 
27.  Public Burning. It is unlawful and it shall be a public nuisance for any person to engage in the intentional burning of any material, structure, matter or thing on any premises or property within the city without a validly issued permit allowing such burning. 
28.  Air Pollution. It is unlawful and it shall be a public nuisance for any person to: (a) establish, operate or allow any activity on any premises or property within the city which pollutes the atmosphere with any unwholesome, offensive, or deleterious gas, fumes, dust, smoke, or odors; or (b) allow any offensive odors to be emitted from offal, garbage, dead animal carcasses or any animal or vegetable matter. 
29.  Mosquito Breeding Places. It is unlawful and it shall be a public nuisance for any person to maintain any premises or property within the city upon which there is stagnant or still water or a marshy condition which harbors and breeds mosquitoes or other poisonous or objectionable insects. 
30.  Discharge of Sewage. It is unlawful and it shall a public nuisance for any person to permit on any premises or property within the city any matter or substance from a private vault, cesspool, septic tank, water closet, privy vault, urinal, pipe, sewer line or any sewage, effluent, slop water or any other filthy water, matter or substance to flow or discharge upon the ground or upon any public sidewalk, street or other public place. 
31.  Animal Manure—Use and Storage. It is unlawful and it shall be a public nuisance for any person to use or store non-domesticated animal manure on any premises or property within the city unless the manure has been processed or treated so as to render it substantially free of unpleasant odor. 
32.  Hauling of Offensive Substances. It is unlawful and it shall be a public nuisance for any person to use, park or store a vehicle or any receptacle used for hauling or transporting any offal, manure, or the contents of a privy vault, cesspool or sink or any nauseous or offensive substances, within the city if the contents of such vehicle or receptacle are leaking or spilling from such vehicle or receptacle. 
33.  Clothes Lines. It is unlawful and it shall be a public nuisance for any person to maintain on any premises or property within the city in the plain view a public sidewalk or public street a clothesline or other object or structure, on a front yard or side yard, for purposes of hanging clothing and/or laundry. 
34.  Stormwater Drainage. It is unlawful and it shall be a public nuisance for any person to maintain on any premises or property within the city any drainage facility, such as terrace drains, down drains and catch basins, in such a condition so as to cause the drainage water to spill onto adjoining properties or other areas not intended or approved for the collection of stormwater. 
35.  Water Disposal. It is unlawful and it shall be a public nuisance for any person to maintain on any premises or property within the city where water from swimming pools, ornamental ponds, waterfalls, and similar facilities is permitted to be disposed over or onto adjoining property or onto any street, alley or public way without written permission from the affected property owner or property owners and/or a validly issued permit from the requisite agency. 
36.  Signs. It is unlawful and it shall be a public nuisance for any person to maintain on any premises or property within the city any sign, including its supporting structure, which is damaged to the point of presenting a possible safety hazard. 
37.  Encroachment. It is unlawful and it shall be a public nuisance for any person to cause or permit any encroachment onto public property for which no encroachment permit has been issued or which is in violation of the provisions of an encroachment permit or any applicable provision of this code. 
38.  Municipal Code Violations. It shall be deemed a public nuisance for any member of the public to create, cause, commit, permit or maintain any condition or to perform or cause to be performed any activity specifically identified as a public nuisance by the municipal code and/or applicable statute, rule, code or regulation. 
39.  California Civil Code. The city may declare that a public nuisance exists whenever any member of the public creates, causes, commits, permits or maintains any condition or performs or causes to be performed any activity that falls within the scope of the definition of "public nuisance" as set forth in California Civil Code Sections 3479 and 3480. 
40.  California Red Light Abatement Act. The city may: (a) declare that a public nuisance exists whenever any member of the public creates, causes, commits, permits or maintains any condition or performs or causes to be performed any activity that falls within the scope of the definition of "public nuisance" as set forth in California Penal Code Section 11225; and (b) commence any action or proceeding pursuant to the California Red Light Abatement Act to abate the public nuisance, to pursue all other remedies against the violator, to seek the imposition of all penalties against the violator and to recover any and all costs from the violator. 
41.  California Drug Abatement Act. The city may: (a) declare that a public nuisance exists whenever any member of the public creates, causes, commits, permits or maintains any condition or performs or causes to be performed any activity that falls within the scope of the definition of "public nuisance" as set forth in California Health and Safety Code Section 11570; and (b) commence any action or proceeding pursuant to the California Drug Abatement Act to abate the public nuisance, to pursue all other remedies against the violator, to seek the imposition of all penalties against the violator and to recover any and all costs from the violator. 
42.  State Housing Law. The city may: (a) declare that a public nuisance exists whenever any member of the public creates, causes, commits, permits or maintains any condition or performs or causes to be performed any activity that falls within the scope of the definition of "public nuisance" as set forth in California Health and Safety Code Sections 17910 through 17995; and (b) commence any action or proceeding set forth therein to abate the public nuisance, to pursue all other remedies against the violator, to seek the imposition of all penalties against the violator and to recover any and all costs from the violator. 
43.  Weed Abatement. The city council may: (a) declare by resolution pursuant to California Government Code Section 39561 et seq. that a public nuisance exists with respect to a specific parcel whenever that parcel is being maintained in a manner that has resulted in weeds, as that term is defined in California Government Code Section 39561.5, being grown upon the streets, sidewalks or private property in the city; and (b) commence any action or proceeding pursuant to California Government Code Section 39561 et seq. to abate the public nuisance, to pursue all other remedies against the violator, to seek the imposition of all penalties against the violator and to recover any and all costs from the violator. 
44.  Rubbish, Refuse and Dirt. The city council may: (a) declare by resolution pursuant to California Government Code Section 39561 et seq. that a public nuisance exists with respect to a specific parcel whenever that parcel is being maintained in a manner that has resulted in an accumulation of rubbish, refuse and dirt upon parkways, sidewalks or private property in the city; and (b) commence any action or proceeding pursuant to California Government Code Section 39561 et seq. to abate the public nuisance, to pursue all other remedies against the violator, to seek the imposition of all penalties against the violator and to recover any and all costs from the violator. 
E.  Reserved. 
F.  Reserved. 
G.  Reserved. 
H.  Reserved. 
I.  Reserved. 
J.  Reserved. 
K.  Reserved. 
(Prior code § 14½-4) 
(Ord. No. 1078, § 2, 9-9-15)  
Chapter 3.12 - INSPECTIONS 
Sections: 
 
3.12.010 - Authority to inspect. 
A code enforcement officer or other authorized enforcement agent shall have the authority to enter upon any real property or premises to ascertain whether the provisions of this code and/or applicable statutes, rules, codes and regulations are being obeyed and to make any examinations and surveys as may be necessary in the performance of his or her code enforcement duties. Inspections may include and/or involve the taking of photographs, samples, or other physical evidence and conferring with persons present. 
(Prior code § 14½-76)  
3.12.020 - Right to enter occupied property with consent of landlord, occupant or tenant. 
When it is necessary to conduct an inspection of occupied property to enforce the provisions of this code and/or applicable statutes, rules, codes and regulations, or when the code enforcement officer or other authorized enforcement agent has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in an occupied building or upon occupied premises a condition that is contrary to or in violation of this code and/or applicable statutes, rules, codes or regulations, the code enforcement officer or other authorized enforcement agent may enter the building or premises at reasonable times to inspect or to perform duties imposed by this chapter provided that, if such building or premises are occupied, credentials are presented to the occupant or tenant and consent to enter for the purpose of inspection is requested and granted by the occupant or tenant, or the landlord consents to entry for inspection purposes. 
(Prior code § 14½-77)  
3.12.030 - Limitation on scope of consent by occupant or tenant. 
A code enforcement officer or other authorized enforcement agent shall be permitted to inspect only those areas of the subject premises that are within the consenting occupant's or tenant's control or which are subject to the common authority of all occupants and tenants unless otherwise provided by a court-issued inspection warrant. 
(Prior code § 14½-78)  
3.12.040 - Limitation on scope of consent by landlord. 
A code enforcement officer or other authorized enforcement agent shall be permitted to inspect only those areas of the subject premises that the consenting landlord has authority to access and inspect him or herself, unless otherwise provided by a court-issued inspection warrant. 
(Prior code § 14½-79)  
3.12.050 - Right to enter secured unoccupied premises with consent. 
When it is necessary to conduct an inspection of secured unoccupied property to enforce the provisions of this code and/or applicable statutes, rules, codes or regulations or when the code enforcement officer or other authorized enforcement agent has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in an unoccupied building or upon unoccupied premises a condition that is contrary to or in violation of this code and/or applicable statutes, rules, codes or regulations the code enforcement officer or other authorized enforcement agent shall make a reasonable effort to locate the property owner or other person having charge or control of the building or premises and request and obtain that persons' consent to enter for the purpose of inspection. 
(Prior code § 14½-80)  
3.12.060 - Remedy for refused entry or inability to obtain consent. 
If a property owner, occupant or agent having charge or control of a property refuses to consent to an inspection of the subject premises by a code enforcement officer or other authorized enforcement agent or if the property owner occupant, or agent having charge or control of a property cannot be located after a reasonable attempt has been made, the code enforcement officer or other authorized enforcement agent must obtain an administrative inspection warrant pursuant to the procedures provided in California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1822.50 et seq., to conduct an inspection of the premises, unless otherwise provided in this chapter or any other applicable law. 
(Ord. 891 § 3, 2003: prior code § 14½-81)  
3.12.070 - Inspection of exterior code violations from public property. 
To enforce the provisions of this code and/or applicable statutes, rules, codes or regulations, a code enforcement officer or other authorized enforcement agent may inspect exterior code violations from a public street, sidewalk, park, or alley without the consent of the property owner or occupant and without an inspection warrant. 
(Prior code § 14½-82)  
3.12.080 - Inspection of exterior code violations from neighbor's yard. 
To enforce the provisions of the municipal code and/or applicable statutes, rules, codes or regulations, a code enforcement officer or other authorized enforcement agent may inspect exterior code violations from a neighbor's yard without the consent of the property owner, occupant, or agent having charge or control of the premises upon which the violation exists and without an inspection warrant provided that lawful access to the neighbor's yard can be obtained and the exterior code violations are in plain view from the neighbor's yard. 
(Prior code § 14½-83)  
3.12.090 - Inspection of abandoned buildings and property. 
To enforce the provisions of this code, and/or applicable statutes, rules, codes or regulations, a code enforcement officer or other authorized enforcement agent may inspect abandoned buildings and property without the consent of the property owner or agent having charge or control of the premises and without an inspection warrant provided that the subject property and/or building or buildings are unoccupied and have not been secured against unlawful entry. 
(Prior code § 14½-84)  
3.12.100 - Inspection of common areas of multi-housing complexes. 
To enforce the provisions of this code and/or applicable statutes, rules, codes or regulations, a code enforcement officer or other authorized enforcement agent may inspect the common areas of multi-housing complexes without the consent of the property owner, occupant or agent having charge or control of the premises and without an inspection warrant provided that such common areas are accessible to members of the general public. 
(Prior code § 14½-85)  
3.12.110 - Inspection of open undeveloped areas. 
To enforce the provisions of this code and/or applicable statutes, rules, codes or regulations, a code enforcement officer or other authorized enforcement agent may inspect open undeveloped areas without the consent of the property owner or agent having charge or control of the premises and without an inspection warrant provided that the subject area is accessible to members of the general public and open to public view. 
(Prior code § 14½-86)  
3.12.120 - Use of optical aids. 
Use of optical aids such as flashlights and binoculars may be used to conduct inspections of exterior code violations if such violations could otherwise be seen during normal daylight hours or at close range without such optical aids from a location upon which the observing individual is legally justified. 
(Prior code § 14½-87)  
3.12.130 - Use of aerial surveillance. 
To enforce the provisions of this code and/or applicable statutes, rules, codes or regulations, a code enforcement officer or other authorized enforcement agent may use aerial surveillance to inspect an enclosed yard that is visible from the air space above without the consent of the property owner, occupant or agent having charge or control of the premises and without an inspection warrant provided that such surveillance does not cause unnecessary noise, dust or threaten injury. 
(Prior code § 14½-88)  
3.12.140 - Inspections of sexually oriented businesses. 
To enforce the provisions of Chapter 5.60 of this code and/or other applicable statutes, rules, codes or regulations, a code enforcement officer or other authorized enforcement agent may inspect a sexually oriented business pursuant to Section 5.60.170 of this code. 
(Prior code § 14½-89)  
3.12.150 - Inspections pursuant to Uniform Building Code. 
Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit or preclude inspections conducted pursuant to the Uniform Building Code as adopted pursuant to Section 15.08.010. 
(Prior code § 14½-90)  
3.12.160 - Inspections pursuant to Uniform Plumbing Code. 
Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit or preclude inspections conducted pursuant to the Uniform Plumbing Code as adopted pursuant to Section 15.16.010. 
(Prior code § 14½-91)  
3.12.170 - Inspections pursuant to Uniform Mechanical Code. 
Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit or preclude inspections conducted pursuant to the Uniform Mechanical Code as adopted pursuant to Section 15.20.010. 
(Prior code § 14½-92)  
3.12.180 - Inspections pursuant to National Electrical Code. 
Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit or preclude inspections conducted pursuant to the National Electrical Code as adopted pursuant to Section 15.12.010. 
(Prior code § 14½-93)  
3.12.190 - Inspections pursuant to Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings. 
Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit or preclude inspections conducted pursuant to Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings as adopted pursuant to Section 15.28.010. 
(Prior code § 14½-94)  
3.12.200 - Inspections pursuant to Uniform Sign Code. 
Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit or preclude inspections conducted pursuant to the Uniform Sign Code as adopted pursuant to Section 15.32.010. 
(Prior code § 14½-95)  
3.12.210 - Inspections pursuant to Uniform Fire Code. 
Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit or preclude inspections conducted pursuant to the Uniform Fire Code as adopted pursuant to Section 8.28.010. 
(Prior code § 14½-96)  
3.12.220 - Inspections pursuant to California Fire Code. 
Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit or preclude inspections conducted pursuant to the California Fire Code as adopted pursuant to Section 8.28.010. 
(Prior code § 14½-97)  
3.12.230 - Inspections pursuant to Uniform Swimming Pool Code. 
Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit or preclude inspections conducted pursuant to the Uniform Swimming Pool Code as adopted pursuant to Section 15.36.010. 
(Prior code § 14½-98)  
3.12.240 - Inspections pursuant to applicable statutes, rules, codes, regulations or inspection warrants. 
Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit or preclude inspections conducted pursuant to any applicable statute, rule, code, regulation or inspection warrant for purposes of inspections related to the respective statute, rule, code, regulation or inspection warrant. 
(Prior code § 14½-99)  
3.12.250 - Refusal to permit inspection pursuant to court issued inspection warrant. 
Any occupant or tenant who refuses to permit an inspection pursuant to any court issued inspection warrant shall be subject to arrest by the code enforcement officer or other authorized enforcement agent. Forcible execution of the inspection under such circumstance shall be permitted only if the warrant expressly grants permission for such forcible entry. 
(Prior code § 14½-100)  
Chapter 3.16 - NOTICE OF VIOLATION 
Sections: 
 
3.16.010 - Issuance of notice of violation. 
A code enforcement officer or other authorized enforcement agent may issue a notice of violation in lieu of issuing a field citation, an administrative citation or a notice of public nuisance, provided that grounds exist to issue a field citation, an administrative citation or a notice of public nuisance or to file a criminal complaint as set forth in this title. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed or interpreted to require the issuance of a notice of violation as a prerequisite to the issuance of a field citation, an administrative citation, or a notice of public nuisance or the filing of a criminal complaint. 
(Prior code § 14½-106)  
3.16.020 - Contents of notice of violation related to real property. 
A.  If the violator is being charged for violations occurring upon real property, the notice of violation should include all of the following information: 
1.  The name of the property's owner of record, the occupant, if any, and/or the agent, if any, having charge or control of the property; 
2.  The date of inspection; 
3.  The date of the violation(s); 
4.  The street address or a definite description of the location where the violation(s) occurred; 
5.  The code section(s) violated; 
6.  A description of the property's condition which violated the applicable codes; 
7.  A list of necessary corrections to bring the property into compliance; 
8.  The deadline or specific date by which to correct the violation(s) listed in the notice of violation; 
9.  A reference to the potential consequences should the property remain in violation after the expiration of the compliance deadline; 
10.  The amount of the potential fine for the code violation(s); and 
11.  The name and signature of the code enforcement officer or other authorized enforcement agent who issued the notice of violation ("citing officer"). 
(Prior code § 14½-107)  
3.16.030 - Contents of notice of violation unrelated to real property. 
If the violator is being charged for violations not occurring upon real property, the notice of violation shall include all of the following information: (a) the name of the person(s) responsible for committing the violation(s); (b) the date of the violation(s); (c) the street address or a definite description of the location where the violation occurred; (d) the code section(s) violated; (e) a description of the violation(s); (f) an order prohibiting the continuation or repeated occurrence of the described violation(s); (g) the amount of the potential fine for the code violation(s); and (h) the name and signature of the citing officer. 
(Prior code § 14½-108)  
3.16.040 - Form of notice of violation. 
The notice of violation may be in letter form or any other form which adequately conveys the information set forth in Section 3.16.020 or 3.16.030. 
(Prior code § 14½-109)  
3.16.050 - Persons entitled to service of notice of violation. 
The notice of violation, and any amended or supplemental notice of violation, should be served upon the person(s) responsible for the violation(s). 
(Prior code § 14½-110)  
3.16.060 - Service of notice of violation related to real property. 
A notice of violation that is related to real property may be served by personal delivery to the violator or, if the violator is the owner or occupant of, or has charge or control of the property, the citation may be served by causing a copy of such citation to be sent by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, to the address shown on the last available assessment roll. The failure of any such person to receive a copy of the notice of violation shall not affect the validity of any proceedings or actions taken under this chapter. Service by certified mail in the manner herein provided shall be affixed to the copy of the notice of violation and retained by the citing officer. 
(Prior code § 14½-111)  
3.16.070 - Service of notice of violation unrelated to real property. 
A notice of violation that is not related to real property may be served in any of the following ways: (a) by personal delivery to the violator; (b) if the violator is being charged for violations occurring at a business operating within the city, and the violator is the owner or an employee of the business, the citation may be served by causing a copy of such citation to be sent by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested to the address shown on any permit or license issued by the city to such business; or (c) by causing a copy of such citation to be sent by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, to an address otherwise known to the issuing officer or authorized agent. The failure of any such person to receive a copy of the notice of violation shall not affect the validity of any proceedings or actions taken under this chapter. Service by certified mail in the manner herein provided shall be affixed to the copy of the notice of violation retained by the citing officer. 
(Prior code § 14½-112)  
3.16.080 - Completion of service of notice of violation. 
Service of a notice of violation which is personally served shall be deemed completed at the time of such delivery. Service of a notice of violation which is served by mail is deemed completed on the date such notice of violation is deposited in the mail. 
(Prior code § 14½-113)  
3.16.090 - Failure to comply with notice of violation. 
Failure to comply with a notice of violation may result in the issuance of a field citation, an administrative citation, or a notice of public nuisance, or such other action or proceeding pursuant to this chapter. 
(Prior code § 14½-114)  
Chapter 3.20 - ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS 
Sections: 
 
3.20.010 - Issuance of administrative citation. 
Whenever a code enforcement officer or other authorized agent determines that a violation of this code has occurred, or that a violation exists which is deemed to constitute a public nuisance as set forth in this Code or other applicable statute, rule, code or regulation, the officer or agent, in lieu of issuing a criminal citation or causing or requesting the city prosecutor to file a criminal complaint, may issue an administrative citation to each party responsible for the violation. 
(Prior code § 14½-121) 
(Ord. No. 1098, § 4, 12-14-16)  
3.20.020 - Administrative fines. 
A.  Any responsible party to whom an administrative citation is issued, shall be responsible for payment of an administrative fine, the amount of which shall be set forth by this code or a resolution of the city council through adoption of an administrative fine schedule. The maximum fine for any violation not listed in the administrative fine schedule that is designated as an infraction shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first violation, two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the second violation of the same code section within twelve (12) months, five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a third violation of the same code section within twelve (12) months, and one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each subsequent violation of the same code section within twelve (12) months. A fourth violation of the same code section otherwise designated as an infraction, and each subsequent violation thereof, within twelve (12) months is hereby designated to be a misdemeanor. The maximum fine for any violation not listed in the administrative citation fine schedule that is designated as a misdemeanor shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense. Each subsequent violation of the same CCC section shall be subject to double the fine of the previous violation up to a maximum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation. 
B.  Upon the issuance of an administrative citation, or the expiration of the applicable grace period, any associated fines shall automatically renew and accrue each day until the violation is corrected. 
(Prior code § 14½-122) 
(Ord. No. 1098, § 5, 12-14-16)  
3.20.030 - Opportunity to correct or remedy violations. 
A.  Any responsible party to whom an administrative citation has been issued for continuing violations that do not create an immediate danger to health or safety shall be provided a reasonable opportunity to correct the violations ("grace period") of not less than three calendar days, or as otherwise set by resolution of the city council, prior to the imposition of any administrative fine. 
B.  The citing officer may extend the time in which to correct or otherwise remedy a violation upon a showing of good cause that the responsible party requires additional time to complete repairs, or upon a showing for good cause that the responsible party is awaiting issuance of a permit or approval, provided that the responsible party offers proof that he or she has commenced taking action to correct or otherwise remedy the violation and that a proper application for such permit or approval has been made to the appropriate public entity. 
(Prior code § 14½-123) 
(Ord. No. 1098, § 6, 12-14-16)  
3.20.040 - Contents of administrative citation. 
Administrative citations shall include all of the following information: 
A.  The name of the persons responsible for committing the violations. 
B.  The date of the violations. 
C.  The street address or a definite description of the location where the violations occurred. 
D.  The code sections violated. 
E.  A brief description of the violations. 
F.  Designation of whether each violation is continuous. 
G.  Designation of whether each violation creates an immediate danger to health or safety. 
H.  The grace period for each violation, if applicable. 
I.  The amount of the administrative fine for each violation (if not cured within the grace period, if applicable). 
J.  A brief description of the fine payment process, including a description of the time within which, and the place to which, the fine shall be paid. 
K.  A brief description of the administrative citation appeal process, including the time within which a notice of appeal must be filed. 
L.  A brief description of the process by which the city may collect any unpaid fines. 
M.  A brief description of the potential consequences should the violator continue or repeat the violation. 
N.  The name and signature of the code enforcement officer or other authorized person who issued the administrative citation ("citing officer"). 
(Prior code § 14½-124) 
(Ord. No. 1098, § 7, 12-14-16)  
3.20.050 - Form of administrative citation. 
An administrative citation may be in letter form or any other form which adequately conveys the information set forth in Section 3.20.040. 
(Prior code § 14½-125)  
3.20.060 - Service of administrative citation. 
Administrative citations, and all notices issued under this chapter, may be served on the responsible parties in accordance with any of the following methods: 
A.  Personal service to the responsible parties. 
B.  First class mail to the responsible parties at the property address containing the violations being cited. 
C.  First class mail to the responsible parties at their last known address. 
D.  If the responsible party is an entity registered with the Secretary of State, then by first class mail to the party's agent for service of process as registered with the Secretary of State, or as otherwise permitted by the Corporations Code. 
E.  If the address for a responsible party cannot be determined, then that party may be served by posting the administrative citation in a conspicuous place on the parcel of real property containing the violation and mailing the citation to that responsible party at that property's address by first class mail. 
(Prior code § 14½-126) 
(Ord. No. 1098, § 8, 12-14-16)  
3.20.070 - Completion of service. 
Service of an administrative citation, or any notice under this chapter, that is personally served shall be deemed completed at the time of such delivery. Service of an administrative citation, or any notice under this chapter, that is served by mail is deemed completed on the date such citation is deposited in the mail. Service of an administrative citation, or any notice under this chapter, that is served by posting is deemed completed on the date such posting is made. 
(Prior code § 14½-127) 
(Ord. No. 1098, § 9, 12-14-16)  
3.20.080 - Appeal of administrative citation. 
Any recipient of an administrative citation may contest that there was a violation, or that he or she is the party responsible for committing the violation, by filing with the city a complete and proper appeal of an administrative citation as described in Section 3.20.090, to the citing officer. Such appeal shall be filed within ten (10) calendar days from the date service of the administrative citation is completed. Any appeal not timely and properly filed shall be rejected. Failure to properly request an appeal, or to appear at a hearing as properly requested and duly noticed, shall constitute a waiver of the right to contest the administrative citation, a waiver of the right to contest the administrative fines, a failure to exhaust the available administrative remedies, and a bar to any further appeals of the administrative citation. 
(Prior code § 14½-128) 
(Ord. No. 1098, § 10, 12-14-16)  
3.20.090 - Form for filing of appeal. 
All appeals from any administrative citation shall be in writing and shall contain the following information: (a) name(s) of each appellant; (b) a brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the specific items protested, together with any material facts claimed to support the contentions of the appellant; (c) a brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the relief sought and the reasons why the administrative citation should be rescinded, modified or otherwise set aside; and (d) the signatures of all parties named as appellants and their mailing addresses. Any appeal filed that fails to provide all of the information required by this section shall be deemed incomplete. 
(Prior code § 14½-129)  
3.20.100 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1098, § 11, adopted Dec. 14, 2016, repealed former § 3.20.100 in its entirety which pertained to a filing fee for appeals and derived from prior code § 14½-130.  
3.20.110 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1098, § 12, adopted Dec. 14, 2016, repealed former § 3.20.110 in its entirety which pertained to incomplete filings and derived from prior code § 14½-131.  
3.20.120 - Failure to file proper appeal. 
Failure to timely and properly file an appeal from an administrative citation shall constitute a waiver of all rights to an administrative appeal hearing and adjudication of the administrative citation or any portion thereof. The determination that the violation occurred and that the violator was responsible for the violation shall be deemed final on the date that service of the administrative citation is deemed completed pursuant to Section 3.20.070. 
(Prior code § 14½-132)  
3.20.130 - Processing of appeal. 
The appeal of any administrative citation shall proceed in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 3.28. 
(Prior code § 14½-133)  
3.20.140 - Stay pending appeal. 
Enforcement of any administrative citation shall be stayed during the pendency of an appeal therefrom which is properly and timely filed pursuant to this chapter. 
(Prior code § 14½-134)  
3.20.150 - Time in which to pay fine. 
All fines must be paid within thirty (30) days of the effective date of the fine, or within thirty (30) days following the decision of the hearing officer upholding the fine following a valid hearing. The amount of the fine for which the recipient shall be responsible shall be as set forth in the administrative citation and specified herein. Payment of the administrative fine shall be made to the "City of Coachella" and delivered to the department issuing the citation. 
(Prior code § 14½-135) 
(Ord. No. 1098, § 13, 12-14-16)  
3.20.155 - Recovery of administrative citation fines, costs, expenses, fees, and attorneys' fees. 
The city may collect any past due administrative citation fines, costs, expenses, fees, and attorneys' fees by use of all available legal means, including, but not limited to, personal collection from the responsible parties, judgment liens, personal property liens, special assessments against the parcel of real property containing the violations cited, and submission to the Franchise Tax Board for collection through an intercept collection program. The city may also recover all fines, costs, expenses, fees, and attorneys' fees associated with the assessment, enforcement, processing, and collection of the fines associated with the administrative citation in accordance with Chapter 1.10, Chapter 3.36, Chapter 3.56, and any other provisions of this code, or as provided by any other law. The remedies prescribed by this section shall be cumulative, and the use of any action to collect any such amounts as a debt by civil action shall not bar the use of any other remedy provided by this chapter or as otherwise provided by law. The fines, costs, expenses, fees, and attorneys' fees contemplated by this section are deemed nuisance abatement costs for purposes of collecting these amounts as a special assessment against the parcel of real property containing the violations cited in accordance with Government Code section 38773.5. 
(Ord. No. 1098, § 14, 12-14-16)  
3.20-160—3.20.190 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1098, §§ 15—-19, respectively repealed former §§ 3.20.160—3.20.190 in their entirety. Subject and legislative history of these former sections follows. 
Section 	Subject 	History 
3.20.160 	Contents of demand for payment 	Prior code, § 14½-136 
3.20.170 	Service of demand for payment 	Prior code, § 14½-137 
3.20.180 	Completion of service 	Prior code, § 14½-138 
3.20.190 	Proof of serviced 	Prior code, § 14½-139 
  
3.20.200 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1078, § 2, adopted Sept. 9, 2015, repealed § 3.20.200, which pertained to attorney's fees and derived from prior code, § 14½-140.  
Chapter 3.24 - PUBLIC NUISANCE ABATEMENT ORDERS AND FINES 
Sections: 
 
3.24.010 - Notice of public nuisance and order to abate. 
When a code enforcement officer or other authorized agent has inspected any real property or premises and has found and determined that conditions at or upon such property or premises constitute a public nuisance pursuant to any provision of this code and/or applicable statute, rule, code and regulation and the city has not commenced an alternative public nuisance abatement procedure prescribed by statute regarding such public nuisance, the code enforcement officer or authorized agent may issue or cause the issuance of a notice of public nuisance and order to abate ("Notice and Order") pursuant to this chapter. 
(Prior code § 14½-146)  
3.24.020 - Public nuisance administrative fines. 
Any violation of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
(Prior code § 14½-147) 
(Ord. No. 1098, § 19, 12-14-16)  
3.24.030 - Opportunity to correct or remedy violations. 
A.  Any party to whom a notice and order has been issued for violations pertaining to building, plumbing, electrical, or other similar structural or zoning issues that do not create an immediate danger to health or safety, shall be provided not less than ten (10) calendar days in which to correct or otherwise remedy the violation prior to the imposition of any administrative fine. For all other violations, the recipient of a notice and order shall be provided not less than seven calendar days in which to correct or otherwise remedy the violation prior to the imposition of any administrative fine. 
B.  The citing officer may extend the time in which to correct or otherwise remedy a violation upon a showing that the recipient of the notice and order requires additional time to complete repairs or upon a showing that the recipient is awaiting issuance of a permit, provided such person offers proof that he or she has commenced taking action to correct or otherwise remedy the violation and/or that a proper application for such permit has been made. 
(Prior code § 14½-148)  
3.24.040 - Contents of notice and order. 
The notice and order shall include all of the following information: 
A.  The name of the property's record owner, the occupant, if any, and/or the agent, if any, having charge or control of the property; 
B.  The date of inspection; 
C.  The date of the violation; 
D.  The street address or a definite description of the location where the violation occurred; 
E.  The code section(s) violated; 
F.  A description of the property's condition which violated the applicable codes; 
G.  The actions necessary to correct the subject violations; 
H.  The deadline or specific date by which to correct the violations; 
I.  A reference to the potential consequences should the property remain in violation after the expiration of the compliance deadline; 
J.  The number of times the violation has been cited by the city within the previous thirty-six (36) months; 
K.  The amount of the public nuisance administrative fine for the code violation; 
L.  A description of the fine payment process, including a description of the time within which the fine must be paid and the place where the fine must be paid; 
M.  A description of the process by which the city may collect any unpaid fines; 
N.  An order prohibiting the continuation or repeated occurrence of the code violation described in the notice and order; 
O.  A description of the administrative appeal process for a person's appeal of the code enforcement officer's determination of violation, including the time within which the administrative appeal must be filed and the place at which a "request for hearing" form may be obtained; and 
P.  The name and signature of the citing code enforcement officer or other authorized agent ("citing officer"). The heading of the notice shall be "notice of public nuisance and order to abate" in letters not less than one inch in height. 
(Prior code § 14½-149)  
3.24.050 - Posting of notice and order. 
The notice and order, and any amended or supplemental notice and order, shall be posted on the property on which a violation occurs. 
(Prior code § 14½-150)  
3.24.060 - Persons entitled to service. 
The notice and order, and any amended or supplemental notice and order, shall be served upon the record owner, tenant, occupant, if any, and/or agent, if any, having charge or control of the property. The failure of the issuing officer or any other authorized agent to serve any person required herein to be served shall not invalidate any proceedings hereunder as to any other person duly served or relieve any such person from any duty or obligation imposed by the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 14½-151)  
3.24.070 - Method of service. 
Service of a copy of the notice and order shall be made upon all persons entitled thereto either personally or by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, at their address as it appears on the last equalized assessment roll of the county or as otherwise known to the issuing officer or authorized agent. If an address of any such person does not appear on the last equalized assessment roll or is not otherwise known to the citing officer then a copy of the notice and order shall be addressed to such person(s) and mailed to the address of the subject premises. The failure of any such person to receive a copy of the notice and order shall not affect the validity of any proceedings or actions taken under this chapter. Service by certified mail in the manner herein provided shall be affixed to the copy of the notice and order and retained by the citing officer. 
(Prior code § 14½-152)  
3.24.080 - Completion of service. 
Service of a notice and order which is personally served shall be deemed completed at the time of such delivery. Service of a notice and order which is served by mail is deemed completed on the date the notice and order is deposited in the mail. 
(Prior code § 14½-153)  
3.24.090 - Proof of service. 
Proof of service of the notice and order shall be certified at the time of service by a written declaration under penalty of perjury executed by the persons effecting service, declaring the date and manner in which service was made. The declaration, together with any receipt card returned in acknowledgment of receipt by certified mail shall be affixed to a copy of the notice and order and retained by the citing officer. 
(Prior code § 14½-154)  
3.24.100 - Recordation of notice and order. 
The notice and order shall be filed in the office of the county recorder to certify that: (a) the subject property is being maintained in violation of the municipal code and/or applicable statute, rule, code and regulation; and (b) the property owner has been so notified. 
(Prior code § 14½-155)  
3.24.110 - Appeal of imposition of administrative fines. 
Any party contesting the imposition of the public nuisance administrative fine may seek judicial review of the imposition of the fines by filing an appeal pursuant to California Government Code Section 53069.4, subdivision (b)(1) after such party has exhausted all available administrative remedies relating to the underlying violation. 
(Prior code § 14½-156)  
3.24.120 - Appeal of notice and order. 
Any person subject to the provisions of a notice and order may contest that there was a violation or that he or she is the party responsible for committing the violation by filing a complete and proper appeal of an notice and order as described in Section 3.24.110 to the citing officer. Such appeal shall be filed within ten (10) calendar days from the date service of the notice and order is completed. Any appeal not timely filed shall be rejected. 
(Prior code § 14½-157)  
3.24.130 - Form for filing of appeal. 
All appeals from any notice and order shall be in writing and shall contain the following information: (a) name(s) of each appellant; (b) a brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the specific items protested, together with any material facts claimed to support the contentions of the appellant; (c) a brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the relief sought and the reasons why the notice and order should be rescinded, modified or otherwise set aside; and (d) the signatures of all parties named as appellants and their mailing addresses. Any appeal filed that fails to provide all of the information required by this section shall be deemed incomplete. 
(Prior code § 14½-158)  
3.24.140 - Fee for filing of appeal. 
A filing fee as established by city council resolution or any amendments thereto for an appeal of an notice and order must be paid to the city at or prior to the time of the filing of such appeal. Any appeal of the notice and order filed without payment of the filing fee shall be deemed incomplete. 
(Prior code § 14½-159)  
3.24.150 - Incomplete filing. 
Not later than five calendar days from the date the appeal is filed, the citing officer or his or her designee shall determine whether the appeal is complete. If the appeal is determined to be incomplete, the citing officer or his or her designee shall immediately mail to the appellant a notice of incomplete filing which shall provide a written explanation of each reason why the appeal has been determined to be incomplete. If service of the notice of incomplete filing is completed within five calendar days from the date the appeal is filed, the ten (10) calendar days time period within which to file a completed appeal of an notice and order shall not be extended. 
(Prior code § 14½-160)  
3.24.160 - Failure to file appeal. 
Failure to timely and properly file an appeal from a notice and order shall constitute a waiver of all rights to an administrative appeal hearing and adjudication of the notice and order or any portion thereof. The determination that the violation occurred and that the violator was responsible for the violation shall be deemed final on the date that service of the notice and order is deemed completed pursuant to Section 3.24.070. 
(Prior code § 14½-161)  
3.24.170 - Processing of appeal. 
The appeal of any notice and order shall proceed in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 3.28. 
(Prior code § 14½-162)  
3.24.180 - Stay pending appeal. 
Enforcement of any notice and order shall be stayed during the pendency of an appeal therefrom which is properly and timely filed pursuant to this chapter. 
(Prior code § 14½-163)  
3.24.190 - Time in which to pay fine—Demand for payment. 
A.  After a notice and order becomes final due to the failure to file a timely and proper appeal, the code enforcement chief or other authorized agent shall prepare a demand for payment of all applicable administrative fines if the city determines that the person to whom the notice and order is directed failed, neglected or refused to obey any orders or adhere to the terms and conditions set forth in such order. The amount of the fine for which the recipient shall be responsible shall be as set forth in the notice and order. Payment of the administrative fine shall be made to the issuing department or division unless otherwise provided by the citation. 
B.  Where a timely and complete appeal of the notice and order is filed pursuant to Section 3.20.100 and the citation upheld, the notice of decision and compliance order issued by the hearing officer shall require appellant to pay all applicable administrative fines no later than ten (10) days from the date the notice of decision and compliance order was issued. The amount of the fine for which the recipient shall be responsible shall be as set forth in the notice and order. Payment of the administrative fine shall be made to the issuing department or division unless otherwise provided by the notice of decision and compliance order. 
(Prior code § 14½-164)  
3.24.200 - Contents of demand for payment. 
The demand for payment shall include all of the following, which shall be consistent with the information contained in the final notice of public nuisance and order to abate: 
A.  The name of the person(s) responsible for payment of the public nuisance administrative fines; 
B.  The street address or a definite description of the location where the violation occurred; 
C.  The deadline or specific date by which the violations were to have been corrected; D. The date of the follow up inspection where continuing violation conditions were discovered; 
E.  The code violation(s) noted at the follow up inspection; 
F.  The amount of the public nuisance administrative fine which shall be immediately due and payable; 
G.  The place where the fine must be paid; and 
H.  A description of the process by which the city may collect any unpaid fines. 
(Prior code § 14½-165)  
3.24.210 - Form of demand for payment. 
The demand for payment may be in letter form or any other form which conveys the information set forth in Section 3.36.010. 
(Prior code § 14½-166)  
3.24.220 - Service of demand for payment. 
The demand for payment shall be served upon the person(s) responsible for payment of the public nuisance administrative fines either personally or by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, at their address as it appears on the last equalized assessment roll of the county or as otherwise known to the issuing officer or authorized agent. If an address of any such person does not appear on the last equalized assessment roll or is not otherwise known to the issuing officer or authorized agent, then a copy of the notice and order shall be addressed to such person(s) and mailed to the address of the subject premises. The failure of any such person to receive a copy of the demand for payment shall not affect the validity of any proceedings or actions taken under this chapter. Service by certified mail in the manner herein provided shall be affixed to the copy of the demand for payment and retained by the citing officer. 
(Prior code § 14½-167)  
3.24.230 - Completion of service. 
Service of the demand for payment which is personally served shall be deemed completed at the time of such delivery. Service of a demand for payment which is served by mail is deemed completed on the date such notice and order is deposited in the mail. 
(Prior code § 14½-168)  
3.24.240 - Proof of service. 
Proof of service of the demand for payment shall be certified at the time of service by a written declaration under penalty of perjury executed by the persons effecting service, declaring the date and manner in which service was made. The declaration, together with any receipt card returned in acknowledgment of receipt by certified mail shall be affixed to a copy of demand for payment and retained by the citing officer. 
(Prior code § 14½-169)  
3.24.250 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1078, § 2, adopted Sept. 9, 2015, repealed § 3.24.250, which pertained to attorney's fees and derived from prior code, § 14½-170.  
3.24.260 - Recordation of notice of compliance. 
Whenever it is determined that the corrections ordered by the notice and order have been completed so that the premises no longer exists in a condition that is in violation of this code and/or applicable statute, rule, code and regulation, a notice of compliance shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder certifying that all required corrections have been made and that the subject premises is no longer being maintained as a public nuisance. 
(Prior code § 14½-171)  
Chapter 3.28 - ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS 
Sections: 
 
3.28.010 - Duties of administrative hearing officer. 
The administrative hearing officer ("hearing officer") shall conduct all administrative appeal hearings of any timely and properly filed appeal from any administrative citation or any notice of public nuisance and order to abate ("notice and order") pursuant to the administrative appeal procedures set forth in this chapter. The hearing officer shall review all evidence, documents, and written testimony and hear all oral testimony submitted by the parties at or before the scheduled administrative appeals hearing and render all decisions and findings in writing to the appellant with a duplicate copy to the code enforcement officer or other authorized enforcement agent who issued the administrative citation or notice and order (the "citing officer"). 
(Prior code § 14½-177)  
3.28.020 - Limitations on authority of hearing officer. 
The hearing officer's authority to hear and consider appeals shall be limited to passing on only those appeals pertaining to matters within his or her subject matter jurisdiction. The hearing officer shall consider at the hearing on the appeal only those matters or issues which were specifically raised by the appellant in his or her appeal and which are relevant to the issues of the hearing. The hearing officer shall not have the authority to waive any requirements of this code and/or any applicable statutes, rules, codes or regulations, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 14½-178)  
3.28.030 - Exceptions. 
The procedures adopted in this chapter by the city for the selection of hearing officers shall not replace, substitute for, or in any way affect the administrative hearing board processes created by the uniform and national codes adopted by the city and the administrative hearings provided by the uniform and national codes shall be treated separate and apart from the administrative hearing procedures adopted in this section. 
(Prior code § 14½-179)  
3.28.040 - Request for hearing officer. 
Upon receipt of a proper and timely appeal, the city shall appoint a neutral and impartial hearing officer and shall schedule a hearing at a date, time, and location no earlier than ten (10) days and no later than sixty (60) days after receipt of such appeal, or as otherwise required by this code or any other applicable law or regulation, or as otherwise agreed by the city and the requestor. The city shall provide notice of the hearing as provided in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 14½-180) 
(Ord. No. 1078, § 4, 9-9-15; Ord. No. 1098, § 20, 12-14-16)  
3.28.050 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1078, § 3, adopted Sept. 9, 2015, repealed § 3.28.050, which pertained to selection of hearing officer—notice to hearing officer, and derived from prior code, § 14½-181.  
3.28.060 - Scheduling of administrative appeals hearing—Notice of administrative appeals hearing. 
The city shall fix a date, time, and place for a hearing of the appeal pursuant to code Section 3.28.040. The city shall prepare a notice of administrative appeals hearing ("Hearing Notice"), which shall be in substantially the same form as follows: 
"You are hereby notified that a hearing will be held before an Administrative Hearing Officer at [time] on [month] [day], [year] regarding the [Administrative Citation or Notice of Public Nuisance and Order to Abate] served upon you. You must be present at the hearing. You may present any relevant evidence at the hearing and you will be given a full opportunity to cross-examine all witnesses testifying against you. Failure to appear at the appeal hearing shall constitute a waiver of your right to contest the [Administrative Citation or Notice of Public Nuisance and Order to Abate], a waiver of your right to contest the fines, a failure to exhaust your administrative remedies, and a bar to any further appeals of the [Administrative Citation or Notice of Public Nuisance and Order to Abate]." 
(Prior code § 14½-182) 
(Ord. No. 1098, § 21, 12-14-16)  
3.28.070 - Service of notice of administrative appeals hearing. 
The city shall cause a copy of the hearing notice to be served not less than ten (10) days before the scheduled hearing to each appellant by either personal service, or by mailing a copy of such notice to each such party at the address shown on the appeal. 
(Prior code § 14½-183) 
(Ord. No. 1098, § 22, 12-14-16)  
3.28.080 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1098, § 23, adopted Dec. 14, 2016, repealed former § 3.28.080 in its entirety which pertained to proof of service of hearing notice and derived from prior code, § 14½-184.  
3.28.090 - Report and recommendation. 
The citing officer shall prepare an administrative hearing packet for the hearing officer to review prior to the hearing. The packet shall include a copy of the administrative citation or notice and order, a staff report and any evidence of the violation(s). 
(Prior code § 14½-185)  
3.28.100 - Admissibility of evidence at appeals hearing. 
At the appeals hearing, the hearing officer shall hear any evidence offered either in support of appellant's claim or in support of the administrative citation or notice and order, provided such evidence is relevant to the issues of the hearing. The hearing officer has the authority to determine the relevance of any evidence to the hearing. The hearing officer also has the authority to exclude unduly repetitious and cumulative evidence, regardless of its relevancy. 
(Prior code § 14½-186)  
3.28.110 - Failure to attend administrative appeals hearing. 
Failure to attend an administrative appeals hearing shall constitute a waiver of the right to contest the administrative citation, a waiver of the right to contest any fines, a failure to exhaust available administrative remedies, and a bar to any further appeals of the matter. 
(Prior code § 14½-187) 
(Ord. No. 1098, § 24, 12-14-16)  
3.28.120 - Rights of parties at appeals hearing. 
Each party appearing at the hearing shall have the following rights: 
A.  To call and examine witnesses; 
B.  To introduce documentary and physical evidence; 
C.  To cross-examine opposing witnesses; 
D.  To impeach any witness regardless of which party first called the witness to testify; E. To rebut evidence; and 
F.  To be represented by anyone who is lawfully permitted to do so. 
(Prior code § 14½-188)  
3.28.130 - Decision of the hearing officer. 
A.  Following an appeal of an administrative citation, the hearing officer may decide to uphold the administrative citation or overturn the findings of the citing officer, in whole or in part. In the event the hearing officer determines to overturn the findings of the citing officer in whole, the recipient of the administrative citation shall not be required to pay the administrative fine imposed by such citation. 
B.  Following an appeal of a notice and order, the hearing officer may decide to uphold the notice and order, establish a modified schedule for compliance, or overturn the findings and determinations set forth in the notice and order, in whole or in part, and not require that the property owner or party otherwise responsible for the violation(s) take any action otherwise required by the notice and order. In the event the hearing officer determines to overturn the findings of the citing officer in whole, the recipient of the notice and order shall not be required to pay the administrative fine as required by such notice and order. 
(Prior code § 14½-189)  
3.28.140 - Duty to prepare and serve decision and compliance order. 
The hearing officer shall prepare and serve a written notice of decision and compliance order ("decision and compliance order") upon the appellant and the citing officer following the appeals hearing. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final, except as otherwise provided by this chapter. 
(Prior code § 14½-190)  
3.28.150 - Time in which to serve decision and compliance order. 
The hearing officer shall serve the decision and compliance order to each appellant within thirty (30) calendar days from the date the hearing is deemed closed. The hearing officer shall also provide or cause to be provided a copy of the decision and compliance order to the citing officer. 
(Prior code § 14½-191)  
3.28.160 - Form of decision and compliance order. 
A.  The decision and compliance order for an administrative citation shall contain a brief summary of the evidence considered, findings of fact, a determination of the issues presented, the effective date of the decision, and a compliance order which, if the administrative citation is upheld, shall require the administrative citation recipient to pay all applicable administrative fines no later than thirty (30) days from the date of issuance of the notice of decision and compliance order. The amount of the fine for which the recipient shall be responsible shall be as set forth in the administrative citation. Payment of the administrative fine shall be made to the "City of Coachella" and delivered to the department issuing the citation. 
B.  The decision and compliance order for a notice and order shall contain a brief summary of the evidence considered, findings of fact, a determination of the issues presented, the effective date of the decision, and a compliance order which shall specifically describe the actions which shall be required to be taken to remedy the code violations indicated in the decision and compliance order and shall require the actions to be completed within a specified time period and by a specified deadline. The decision and compliance order shall further require the recipient of the notice and order to pay all applicable administrative fines no later than ten (10) days from the date of issuance of the notice of decision and compliance order. The amount of the fine for which the recipient shall be responsible shall be as set forth in the notice and order. Payment of the administrative fine shall be ordered to be made to the issuing department or division unless otherwise directed by the City. 
(Prior code § 14½-192) 
(Ord. No. 1098, § 25, 12-14-16)  
3.28.170 - Service of decision and compliance order. 
The hearing officer shall cause a copy of the decision and compliance order to be provided to each appellant either by causing a copy of such decision and compliance order to be delivered to each appellant personally or by causing a copy to be delivered by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, and addressed to each appellant at the address shown on the appeal. A copy of the decision and compliance order shall also be provided to the citing officer. 
(Prior code § 14½-193)  
3.28.180 - Effective date. 
The effective date of the hearing officer's decision and compliance order shall be as stated therein. 
(Prior code § 14½-194)  
3.28.190 - Failure to comply with decision and compliance order—Misdemeanor violation. 
A.  If, after the decision and compliance order becomes final, the persons to whom the decision and compliance order is directed shall fail, neglect, or refuse to obey such order, the city may: (1) cause such person to be prosecuted for a misdemeanor violation for the offense of contempt of hearing officer; and (2) institute any appropriate legal action or proceeding necessary to gain compliance. 
B.  Each day that the persons to whom the decision and compliance order is directed fails, neglects, or refuses to obey such order shall constitute a new offense. 
(Prior code § 14½-195) 
Ord. No. 1098, § 26, 12-14-16)  
Chapter 3.32 - SUMMARY ABATEMENT OF PUBLIC NUISANCES 
Sections: 
 
3.32.010 - Summary abatement of public nuisances that pose an immediate threat to public health and safety. 
If upon the determination of the code enforcement chief or other authorized enforcement agent, a particular public nuisance as described in Section 3.10.010(D) of this code or any other applicable statute, rule, code or regulation poses an immediate threat to public health and safety, the authorized enforcement agent who made the public nuisance determination may dispense with the notice and hearing requirements of the administrative appeals procedures set forth in Chapter 3.28 and cause city crews or private contractors to take the minimal and most reasonable and feasible action necessary to immediately abate the activity or activities and/or condition or conditions causing the public nuisance. 
(Prior code § 14½-202)  
3.32.020 - City to inventory discarded personal property. 
Prior to the city performing any abatement work pursuant to Section 3.32.030, the code enforcement officer or other authorized enforcement agent who caused the summary abatement ("abatement officer") shall, if feasible, cause an inventory to be taken which lists those personal property items which are proposed to be removed from the property and discarded. 
(Prior code § 14½-203)  
3.32.030 - Preparation of summary abatement report. 
A.  Where the public nuisance conditions exist on private property, prior to ordering summary abatement pursuant to this chapter, the abatement officer shall prepare a written report which sets forth in writing the facts and circumstances establishing: 
1.  Why advance notice of the abatement to the property owner, occupant and/or agent having charge or control is not reasonable or feasible or why prior advance notice was not effective; 
2.  Why the subject property constitutes a public nuisance; and 
3.  Why immediate abatement of the public nuisance is essential; and 
B.  Where the public nuisance conditions exist on public property and the abatement officer is able to determine the person(s) responsible for causing the public nuisance conditions, the abatement officer shall prepare a written report which sets forth in writing the facts and circumstances establishing: 
1.  Why advance notice of the abatement to the person(s) responsible for causing the public nuisance conditions is not reasonable or feasible or why prior advance notice was not effective; 
2.  Why the conditions constitutes a public nuisance; and 
3.  Why immediate abatement of the public nuisance is essential. 
(Prior code § 14½-204)  
3.32.040 - Filing of the original summary abatement report. 
The original of the summary abatement report shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(Prior code § 14½-205)  
3.32.050 - Method and manner of service of summary abatement report. 
A.  Where the public nuisance conditions exist on private property, a copy of the summary abatement report shall be served as soon as possible to the owner(s) of record of the parcel of land on which the public nuisance exists by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, to each such person at their address as it appears on the last equalized assessment roll of the county or as known to the abatement officer. If no address of any such person so appears or is not otherwise known, then a copy of the summary abatement report shall be so mailed, addressed to such person(s), at the address of the subject premises. 
B.  Where the public nuisance conditions exist on public property and the abatement officer is able to determine the person(s) responsible for causing the public nuisance conditions, the abatement officer shall make a diligent effort to determine the address of such person(s) and shall cause a copy of the summary abatement report to be served, as soon as possible, by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, to such person(s). 
C.  The failure of the abatement officer to serve any person required herein to be served shall not invalidate any proceedings hereunder as to any other person duly served or relieve any such person from any duty or obligation imposed by the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 14½-206)  
3.32.060 - Proof of service of summary abatement report. 
Proof of service of the summary abatement report shall be certified at the time of service by a written declaration under penalty of perjury executed by the persons effecting service, declaring the date and manner in which service was made. The declaration, together with any receipt card returned in acknowledgment of receipt by certified mail shall be affixed to a copy of the summary abatement report and retained by the abatement officer. 
(Prior code § 14½-207)  
3.32.070 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1078, § 2, adopted Sept. 9, 2015, repealed § 3.32.070, which pertained to attorney's fees and derived from prior code, § 14½-208.  
Chapter 3.36 - PUBLIC NUISANCE ABATEMENT COSTS 
Sections: 
 
3.36.010 - Responsibility for public nuisance abatement costs. 
A.  Where the public nuisance conditions which necessitate summary abatement exist on private property and the city elects to perform public nuisance abatement work in pursuant to this chapter, the owner of record of the property where the public nuisance conditions exists shall be liable for all costs of abatement incurred by the city, including, but not limited to, administrative costs. 
B.  Where the public nuisance conditions which necessitate summary abatement exist on public property and the city elects to perform public nuisance abatement work in pursuant to this chapter, the person(s) determined by the abatement officer to be the person(s) responsible for causing the public nuisance conditions shall be liable for all costs of abatement incurred by the city, including, but not limited to, administrative costs. 
(Prior code § 14½-215)  
3.36.020 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1078, § 2, adopted Sept. 9, 2015, repealed § 3.36.020, which pertained to recovery of attorney's fees and derived from prior code, § 14½-216.  
3.36.030 - Recovery of other costs associated with abatement. 
Recovery of costs pursuant to this chapter shall be in addition to and shall not limit any prevailing party's right to recover any cost that a prevailing party is entitled to recover by law. 
(Prior code § 14½-217)  
3.36.040 - Preparation of abatement cost report. 
Upon completion of any abatement work performed by or under the direction of the city, the abatement officer shall prepare an abatement cost report in the form proscribed by Section 3.36.050, which provides an accounting of the cost, including incidental expenses, incurred as a result of abating the public nuisance. 
(Prior code § 14½-218)  
3.36.050 - Contents of abatement cost report. 
The abatement cost report shall itemize all costs associated with the rehabilitation, demolition or repair of such property, buildings or structures, including any salvage value relating thereto and a total of all such costs. The abatement cost report shall also include the following information: 
A.  A description of the real property where the abatement activity took place; 
B.  The names and addresses of the persons entitled to receive notice; 
C.  A description of the work completed; 
D.  A determination that the amount of the costs set forth in the abatement cost report are accurate and reasonable; 
E.  A determination that the city took the minimal and most reasonable and feasible action necessary to immediately abate the activity or activities and/or condition or conditions causing the public nuisance; 
F.  Notice of the opportunity to appeal the amount and the reasonableness of the abatement costs; and 
G.  Notice of the manner in which the city intends to collect the final and approved abatement costs. 
(Prior code § 14½-219)  
3.36.060 - Filing and recordation of abatement cost report. 
The abatement officer shall file the original abatement cost report with the city clerk who shall cause the abatement cost report to be filed in the office of the county recorder. 
(Prior code § 14½-220)  
3.36.070 - Persons entitled to service. 
A.  If the abatement officer determines that the public nuisance conditions which necessitate summary abatement have been caused or permitted by the person(s) having charge or control of the property where the nuisance is located, the abatement cost report and any amended or supplemental report, shall be served upon the record owner and/or any agent having charge or control of the property. 
B.  If the abatement officer determines that the public nuisance conditions which necessitate summary abatement have been caused or permitted by person(s) other than the person(s) having charge or control of the property where the nuisance is located, the abatement officer shall make a diligent effort to determine the address of such person(s) and shall cause a copy of the abatement cost and any amended or supplemental report to be served upon such persons. 
C.  The failure of the abatement officer to serve any person required in this section to be served shall not invalidate any proceedings in this chapter as to any other person duly served or relieve any such person from any duty or obligation imposed by the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 14½-221)  
3.36.080 - Method of service of abatement cost report. 
A.  Where the public nuisance conditions exist on private property, service of a copy of the abatement cost report shall be made upon the owner(s) of record of the parcel of land on which the public nuisance exists by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, to each such person at their address as it appears on the last equalized assessment roll of the county or as known to the abatement officer. If no address of any such person so appears or is not otherwise known, then a copy of the abatement cost report shall be so mailed, addressed to such person(s), at the address of the subject premises. 
B.  Where the public nuisance conditions exist on public property and the abatement officer is able to determine the person(s) responsible for causing the public nuisance conditions, the abatement officer shall make a diligent effort to determine the address of such person(s) and service of a copy of the abatement cost report shall be made upon each such person(s) by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested. 
C.  The failure of the abatement officer to serve any person require in this section to be served shall not invalidate any proceedings hereunder as to any other person duly served or relieve any such person from any duty or obligation imposed by the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 14½-222)  
3.36.090 - Proof of service of abatement cost report. 
Proof of service of the abatement cost report shall be certified at the time of service by a written declaration under penalty of perjury executed by the persons effecting service, declaring the date and manner in which service was made. The declaration, together with any receipt card returned in acknowledgment of receipt by certified mail shall be affixed to a copy of the abatement cost report and retained by the abatement officer. 
(Prior code § 14½-223)  
3.36.100 - Completion of service of abatement cost report. 
Service of an abatement cost report which is personally served shall be deemed completed at the time of such delivery. Service of an abatement cost report which is served by mail is deemed completed on the date such abatement cost report is deposited in the mail. 
(Prior code § 14½-224)  
3.36.110 - Appeal of abatement cost report. 
Any person(s) responsible for payment of abatement costs pursuant to this chapter may appeal the city's determination that the amount of the costs set forth in the abatement cost report are accurate and reasonable and/or the city's determination that the city took the minimal and most reasonable and feasible action necessary to immediately abate the activity or activities and/or condition or conditions causing the public nuisance. 
(Prior code § 14½-225)  
3.36.120 - Failure to file appeal of abatement cost report—Final determination. 
Failure to timely and properly file an appeal from an abatement cost report shall constitute a waiver of all rights to an appeal of the abatement cost report or any portion thereof. The determination that the amount of the costs set forth in the abatement cost report are accurate and reasonable shall be deemed final on the day that service of the abatement cost report is deemed completed. 
(Prior code § 14½-226)  
3.36.130 - Time in which to pay abatement costs. 
Person(s) responsible for payment of abatement costs shall pay all such costs no later than thirty (30) calendar days from the date the abatement cost report becomes final. The amount of the abatement costs for which such person(s) shall be responsible shall be as set forth in the final abatement cost report. 
(Prior code § 14½-227)  
3.36.140 - Recovery of abatement costs. 
A.  Final abatement costs shall be deemed a civil debt owing to the city. An action may be commenced in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction for the collection of the amount of any delinquent or unpaid abatement cost. The remedy prescribed by this section shall be cumulative, and the use of an action to collect such an amount as a debt by civil action shall not bar the use of any other remedy provided by this code or by law. 
B.  In addition to the collection methods provided by the foregoing subsection, if the owner of record of the property where the public nuisance conditions exists has been held liable for all costs of abatement incurred by the city and the abatement costs are not paid within thirty (30) calendar days from the date the abatement cost report becomes due pursuant to Section 3.36.130, the abatement costs may become a special assessment against such property. 
(Prior code § 14½-228)  
3.36.150 - Notice of imposition of special assessment. 
Notice of the imposition of a special assessment shall be sent by certified mail return receipt requested to the property owner, if the property owner's identity can be determined from the records of the office of the county assessor or the office of the county recorder. The notice shall be given at the time of imposing the assessment and shall specify that the property may be sold after three years by the tax collector for unpaid delinquent assessments. 
(Prior code § 14½-229)  
3.36.160 - Recordation of notice of special assessment. 
The notice of special assessment shall be filed and recorded in the office of the county recorder. 
(Prior code § 14½-230)  
3.36.170 - Sale of vacant residential developed property. 
Subject to the requirements applicable to the sale of property pursuant to Section 3691 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, the city may conduct a sale of vacant residential developed property for which the payment of an assessment is delinquent. 
(Prior code § 14½-231)  
3.36.180 - Treble abatement costs. 
Upon entry of a second or subsequent civil or criminal judgment within a two-year period finding that an owner of property is responsible for a condition that may be abated pursuant to this chapter, excepting any conditions abated pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Section 17980, the city may seek to recover treble the costs of the abatement from the owner. 
(Prior code § 14½-232)  
Chapter 3.40 - ABATEMENT COST APPEALS PROCEDURE 
Sections: 
 
3.40.010 - Form for filing of appeal of abatement cost report. 
All appeals from any abatement cost report shall be in writing and shall contain the following information: 
A.  Name(s) of each appellant; 
B.  A brief statement setting forth the legal or equitable interest of each appellant; 
C.  A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the specific cost items protested, together with any material facts claimed to support the contentions of the appellant; 
D.  A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the relief sought and the reasons why the abatement costs should be modified or otherwise set aside; 
E.  The signatures of all parties named as appellants and their mailing addresses. 
Any appeal filed that fails to provide all of the information required by this section shall be deemed incomplete. 
(Prior code § 14½-239)  
3.40.020 - Time in which to file appeal of abatement cost report. 
A complete and proper appeal of abatement cost report as described in Section 3.40.010 shall be filed with the code enforcement officer or other authorized enforcement agent who caused the summary abatement ("abatement officer") within ten (10) calendar days from the date service of the abatement cost report is completed. Any appeal not timely filed shall be rejected. 
(Prior code § 14½-240)  
3.40.030 - Fee for filing of appeal of abatement cost report. 
A filing fee as established by city council resolution or any amendments thereto for an appeal of abatement cost report must be paid to the city at or prior to the time of the filing of such appeal. Any appeal of the abatement cost report filed without payment of the filing fee shall be deemed incomplete. 
(Prior code § 14½-241)  
3.40.040 - Incomplete filing of appeal of abatement cost report. 
Not later than five calendar days from the date the appeal is filed, the abatement officer or his or her designee shall determine whether the appeal is complete. If the appeal is determined to be incomplete, the abatement officer or his or her designee shall immediately mail to each appellant a notice of incomplete filing which shall provide a written explanation of each reason why the appeal has been determined to be incomplete. If service of the notice of incomplete filing is completed within five calendar days from the date the appeal is filed, the ten (10) calendar day time period within which to file a completed appeal of abatement cost report shall not be extended. 
(Prior code § 14½-242)  
3.40.050 - Stay pending appeal. 
Enforcement of the summary abatement report shall be stayed during the pendency of an appeal therefrom which is properly and timely filed pursuant to this chapter. 
(Prior code § 14½-243)  
3.40.060 - Request for hearing officer. 
Within three days after the city has determined that a timely and complete appeal of a cost report has been filed, the city shall appoint a neutral hearing officer who will schedule a date, time, and location for the hearing within the time periods required by this code or any other applicable law or regulation. 
(Prior code § 14½-244) 
(Ord. No. 1078, § 5, 9-9-15)  
3.40.070 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1078, § 3, adopted Sept. 9, 2015, repealed § 3.40.070, which pertained to selection of hearing officer—notice to hearing officer and derived from prior code, § 14½-245.  
3.40.080 - Scheduling of administrative appeals hearing—Notice of administrative appeals hearing. 
As soon as practicable, but allowing sufficient time for providing notice of the hearing as provided by Section 3.28.070, the hearing officer shall fix a date, time and place for the hearing of the appeal and shall instruct the abatement officer of the same. The abatement officer shall prepare a notice of administrative appeals hearing ("hearing notice"), which shall be in substantially the same form as follows: 
 "You are hereby notified that a hearing will be held before the Administrative Hearing Officer at ________ on the _______ day of _______, _______, at the hour of _______ upon the Abatement Cost Report served upon you. You may be present at the hearing. You may be, but need not be, represented by an attorney. You may present any relevant evidence at the hearing and you will be given a full opportunity to cross-examine all witnesses testifying against you." 
(Prior code § 14½-246)  
3.40.090 - Service of notice of administrative appeals hearing. 
The abatement officer shall cause a copy of the hearing notice to be provided to each appellant either by causing a copy of such notice to be delivered to each appellant personally or by causing a copy of such notice to be delivered by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, and addressed to each appellant at the address shown on the appeal. 
(Prior code § 14½-247)  
3.40.100 - Proof of service of hearing notice. 
Proof of service of the hearing notice shall be certified at the time of service by a written declaration under penalty of perjury executed by the persons effecting service, declaring the date and manner in which service was made. The declaration shall be affixed to a copy of the hearing notice and retained by the abatement officer. 
(Prior code § 14½-248)  
3.40.110 - Duties of administrative hearing officer. 
The administrative hearing officer ("hearing officer") shall conduct all administrative appeal hearings of any timely and properly filed appeal from any cost report pursuant to the administrative appeal procedures set forth in this chapter. The hearing officer shall review all evidence, documents, and written testimony and hear all oral testimony submitted by the parties at or before the scheduled administrative appeal hearing and render all decisions and findings in writing to the appellant with a duplicate copy to the abatement officer. 
(Prior code § 14½-249)  
3.40.120 - Limitations on authority of hearing officer. 
The hearing officer's authority to hear and consider appeals shall be limited to the city's determination that the amount of the costs set forth in the abatement cost report are accurate and reasonable and/or the city's determination that the city took the minimal and most reasonable and feasible action necessary to immediately abate the activity or activities and/or condition or conditions causing the public nuisance. The hearing officer shall consider at the hearing on the appeal only those matters or issues which were specifically raised by the appellant in his or her appeal and which are relevant to the issues of the hearing. The hearing officer shall not have the authority to waive any requirements of this code and/or any applicable statutes, rules, codes or regulations, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 14½-250)  
3.40.130 - Exceptions. 
The procedures adopted in this chapter by the city for the selection of hearing officers shall not replace, substitute for, or in any way affect the administrative hearing board processes created by the uniform and national codes adopted by the city and the administrative hearings provided by the Uniform and National Codes shall be treated separate and apart from the administrative hearing procedures adopted in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 14½-251)  
3.40.140 - Report and recommendation. 
The abatement officer shall prepare an administrative hearing packet for the hearing officer to review prior to the hearing. The packet shall include a copy of the cost report, the summary abatement report, a staff report and any evidence of the abatement costs. The staff report should include a summary of the code enforcement activities performed at the subject property. 
(Prior code § 14½-252)  
3.40.150 - Admissibility of evidence at appeals hearing. 
At the appeals hearing, the hearing officer shall hear any evidence offered either in support of appellant's claim or in support of the cost report, provided such evidence is relevant to the issues of the hearing. The hearing officer has the authority to determine the relevance of any evidence to the hearing. The hearing officer also has the authority to exclude unduly repetitious and cumulative evidence, regardless of its relevancy. 
(Prior code § 14½-253)  
3.40.160 - Rights of parties at appeals hearing. 
Each party appealing the abatement cost report shall have the following rights at the hearing: 
A.  To call and examine witnesses; 
B.  To introduce documentary and physical evidence; 
C.  To cross-examine opposing witnesses; 
D.  To impeach any witness regardless of which party first called the witness to testify; 
E.  To rebut evidence; and 
F.  To be represented by anyone who is lawfully permitted to do so. 
(Prior code § 14½-254)  
3.40.170 - Failure to attend administrative appeals hearing. 
If appellant fails to attend the scheduled appeals hearing, the hearing will proceed without appellant and he or she will be deemed to have waived his or her rights to be orally heard at the appeals hearing. 
(Prior code § 14½-255)  
3.40.180 - Decision of the hearing officer. 
At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall render his or her decision, which may include a decision to ratify the abatement cost report in its entirety and/or modify the amount of the abatement costs to be recovered and/or modify the terms of payment of the abatement costs. The recipients of an abatement cost report shall be required to pay all abatement costs that are upheld by the hearing officer as being accurate and reasonable and resulting from the minimal and most reasonable and feasible action necessary to immediately abate the activity or activities and/or condition or conditions causing the public nuisance. 
(Prior code § 14½-256)  
3.40.190 - Duty to prepare and serve notice of decision. 
The hearing officer shall prepare and serve a written notice of decision upon the appellant and the abatement officer following the appeals hearing. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final, except as otherwise provided by this chapter. 
(Prior code § 14½-257)  
3.40.200 - Time in which to serve notice of decision. 
The hearing officer shall serve the notice of decision to each appellant within thirty (30) calendar days from the date the hearing is deemed closed. The hearing officer shall also provide or cause to be provided a copy of the notice of decision to the abatement officer. 
(Prior code § 14½-258)  
3.40.210 - Form of notice and decision. 
The notice of decision shall contain a brief summary of the evidence considered, findings of fact, a determination of the issues presented, the effective date of the decision, and shall require the cost report recipient to pay the total sum due no later than ten (10) days from the date of issuance of the notice of decision. The amount of the cost report for which the recipient shall be responsible shall be as set forth in the cost report unless otherwise modified by the notice of decision. Payment of the cost report shall be ordered to be made to the issuing department or division unless otherwise directed by the city. 
(Prior code § 14½-259)  
3.40.220 - Service of notice of decision. 
The hearing officer shall cause a copy of the notice of decision to be provided to each appellant either by causing a copy of such notice to be delivered to each appellant personally or by causing a copy to be delivered by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, and addressed to each appellant at the address shown on the appeal. A copy of the notice of decision shall also be provided to the abatement officer. 
(Prior code § 14½-260)  
3.40.230 - Effective date. 
The effective date of the hearing officer's notice of decision shall be as stated in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 14½-261)  
3.40.240 - Time in which to pay abatement costs. 
The owner of record of the subject property shall pay all costs of abatement no later than thirty (30) calendar days from the date the abatement cost report becomes final pursuant to Section 3.40.200. The amount of the abatement costs for which the owner of record shall be responsible shall be as set forth in the final abatement cost report. 
(Prior code § 14½-262)  
3.40.250 - Special assessment against parcel for failure to timely pay abatement costs. 
If the abatement costs are not paid within thirty (30) calendar days from the date the abatement cost report becomes due pursuant to Section 3.40.210, the abatement costs shall become a special assessment against that parcel, which shall be imposed pursuant to the procedures set forth in Chapter 3.52 and shall be subject to the penalties set forth in that chapter. 
(Prior code § 14½-263)  
3.40.260 - Attorney's fees. 
The prevailing party in any proceeding conducted pursuant to Chapter 3.44 and associated with the abatement of a public nuisance shall be entitled to recovery of attorney's fees incurred in any such proceeding. 
(Prior code § 14½-264)  
Chapter 3.44 - INFRACTION VIOLATIONS 
Sections: 
 
3.44.010 - Infraction violations. 
Any violation of this code by a member of the public that is designated as an infraction violation under the applicable code provision shall be deemed an infraction violation for purposes of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 14½-271) 
(Ord. No. 1098, § 27, 12-14-16)  
3.44.020 - Authority to arrest without warrant. 
Any code enforcement officer or other agent who has a duty to enforce any provision of this chapter and who has reasonable cause to believe that a person has committed an infraction violation in the presence of such officer or agent may arrest the alleged violator without a warrant. 
(Prior code § 14½-272)  
3.44.030 - Field citation—Release procedures—Evidence of identity. 
Any code enforcement officer or other authorized enforcement agent who arrests a person for an infraction violation pursuant to Section 3.40.020, shall, in lieu of taking the arrested person into custody, prepare, or cause to be prepared, in duplicate, an infraction field citation which shall provide a written notice to appear in court, and which shall contain the name and address of the arrested person, the offense charged, and the time when, and the place where, the arrested person shall appear in court. The arresting officer or agent shall release the arrested person and issue an infraction field citation provided that: (a) the arrested person presents his or her driver's license or other satisfactory evidence of his or her identity to the officer or agent; and (b) the arrested person signs a written promise to appear at court at a later date and time which shall be specified on the field citation. The arresting officer or agent shall deliver one duplicate copy of the field citation to the arrested person and shall retain the original signed citation. If the arrested person does not have a driver's license or other satisfactory evidence of identity in his or her possession, the arresting officer or agent may require the arrested person to place a right thumbprint, or a left thumbprint or fingerprint if the person has a missing or disfigured right thumb, on the field citation. 
(Prior code § 14½-273)  
3.44.040 - Custody. 
Any person who is placed under arrest in accordance with Section 3.44.020 who refuses to sign the field citation, or who is unable or unwilling to produce satisfactory identification, or is unable or unwilling to provide a thumbprint or fingerprint shall be taken into custody by the arresting code enforcement officer or other authorized enforcement agent pursuant to Penal Code Section 853.5. 
(Prior code § 14½-274)  
3.44.050 - Criminal infraction complaint. 
Whenever a code enforcement officer or other authorized agent has reasonable cause to believe that an infraction violation has been committed in his or her presence and the alleged violator cannot be served with a field citation for any reason, the city attorney shall file a criminal infraction complaint against the alleged violator at the request of the code enforcement chief or other enforcement authority. 
(Prior code § 14½-275)  
3.44.060 - Continuing violations. 
A separate offense occurs for each day an infraction violation is continued and/or maintained. 
(Prior code § 14½-276)  
3.44.070 - Infraction penalties. 
Every municipal code violation determined to be an infraction is punishable by: (a) a fine in an amount not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first violation; (b) a fine in an amount not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second violation of the same provision within a twelve (12) month period; and (c) a fine in an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the third violation within a twelve (12) month period commencing upon the date of the first violation. A fourth violation and subsequent violations of the same provision within a twelve (12) month period shall be deemed a misdemeanor pursuant to Section 3.48.020. 
(Prior code § 14½-277)  
3.44.080 - Payment of civil fines. 
Upon conviction of any infraction violation, the convicted violator shall be required to pay all applicable civil fines in addition to the infraction penalties set forth in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 14½-278)  
3.44.090 - Restitution. 
Nothing in this chapter is intended to prohibit or preclude the city from seeking and recovering restitution in any infraction violation proceeding. 
(Prior code § 14½-279)  
3.44.100 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1078, § 2, adopted Sept. 9, 2015, repealed § 3.44.100, which pertained to attorney's fees and derived from prior code, § 14½-280.  
Chapter 3.48 - MISDEMEANOR VIOLATIONS 
Sections: 
 
3.48.010 - Misdemeanor violations. 
Any violation of the municipal code by a member of the public which is designated as a misdemeanor violation under the applicable municipal code provision shall be deemed a misdemeanor violation and shall be prosecuted as such pursuant to this chapter. 
(Prior code § 14½-286)  
3.48.020 - Fourth and subsequent infraction violations. 
The fourth and each subsequent violation of a municipal code provision by a member of the public that would otherwise be an infraction violation within a twelve (12) month period commencing upon the date of the first violation shall be deemed a misdemeanor violation. 
(Prior code § 14½-287)  
3.48.030 - Continuing violations. 
A separate offense occurs for each day a misdemeanor violation is continued and/or maintained. 
(Prior code § 14½-288)  
3.48.040 - Discretion of the city attorney. 
The city attorney shall have the discretion to reduce any misdemeanor violation to an infraction violation. 
(Prior code § 14½-289)  
3.48.050 - Authority to arrest without warrant. 
Any code enforcement officer or other agent who has a duty to enforce any provision of this chapter and who has reasonable cause to believe that a person has committed a misdemeanor violation in the presence of such officer or agent, may arrest the alleged violator without a warrant. 
(Prior code § 14½-290)  
3.48.060 - Field citation—Release procedures—Evidence of identity. 
Any code enforcement officer or other authorized enforcement agent who arrests a person for a misdemeanor violation pursuant to Section 3.48.050 shall, in lieu of taking the arrested person into custody, prepare, or cause to be prepared, in duplicate, a misdemeanor field citation which shall provide a written notice to appear in court, and which shall contain the name and address of the arrested person, the offense charged, and the time when, and the place where, the arrested person shall appear in court. The arresting officer or agent shall release the arrested person and issue an misdemeanor field citation provided that: (a) the arrested person presents his or her driver's license or other satisfactory evidence of his or her identity to the officer or agent; and (b) the arrested person signs a written promise to appear at court at a later date and time which shall be specified on the field citation. The arresting officer or agent shall deliver one duplicate copy of the field citation to the arrested person and shall retain the original signed citation. If the arrested person does not have a driver's license or other satisfactory evidence of identity in his or her possession, the arresting officer or agent may require the arrested person to place a right thumbprint, or a left thumbprint or fingerprint if the person has a missing or disfigured right thumb, on the field citation. 
(Prior code § 14½-291)  
3.48.070 - Custody. 
Any person who is placed under arrest in accordance with Section 3.44.020 who refuses to sign the field citation, or who is unable or unwilling to produce satisfactory identification, or is unable or unwilling to provide a thumbprint or fingerprint shall be taken into custody by the arresting code enforcement officer or other authorized enforcement agent pursuant to Penal Code Section 853.5. 
(Prior code § 14½-292)  
3.48.080 - Criminal misdemeanor complaint. 
Whenever a code enforcement officer or authorized agent has reasonable cause to believe that a misdemeanor violation is being committed and the alleged violator cannot be served with a field citation for any reason, the city attorney may file a criminal misdemeanor complaint against the alleged violator at the request of the code enforcement chief or any other enforcement authority unless the city attorney in his or her discretion determines that the misdemeanor violation should be reduced to an infraction violation. 
(Prior code § 14½-293)  
3.48.090 - Misdemeanor penalties. 
Every municipal code violation determined to be a misdemeanor violation is punishable by a fine in an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months. 
(Prior code § 14½-295)  
3.48.100 - Payment of civil fines. 
Upon conviction of any misdemeanor violation, the convicted violator shall be required to pay all applicable civil fines in addition to any misdemeanor penalties set forth in Section 3.48.090. 
(Prior code § 14½-296)  
3.48.110 - Restitution. 
Nothing in this chapter is intended to prohibit or preclude the city from seeking and recovering restitution in any misdemeanor violation proceeding. 
(Prior code § 14½-297)  
3.48.120 - Community service. 
Pursuant to California Government Code Section 36904, persons imprisoned for a misdemeanor violation under this chapter may be required to labor on public property or public works projects within the city. 
(Prior code § 14½-298)  
3.48.130 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1078, § 2, adopted Sept. 9, 2015, repealed § 3.48.130, which pertained to attorney's fees and derived from prior code, § 14½-299.  
Chapter 3.52 - PERMIT AND LICENSE SUSPENSION, MODIFICATION OR REVOCATION 
Sections: 
 
3.52.010 - Application. 
The procedures set forth in this chapter apply only to those permits and licenses which are not specifically governed by any other procedures which may be required pursuant to any applicable provision of the municipal code, and/or applicable statute, rule, code or regulation. 
(Prior code § 14½-306)  
3.52.020 - Duty to prepare and serve notice of action recommendation. 
Upon reaching the determination that a specific violation of this code and/or applicable statute, rule, code or regulation warrants suspension, modification or revocation of a permit or license, the city manager or his or her designee shall prepare and serve a written notice of action recommendation upon the subject permit or license holder. 
(Prior code § 14½-307)  
3.52.030 - Contents of notice of action recommendation. 
The notice of action recommendation should include all of the following information: 
A.  The name of the subject permit or license holder; 
B.  The street address or definite location where the violation(s) occurred; 
C.  The code section(s) violated; 
D.  A description of the conditions or actions which warrant suspension, modification or revocation of the subject permit or license; 
E.  The action proposed (i.e., suspension, modification or revocation of the subject permit or license); 
F.  A description of any prior action taken by the city to gain compliance with the code with regards to the subject violation(s); 
G.  A description of the procedures involved in taking the proposed action, including the license or permit holder's right to attend the hearing on the proposed action; and 
H.  The name, title and telephone number of the official making the recommendation. 
(Prior code § 14½-308)  
3.52.040 - Service of notice of action recommendation. 
The city manager or his or her designee shall cause a copy of the notice of action recommendation to be provided to the subject permit or license holder by causing a copy of the notice of action recommendation to be delivered to the permit or license holder personally or by causing a copy to be delivered to the permit or license holder by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, and addressed to permit or license holder at the address shown on the permit or license. 
(Prior code § 14½-309)  
3.52.050 - Proof of service of notice of action recommendation. 
Proof of service of the notice of action recommendation shall be certified at the time of service by a written declaration under penalty of perjury executed by the persons effecting service, declaring the date and manner in which service was made. The declaration shall be affixed to a copy of the notice and retained by the city manager or his or her designee. 
(Prior code § 14½-310)  
3.52.060 - Administrative hearing officer. 
The administrative hearing officer shall act as the hearing officer and conduct all hearings pursuant to the procedures set forth in this chapter, unless otherwise provided under any other applicable provision of this code and/or any applicable statute, rule, code or regulation. 
(Prior code § 14½-311)  
3.52.070 - Duties of the hearing officer. 
The hearing officer shall review all evidence, documents, and written testimony and hear all oral testimony submitted by all interested parties at or before the scheduled administrative hearing and render all decisions and findings in writing to the permit or license holder with a duplicate copy to the issuing officer. The hearing officer may accept, modify or reject the findings and determinations supporting the recommendation. 
(Prior code § 14½-312)  
3.52.080 - Limitations on authority of hearing officer. 
The hearing officer's authority to hear and consider the notice of action recommendation shall be limited to only those matters within his or her subject matter jurisdiction. The hearing officer shall consider at the administrative hearing only those issues which are relevant to the issues of the hearing. The hearing officer shall not have the authority to waive any requirements of this code and/or any applicable statutes, rules, codes or regulations. 
(Prior code § 14½-318)  
3.52.090 - Submission to hearing officer. 
As soon as practicable after service of the notice of action recommendation, the city official responsible for issuing the notice of action recommendation ("issuing official") shall provide written notice by first class mail or facsimile to the Desert Bar Association requesting a hearing officer. 
(Prior code § 14½-314)  
3.52.100 - Selection of hearing officer—Notice to hearing officer. 
A.  The Desert Bar Association will provide to the issuing official and the subject permit or license holder, a notice listing three randomly selected names of hearing officers, who are practicing and retired attorneys and judges who have agreed to join a panel from which hearing officers are selected by the Desert Bar Association. 
B.  Each party shall have the opportunity to reject one of the three proposed hearing officers provided by the Desert Bar Association. In the event that two out of the three listed hearing officers are rejected by the parties to the hearing by the deadline stated in the notice, the remaining hearing officer shall become the selected hearing officer for purposes of presiding over that particular hearing. In the event that only one or none of the three listed hearing officers are rejected by the parties to the hearing by the deadline stated in the notice, the first hearing officer on the top of the list who has not been rejected shall become the selected hearing officer for purposes of presiding over that particular hearing. 
C.  Once the hearing officer is selected, the city shall contact such officer to schedule a date, time, and location for the hearing within the time periods required by this code or other law or regulation. 
(Prior code § 14½-315)  
3.52.110 - Exceptions. 
The procedures adopted in this chapter by the city for the selection of hearing officers shall not replace, substitute for, or in any way affect the administrative hearing board processes created by the Uniform and National Codes adopted by the city and the administrative hearings provided by the Uniform and National Codes shall be treated separate and apart from the administrative hearing procedures adopted in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 14½-316)  
3.52.120 - Scheduling of administrative hearing—Notice of administrative hearing. 
As soon as practicable, but allowing sufficient time for providing notice of the hearing as provided by Section 3.52.130, the hearing officer shall fix a date, time and place for the hearing of the appeal and shall instruct the issuing official of the same. The issuing official shall prepare a notice of administrative hearing ("hearing notice"), which shall be in substantially the same form as follows: 
 "You are hereby notified that a hearing will be held before the Administrative Hearing Officer at _______ on the _______ day of _______, _______, at the hour of _______ upon the Notice of Action Recommendation served upon you. You may be present at the hearing. You may be, but need not be, represented by an attorney. You may present any relevant evidence at the hearing and you will be given a full opportunity to cross-examine all witnesses testifying against you." 
(Prior code § 14½-317)  
3.52.130 - Service of hearing notice. 
The issuing official shall cause a copy of the hearing notice to be provided to the subject permit or license holder either by causing a copy of such notice to be delivered to such person(s) personally or by causing a copy of such notice to be delivered by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, and addressed to the permit or license holder at the address shown on the subject permit or license. 
(Prior code § 14½-318)  
3.52.140 - Proof of service of hearing notice. 
Proof of service of the hearing notice shall be certified at the time of service by a written declaration under penalty of perjury executed by the persons effecting service, declaring the date and manner in which service was made. The declaration shall be affixed to a copy of the hearing notice and retained by the issuing official. 
(Prior code § 14½-319)  
3.52.150 - Issuing officer's report. 
The issuing officer shall prepare an administrative hearing packet for the hearing officer to review prior to the hearing. The packet shall include a copy of the notice of action recommendation and a staff report, which should include a description of the violations and any actions taken by the subject permit or license holder subsequent to the service of the notice, a record of conversations or correspondence between the city and the permit or license holder concerning the violations and/or the notice of action recommendation. 
(Prior code § 14½-320)  
3.52.160 - Admissibility of evidence at hearing. 
The hearing officer shall hear any evidence offered in support of or in protest of the proposed action provided such evidence is relevant to the issues of the hearing. The hearing officer has the authority to determine the relevance of any evidence to the hearing and the authority to exclude unduly repetitious and cumulative evidence, regardless of its relevancy. 
(Prior code § 14½-321)  
3.52.170 - Rights of parties at hearing. 
Any party with a legal interest in the subject license or permit who appears at the hearing shall have the following rights: 
A.  To call and examine witnesses; 
B.  To introduce documentary and physical evidence; 
C.  To cross-examine opposing witnesses; 
D.  To impeach any witness regardless of which party first called the witness to testify; 
E.  To rebut evidence; and 
F.  To be represented by anyone who is lawfully permitted to do so. 
(Prior code § 14½-322)  
3.52.180 - Failure to attend hearing. 
If the subject permit or license holder fails to attend the scheduled hearing, the hearing will proceed without the permit or license holder and he or she will be deemed to have waived his or her rights to be orally heard at the hearing. 
(Prior code § 14½-323)  
3.52.190 - Duty to prepare and serve notice of decision—Final decision. 
The hearing officer shall cause to be prepared and served a written notice of decision upon the subject permit or license holder following the hearing. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final. 
(Prior code § 14½-324)  
3.52.200 - Form of notice of decision. 
The notice of decision shall contain a brief summary of the evidence considered, findings of fact, a determination of the issues presented, and the effective date of the decision. 
(Prior code § 14½-325)  
3.52.210 - Time for and method of service of notice of decision. 
The notice of decision shall be served upon the subject permit or license holder within thirty (30) days from the date the hearing is deemed closed. The notice of decision shall be served either by causing a copy of such notice to be delivered to the permit or license holder personally or by causing a copy of such notice to be delivered to permit or license holder via certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, and addressed to permit or license holder at the address shown on the subject permit or license. 
(Prior code § 14½-326)  
3.52.220 - Proof of service. 
Proof of service of the notice of decision shall be certified at the time of service by a written declaration under penalty of perjury executed by the persons effecting service, declaring the date and manner in which service was made. The declaration shall be affixed to a copy of the notice of decision and shall be retained by the issuing officer. 
(Prior code § 14½-327)  
3.52.230 - Effective date. 
The effective date of the decision and order of the hearing officer shall be as stated in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 14½-328)  
3.52.240 - Expedited judicial review. 
Any appeal of an administrative determination by the hearing officer involving the suspension, modification or revocation of a permit, license or other entitlement pertaining to expressive conduct protected by the state or federal constitution is eligible for expedited administrative review by the city council. 
(Prior code § 14½-329)  
3.52.250 - Form of appeal. 
Any appeal to the city council of an administrative determination by a hearing officer involving the suspension, modification or revocation of a permit, license or other entitlement pertaining to expressive conduct protected by the state or federal constitution shall be in writing and shall contain the following information: 
A.  Name(s) of each appellant; 
B.  A. brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the specific items protested, together with any material facts claimed to support the contentions of the appellant; 
C.  A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the relief sought and the reasons why the administrative determination by the hearing officer should be rescinded, modified or otherwise set aside; and 
D.  The signatures of all parties named as appellants and their mailing addresses. 
(Prior code § 14½-330)  
3.52.260 - Processing and scheduling of appeal. 
A.  Any appeal to the city council of an administrative determination by the hearing officer involving the suspension, modification or revocation of a permit, license or other entitlement pertaining to expressive conduct protected by the state or federal constitution ("administrative appeal") shall be filed with the city clerk. 
B.  The administrative appeal shall be heard and decided by the city council in a prompt and expedited way at the next regularly scheduled city council meeting and in no event later than fifteen (15) days from the date the written request for appeal was filed with the city clerk. In the event that the next regularly scheduled city council meeting will not be conducted within fifteen (15) days from the date the written request for appeal was filed with the city clerk, the city council shall schedule a special city council meeting to hear and decide the administrative appeal. 
(Prior code § 14½-331)  
3.52.270 - City council's administrative determination is final. 
Administrative determinations by the city council to suspend, modify, or revoke a permit, license or other entitlement involving expressive conduct protected by the state constitution or the First Amendment to the United States Constitution are deemed to constitute final determinations by the city council which determinations are eligible for expedited judicial review by the Superior Court of California pursuant to the Writ of Mandate procedures set forth in California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1084 et seq. 
(Prior code § 14½-332)  
Chapter 3.56 - OTHER REMEDIES 
Sections: 
 
3.56.010 - California Unfair Business Practices Act. 
The city may seek and obtain any remedies which may also be available to the city pursuant to the California Unfair Business Practices Act as set forth in California Business and Professions Code Sections 17000 through 17208. 
(Prior code § 14½-342)  
3.56.020 - California Red Light Abatement Act. 
The city may seek and obtain any remedies which may also be available to the city pursuant to the California Red Light Abatement Act as set forth in California Penal Code Sections 11225 through 11235. 
(Prior code § 14½-343)  
3.52.030 - California Drug Abatement Act. 
The city may seek and obtain any remedies which may also be available to the city pursuant to the California Drug Abatement Act as set forth in California Health and Safety Code Sections 11570 through 11587. 
(Prior code § 14½-344)  
3.56.040 - California Housing Law. 
The city may seek and obtain any remedies which may also be available to the city pursuant to the California Housing Law as set forth in California Health and Safety Code Sections 17910 through 17995. 
(Prior code § 14½-345)  
3.56.050 - Certificates of occupancy suspension and/or revocation. 
The building official may seek and order suspension and/or revocation pursuant to the Uniform Building Code and/or any applicable statute, rule, code or regulation, of any certificate of occupancy for any property which is being maintained in violation of this code, and/or any applicable statute, rule, code or regulation. 
(Prior code § 14½-346)  
3.56.060 - Injunctive relief. 
The city may seek and obtain injunctive relief to enjoin any violation or continuing violation of this code and/or any applicable statute, rule, code or regulation. 
(Prior code § 14½-347)  
3.56.070 - Stop work orders. 
The building official and any other authorized agent may seek and order stop work orders pursuant to the Uniform Building Code and/or any applicable statute, rule, code or regulation, whenever any work is being done contrary to the provisions of this code and/or any applicable statute, rule, code or regulation. 
(Prior code § 14½-348)  
3.56.080 - Performance bonds. 
As part of any court action, the city is authorized to require any person responsible for causing or maintaining conditions which constitute a public nuisance to post a performance bond to ensure compliance with this code and/or any applicable statute, rule, code or regulation. 
(Prior code § 14½-349)  
3.56.090 - Private nuisance action. 
The city and any of its political subdivisions may initiate and maintain a private nuisance action against any person or entity responsible for causing or maintaining conditions which constitute a nuisance as against any property of the city. 
(Prior code § 14½-350)  
3.56.100 - Warrants for abatement and inspection. 
Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the city from seeking an abatement and/or an inspection warrant at anytime and independent from any other remedy provided by this code and/or any applicable statute, rule, code or regulation. 
(Prior code § 14½-351)  
3.56.110 - Cumulative remedies. 
The remedies set forth in this chapter shall be cumulative and in addition to any and all other remedies, civil, equitable or criminal, afforded to the city under the law. 
(Prior code § 14½-352)  
3.56.120 - Recovery of costs pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure. 
Nothing in this chapter is intended to prohibit or preclude the city from seeking and recovering any costs pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure Sections 1032 through 1033.5. 
(Prior code § 14½-353)  
3.56.130 - Collection of debts to city. 
The amount of any fine or fee imposed by this chapter shall be deemed a civil debt owing to the city. An action may be commenced in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction for the collection of the amount of any such delinquent or unpaid fine or fee, with any penalties applicable thereto as prescribed by this chapter or other enactment. The remedy prescribed by this section shall be cumulative, and the use of an action to collect such an amount as a debt by civil action shall not bar the use of any other remedy provided by this chapter or as otherwise provided by law. 
(Prior code § 14½-354)  
3.56.140 - Notice of pending action. 
Upon the filing of a criminal complaint for zoning or other land use related violations, the code enforcement chief or any other enforcement authority, or his or her designee, may file a notice of pending action in the county recorder's office to prevent the owner from transferring the subject property or premises to another person or entity without first correcting the outstanding violation and reimbursing the city for any and all costs incurred by the city in its attempt to remedy the violation. Once the action is completed and the city is reimbursed for any costs incurred by the city in its attempt to remedy the subject violation, the code enforcement chief, or his or her designee, shall file a withdrawal of the notice with the county recorder's office. 
(Prior code § 14½-355)  
Title 4 - REVENUE AND FINANCE  
Chapter 4.04 - FISCAL CONTROL 
 
4.04.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter, to be known as the "Fiscal Control Ordinance of the City of Coachella, California," is to provide for a system of financial administration, accounting, fiscal and budgetary control which conforms to generally accepted accounting practices. 
(Prior code § 2-144)  
4.04.020 - Definitions. 
Definitions applicable to this chapter will be based on the standard definitions accepted by the Government Finance Officers Association with some modifications made to simplify such definitions. 
(Prior code § 2-145)  
4.04.030 - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year shall begin on July 1 and shall end on June 30. 
(Prior code § 2-146)  
4.04.040 - Adoption of the budget. 
An annual budget will be adopted by the city council prior to the first day of the fiscal year. However, if for good and sufficient reasons the budget cannot be adopted by the first day of the fiscal year, the budget shall be adopted not later than forty-five (45) days subsequent to the beginning of the fiscal year. If the budget is not adopted prior to the beginning of the fiscal year, a resolution authorizing the continuation of necessary and essential expenditures to operate the city shall be adopted prior to the beginning of the fiscal year. The proposed budget shall be prepared by the city manager and transmitted to members of the city council for its review a minimum of forty-five (45) days before the required date of adoption. The budget as adopted shall be a balanced budget with anticipated revenues (including appropriated unencumbered surplus) equal to appropriated expenditures. All funds within the budget shall also be balanced. 
(Prior code § 2-147)  
4.04.050 - Expenditure of funds. 
No expenditure in any fund shall be legal or proper unless appropriations adequate to meet the expenditure have been made in the budget. Purchases shall be made only after bona fide competitive bidding and bids shall be awarded to the lowest and best bidder. Purchases in excess of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) shall be on the basis of sealed bids. 
(Prior code § 2-148)  
4.04.060 - Budget a public record. 
At the time the proposed budget is transmitted to members of the city council by the city manager, a copy of the proposed budget shall be made available for public inspection during regular office hours in the office of the city clerk. 
(Prior code § 2-149)  
4.04.070 - Budget adoption. 
No earlier than seven days after the proposed budget is transmitted to members of the city council and no later than the time that the budget is adopted by the city council, a public hearing shall be held to give the public the opportunity to comment upon the proposed budget. Notice of such public hearing shall be given in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality no more than twenty (20) days and no less than five days in advance of the hearing. 
(Prior code § 2-150)  
4.04.080 - Final adoption of budget. 
The adoption of the budget shall be accomplished by the approval of a budget resolution, which specifies the anticipated revenues by appropriate categories and the appropriated expenditures for each department and each nondepartmental expense and for each fund covered by the budget. Amendments to the budget shall be approved by resolution. 
(Prior code § 2-151)  
4.04.090 - Budget modification. 
Any increase in appropriation in a departmental budget or in a nondepartmental expense category, whether accomplished through a change in anticipated revenues or through a transfer of appropriations among departments and nondepartmental expenses, shall require the approval of the city council in the form of an amendment to the budget resolution. The transfer of appropriations among the various accounts within a departmental budget or within a nondepartmental expense category shall only require the approval of the city manager, except that any transfer of appropriations within the departmental budget so as to increase the salary appropriation for the purpose of employing additional personnel shall require the approval of the city council. 
(Prior code § 2-152)  
4.04.100 - Fund transfer. 
No appropriation shall be made from a sinking fund or debt retirement fund until all legal obligations and requirements of such fund have been satisfied. 
(Prior code § 2-153)  
4.04.110 - Revenue estimates. 
The city manager shall present the statement of anticipated revenues on the basis of the ordinary and reasonable revenues that can be expected for the fiscal year. Property tax revenue estimates shall be based upon the county of Riverside statement of original charge. 
(Prior code § 2-154)  
4.04.120 - Unencumbered fund balance. 
All appropriations which are not obligated, encumbered or expended at the end of the fiscal year shall lapse and shall become a part of the unencumbered fund balance which may be appropriated for the next fiscal year. 
(Prior code § 2-155)  
4.04.130 - Fund structure. 
The following funds may be established and shall be used as necessary to provide for the proper accounting of all financial activities of the city: 
A.  General Fund. The general fund to account for the general governmental operations and all financial transactions not properly accounted for in another fund. 
B.  Special Revenue Funds. Special revenue funds to account for the proceeds of special revenue sources, other than special assessments, or to finance specified activities as required by law or administrative regulation. 
C.  Debt Service Funds. Debt service funds to account for the payment of interest and principal on long-term debt other than special assessment and revenue bonds. 
D.  Capital Projects Funds. Capital projects funds to account for the receipt and disbursement of monies including bond proceeds used for the acquisition of capital facilities other than those financed by special assessment and enterprise funds. 
E.  Enterprise Fund. Enterprise (utility) funds to account for the financing of services to the general public where all or most of the costs involved are paid in the form of charges by users of such services. 
F.  Trust and Agency Funds. Trust and agency funds to account for assets held by a governmental unit as trustee or agent for individuals, private organizations and other governmental units. 
G.  Internal Service Funds. Internal service funds to account for the financing of special activities and services performed by a designated organization unit within a governmental jurisdiction for other organization units within the same governmental jurisdiction. 
H.  Special Assessment Funds. Special assessment funds to account for special assessments levied to finance public improvements or services deemed to benefit the properties against which the assessments are levied. 
(Prior code § 2-156)  
4.04.140 - Self-balancing accounts. 
A complete self-balancing group of accounts shall be established and maintained for each fund used. This group of accounts shall include all general ledger accounts and subsidiary records necessary to reflect compliance with legal provisions and to set forth the financial position and the results of financial operations of the fund. 
(Prior code § 2-157)  
4.04.150 - Additional accounts. 
Additional accounts, as follows, shall be maintained: 
A.  A fixed asset account for the purpose of accounting for those assets which are of tangible nature, have a life longer than one fiscal year, and have a significant value (or have a value greater than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)). General fixed assets shall be recorded at original cost, shall not be depreciated, and shall be removed from the account when disposed of. Enterprise funds' fixed assets may be depreciated. 
B.  A long-term debt account for the purpose of accounting for a long term debt and for recording and fairly representing the liability for long-term debt at any time from date of issuance until the debt is retired. 
(Prior code § 2-158)  
4.04.160 - Basis of accounting. 
To the extent possible, the modified accrual basis of accounting shall be used so that expenditures, other than accrued interest on long-term debt, are recorded at the time liabilities are incurred and revenues are recorded when cash is received, except for material or available revenues which shall be accrued to reflect properly the taxes levied and the revenues earned. All receipts and disbursements shall be posted promptly and at least on a monthly basis. To the extent possible, all interfund transfers shall be cleared by the end of the fiscal year. 
(Prior code § 2-159)  
4.04.170 - Financial reporting. 
Financial statements and reports showing the current conditions of budgetary and proprietary accounts shall be prepared and presented to the city council at least every three months. Not later than six months after the close of the fiscal year, a comprehensive annual financial report covering all funds and financial operations shall be prepared and published. A summary of this report, containing at least a statement of revenues and expenditures as of the close of the preceding fiscal year and the combined balance sheet for all funds and account groups, shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality. 
(Prior code § 2-160)  
4.04.180 - Annual independent audit. 
All the funds, accounts and financial transactions of the city shall be subjected to an annual audit by an independent certified public accountant who is to be selected by the city council. The audit shall be conducted in accordance with generally accepted auditing standards promulgated by the American Institute of Certified Public Accounts (AICPA). 
(Prior code § 2-161)  
4.04.190 - Implementation responsibility. 
The responsibility for the proper execution of the provisions of this fiscal control ordinance shall be with the city manager except where the responsibility is explicitly given to the city council. 
(Prior code § 2-162)  
Chapter 4.08 - PURCHASING SYSTEM 
 
4.08.010 - Legislative purposes. 
A.  This chapter is adopted to establish a purchasing system that enables the city to achieve the following goals: 
1.  Improve internal controls and checks and balances by separating the functions of identifying the city's needs for equipment, goods, materials, supplies and services, of making actual purchases, of receiving the purchases, of comparing what is received with what was purchased, of authorizing payments and of making actual payments. 
2.  Obtain the best prices for needed equipment, goods, materials, supplies and services by forecasting the needs for them in the near and long term, by quantifying the city's need for such items by utilizing best available technology and the quality thereof, by enabling access to all sources of such items and by utilizing competitive bidding and/or competitive negotiations. 
3.  Reduce the number of transactions by purchasing sufficient quantities to meet the city's needs, by minimizing the periods during which purchases are made and by establishing and implementing criteria for extraordinary or unanticipated purchases. 
4.  Reduce the amount of staff time to make purchases by integrating and coordinating purchases by the various departments and by eliminating duplicate functions and procedures and by automating purchases to the greatest extent. 
5.  Reduce or eliminate inventories of needed equipment, goods, materials and supplies by forecasting the need and timing of such items, by tracking inventories of such items and by entering into arrangements for expedited or timed deliveries. 
6.  It is also the purpose of this chapter to authorize and direct the city manager to implement the goals and provisions in this section by monitoring and reporting the implementation of this chapter. Further, the city manager may adopt any and all guidelines that he or she deems necessary to interpret or implement the goals and provisions in this section. Thereafter, the city manager may promulgate such guidelines by signing, and dating them. 
(Ord. 893 § 2 (part), 2003)  
4.08.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms are defined as follows unless the context indicates that a different meaning is intended: 
"Bidders list" is a list of sources of equipment, goods, materials or supplies for each category of purchases needed by the city. 
"City" means the city of Coachella. 
"Department" means a department, division or section of the city. 
"Coachella procurement procedures and regulations" means any interpretation or implementation measure promulgated by the city manager pursuant to his or her authority hereunder. 
"Professional services" means the services of attorneys, architects, auditors, consultants, engineers, specialized printers, or other individuals or firms possessing a high degree of professional, unique, specialized, technical skill or expertise, not adaptable to competitive bidding, or where the service needed is for special activities, negotiations for the acquisition of land, trash services, or any other municipal service engaged for a particular project or series of projects. 
"Public project" means a public work as defined in the Public Contract Code § 20161 that requires competitive bidding. 
"Public works" means those public works that do not constitute public projects under Public Contract Code § 20161. 
"Purchases" means any and all purchases of equipment, goods, materials, supplies, other personal property and services, or the rental thereof, made, or to be made, by the city. It also refers to the leasing or acquisition of real property. 
"Services" means any and all services, including, but not limited to, equipment service contracts. The term does not include services rendered by city officers or employees, nor professional or other contractual service for which the procurement is specifically provided by law or approved city procedures or are in their nature unique and not subject to competition. 
(Ord. 893 § 2 (part), 2003)  
4.08.030 - Centralization of purchases. 
A.  All purchases of goods, equipment, materials, supplies and services shall be centralized under the control and direction of the city manager. All employees of the city shall comply with the provisions of this chapter and the guidelines promulgated by the city manager regarding the purchase, payment, receipt, distribution and storage of all purchases by the city for use by the city or its employees. 
B.  For this purpose, a purchasing function is established within the finance department, which shall be administered by the finance director. The finance director shall administer the activities of the purchasing function as directed by the city manager and described in the Coachella procurement procedures and regulations. 
(Ord. 893 § 2 (part), 2003)  
4.08.040 - Forecasting purchases. 
For purposes of budgeting each department shall submit information that projects its need for purchases during each subsequent fiscal year or such other period that may be practicable with the finance director. Each department may supplement such projections from time to time to update its need for purchases including unforeseen or emergency purchases. Each department shall report in the manner prescribed by the finance director to provide information for forecasting such purchases. The finance director shall utilize the information about such needed purchases to commence the process of making any necessary budget adjustments on behalf of each department. 
(Ord. 893 § 2 (part), 2003)  
4.08.050 - Requirement for competitive pricing. 
A.  All purchases by or for the city shall be competitively priced. It is the policy of the city to price all equipment, goods, materials, supplies, other personal property and services prior to purchasing them to assure that the city shall receive the best price considering the quality of its intended purchases subject to this chapter and any guidelines promulgated by the city manager. Further, all purchases may be awarded based upon provisions of Section 4.08.010. 
B.  Competitive pricing shall not be required for purchases that meet the following criteria: 
1.  Competition does not exist for proposed purchases, such as conventions, legal advertising, meetings, professional membership or subscriptions, public utilities, travel or proprietary items of any kind; 
2.  Competitive pricing or bidding has already been utilized for proposed purchases by a federal, state, county or other local agency and the proposed purchases will be sold to the city at the same or better price by a vendor as submitted to the federal, state, county or other local agency; 
3.  Contracts for professional services as provided hereunder; 
4.  Purchases which shall be resold to the public or others; 
5.  Purchases of circulating library materials, including books, periodicals, films, and recordings; and 
6.  Urgent purchases declared by the city council needed for the preservation of life or property or that seeking quotations or solicitations would provide no benefit or would cause unnecessary expense and delay. 
C.  The city manager may promulgate guidelines to exempt any of the following purchases from the competitive pricing procedures provided such purchases or services otherwise comply with this chapter and applicable guidelines: 
1.  Purchases or services equal to or less than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500); 
2.  Budgeted non-commodity items such as debt service payments, deposits, dues, insurance premiums, legal advertising, memberships, professional service contracts, publications, self-insurance claim payments, seminar registration, subscriptions and travel expenses; 
3.  Commodity items such as credit card purchases of gasoline, oil, office supplies, emergency repairs to equipment, vehicles and facilities, real property purchases and leases, utility services and related charges, work or services performed by another public agency. 
(Ord. 893 § 2 (part), 2003)  
4.08.060 - Competitive pricing procedures. 
The Coachella procurement procedures and regulations describe the manner in which competitive pricing shall be accomplished. These procedures and regulations may be changed at the discretion of the city manager upon approval of a resolution by the city council and in accordance with other applicable sections included in this chapter. 
(Ord. 893 § 2 (part), 2003)  
4.08.070 - Surplus equipment and supplies. 
Each department shall submit reports showing all supplies and equipment that are no longer used, have become obsolete or have worn out to the finance director at such times and on such forms as may be prescribed. The finance director may transfer such items between departments to assure their uses where and when needed. The finance director may cause the sale or exchange of all equipment, goods, materials and supplies that are not or cannot be used by any department provided that the city manager shall approve any such sale or exchange when the total estimated value exceeds five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). 
(Ord. 893 § 2 (part), 2003)  
4.08.080 - Professional services agreements. 
A.  The city council shall approve or reject every agreement for professional services in excess of fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) and the city manager may approve or reject agreements for professional services for all lesser amounts. All such agreements shall be made with the best-qualified person or firm. The city attorney shall approve all professional service agreements as to form prior to their execution except those on standard agreements approved by the city attorney. 
B.  Selection of persons or firms shall be based on demonstrated competence and on the professional qualification necessary for the satisfactory performance of the services required. In determining the best-qualified person or firm, the following criteria shall be utilized: 
1.  The training, credentials and experience of the person or firm; 
2.  The demonstrated competence, ability, capacity and skill of the person or firm to perform the contract or provide the services; 
3.  The capacity of the person or firm to perform the contract or provide the service promptly, within the time specified, and without delay; 
4.  The sufficiency of the persons or firm's financial and other resources; 
5.  The character, integrity, reputation and judgment of the person or firm; 
6.  The ability of the person or firm to provide such future service as may be needed; and 
7.  The price which the person or firm proposes to charge, including whether the price is fair, reasonable and competitive except for selections based on technical merit only. 
C.  The city manager and each department head shall solicit requests for proposals or qualifications for professional services whenever the city manager determines that the best interests of the city would be served by such professional services provided however that the city attorney shall solicit and recommend special legal services for special purposes; and the city council shall select and directly engage the services of the city's external financial auditor. The department seeking such services shall prepare such requests for proposals or request for qualifications. Where practicable, such requests shall be solicited from at least three vendors. 
D.  Agreements for professional services except for law enforcement and fire protection services shall not be made for a term in excess of three years and such agreements shall be for an initial term of one year with an option to the city to extend the agreement for two additional one-year terms. No amendment or modification of a professional service agreement shall be made without a written amendment. No payment for any such amendment or modification shall be made without a written amendment. Professional service agreements may be extended for years two and three without additional city council approval unless the amount thereof has been increased beyond the original approved amount. 
(Ord. 893 § 2 (part), 2003)  
4.08.090 - Public works contracts. 
A.  Contracts for public works for fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) or less may be awarded by the competitive bidding procedures or other purchasing methods set forth in the Coachella procurement procedures and regulations. 
B.  Contracts for public works for amounts in excess of fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) shall be awarded by the competitive bidding procedures described in the Coachella procurement procedures and regulations or by another method that may be required by a federal or state agency participating in or funding the contract. 
C.  Any and all bids for public works may be rejected whenever the city council, city manager or department head makes any one of the following findings: 
1.  The bid does not comply with the bid documents; 
2.  The proposed public work needs to be abandoned or delayed; 
3.  The materials or services may be purchased more reasonably on the open market or the work done less expensively by city personnel; 
4.  The bid is higher than anticipated and a new call for bids could result in lower bids to the city; or 
5.  The best interests of the city would be served by a rejection of all bids. 
D.  The city council may forego the bidding procedures otherwise required by this section whenever the city council finds that there is an urgent need to the public health or welfare, or safety would be jeopardized if the competitive bidding procedures in effect at the time were followed. 
E.  All public works contracts in excess of fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) shall be awarded by the city council and signed by the mayor. Public works contracts less than fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) shall be signed by the city manager. The city attorney shall approve as to form all such public works contracts. Notwithstanding such a signed contract, the contractor shall not proceed with the public works project unless and until so directed in writing by the city manager or a department head and the contractor may not rely on the contract as assurance of any type that the notice to proceed shall be issued. In the event such notice to proceed is not issued, the city shall have no liability to the contractor under the contract or under a theory of promissory estoppel due to the liability of the contractor to third parties. The city attorney shall approve all public works contracts as to form prior to their execution except those on standard forms approved by the city attorney. 
F.  No amendment or modification of a public works contract shall be made without the issuance of a written change order duly signed by the contractor and the city manager and no additional compensation shall be paid to the contractor unless said amendment or modification is so signed. 
(Ord. 893 § 2 (part), 2003)  
4.08.100 - Local business preference program. 
A.  Definitions. 
1.  "Director" means the city manager or the city manager's designee. 
2.  "Coachella Valley" means the nine incorporated cities of the Coachella Valley, and the unincorporated areas of Riverside County in the Coachella Valley that are located within the boundaries of the Coachella Valley Association of Governments. 
3.  "Local business" means a vendor, contractor, or consultant who has a valid physical business address located within the Coachella Valley, at least six months prior to bid or proposal opening date, from which the vendor, contractor, or consultant operates or performs business on a day-to-day basis, and holds a valid business license by a jurisdiction located in the Coachella Valley. Post office boxes are not verifiable and shall not be used for the purpose of establishing such physical address. 
4.  "Solicitation" shall mean the city's process to obtain bids or proposals as provided in this chapter for the purchase of goods or services. 
B.  Findings. 
1.  The city annually spends significant amounts on purchasing supplies, materials, and equipment, and contractual and professional services. The dollars used in making these purchases are derived in large measure from taxes and fees derived from local businesses and the city council has determined that funds generated in the community should, to the extent possible, be placed back in the local economy. Therefore, the city council has determined that it is in the best interest of the city to give a preference to local businesses in making such purchases whenever the application of such a preference is reasonable in light of the dollar-value received in relation to such expenditure. 
2.  The city council further finds that the Coachella Valley is in a state of economic depression and many local businesses have been forced to close their doors due to severe financial losses. Many of these local business establishments have been doing business in the Coachella Valley for many years. The city council finds that the city should promote and stimulate local businesses by requiring that purchases of supplies, materials, and equipment and contractual services be acquired from local businesses. 
3.  The city council further finds that this action is necessary to grow the local economy and preserve the local businesses that have diligently served the Coachella Valley for many years. 
4.  Strategies that encourage people to buy locally are an important component of economic sustainability. Retaining local dollars within a community reduces economic export and increases the financial productivity of taxpayer dollars and increases the consumption of local goods and services while fostering a sustainable community. In working towards a sustainable economy, the city council recognizes that sustainable procurement policies are an important early step on the Coachella path to a sustainable community. By leveraging the purchasing power of the city to buy local products and services instead of products and services from outside the Coachella Valley it strengthens the local economic activity and employment as well as sets an example that helps foster and maintain a vital economic community for future generations. 
C.  Statement of Policy. It is the policy of the city to promote employment and business opportunities for local residents and firms on all contracts and give preference to local residents, workers, businesses, contractors, and consultants to the extent consistent with the law and interests of the public. 
D.  Local Preference in Purchasing. In the bidding of, or letting for procurement of, supplies, materials, and equipment, as provided in this chapter, the city council or the director may give a preference to local businesses in making such purchase or awarding such contract in an amount not to exceed five percent of the local business' total bid price, or fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00), whichever amount is lower. Total bid price shall include only the base bid price but also adjustments to that base bid price resulting from alternates requested in the solicitation. In order for a local business to be eligible to claim the preference, the business must request the preference in the solicitation response and provide a copy of its current business license from a jurisdiction in the Coachella Valley. 
E.  Local Preference in Services. In awarding contracts for services, including consultant services, preference to local business shall be given whenever practicable pursuant to this chapter consistent with the statement of policy in subsection (c) of this section. The contractor or consultant will also, to the extent legally possible, solicit applications for employment and proposals for subcontractors and subconsultants for work associated with the proposed contract from local residents and firms as opportunities occur and hire qualified local residents and firms whenever feasible. In order for a local business to be eligible to claim the preference, the business must request the preference in the solicitation response and provide a copy of its current business license from a jurisdiction in the Coachella Valley. 
F.  Exceptions to Local Business Preference Policy. The preference set forth in this section shall not apply to the following purchases or contracts: 
1.  Goods or services provided under a cooperative purchasing agreement. 
2.  Purchases or contracts which are funded in whole or in part by a governmental entity and the laws, regulations, or policies governing such funding prohibit application of that preference. 
3.  Purchases made or contracts let under emergency or noncompetitive situations. 
4.  Purchases with an estimated cost of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or less. 
5.  Application of the local business preference to a particular purchase, contract, or category of contracts for which the city council is the awarding authority may be waived at the city council's discretion. 
G.  Quality and Fitness. The preferences established in this section shall in no way be construed to inhibit, limit or restrict the right and obligation of the city council and the director to compare quality and fitness for use of supplies, materials, equipment, and services proposed for purchase and compare the qualifications, character, responsibility, and fitness of all persons, firms, or corporations submitting bids or proposals. In addition, the preferences established in this section shall in no way be construed to prohibit the right of the city council or the director from giving any other preference permitted by law or this chapter. 
H.  Application. The local business preference provided in this section shall apply to new contracts for supplies, materials, equipment, and services first solicited as of the effective date of the enabling ordinance. This section shall be implemented in a manner consistent with otherwise applicable provisions of this chapter and competitive bidding laws. 
I.  Verification of Local Business Preference Eligibility. Any vendor or consultant claiming to be a local business shall so certify in the bid, in writing to the director. The director shall not be required to verify the accuracy or any such certifications, and shall have sole discretion to determine if a vendor or consultant meets the definition of "local business." 
J.  Enforcement. 
1.  The information furnished by each bidder requesting a local business preference shall be under penalty of perjury. 
2.  No person or business shall knowingly and with intent to defraud, fraudulently obtain, retain, attempt to obtain or retain, or aid another in fraudulently obtaining or retaining or attempting to obtain or retain certification as a local business for the purpose of this section. 
3.  No person or business shall willfully and knowingly make a false statement with the intent to defraud, whether by affidavit, report, or other representation, to a city official or employee for the purpose of influencing the certification or denial of certification of any entity as a local business. 
4.  A business which has obtained city certification as a local business by reason of having furnished incorrect supporting information or by reason of having withheld information, and which knew or should have known, the information furnished was incorrect or the information withheld was relevant to its request for certification, and which by reason of such certification has been awarded a contract to which it would not otherwise have been entitled, shall: 
(i)  Pay to the city any difference between the contract amount and what the city's costs would have been if the contract had been properly awarded; 
(ii)  In addition to the amount described in subsection (i) above, be assessed a penalty in an amount of not more than ten (10) percent of the amount of the contract involved; and 
(iii)  Be subject to debarment from future award of contracts from the city. 
5.  The penalties identified in (4) above shall also apply to any business that has previously obtained proper certification and, as a result of a change in its status would no longer be eligible for certification, fails to notify the director of this information prior to responding to a solicitation or accepting a contract award. 
K.  Promulgation of Administrative Rules. The director is authorized to adopt administrative rules supplemental to the provisions of this chapter as necessary or appropriate to implement the provisions of this section. The provisions of this section and the rules adopted by the director shall be provided to potential bidders, vendors, and contractors to the widest extent practicable. 
(Ord. No. 1050, § 1, 5-8-13)  
Chapter 4.12 - TRANSFER OF ASSESSMENT AND COLLECTION DUTIES TO COUNTY 
 
4.12.010 - County to assess—Collect city taxes. 
The duties of assessing property and collecting taxes as provided by law to be performed by the assessor and tax collector of the city shall be performed by the county assessor and the county tax collector of the county of Riverside, state of California, the county in which the city is situated. 
(Prior code § 22-1)  
Chapter 4.16 - NEW CONSTRUCTION TAX 
 
4.16.010 - Tax required—Computed. 
In addition to any other fee or fees prescribed by law, every person constructing any new building or addition or trailer space in the city shall pay to the city a sum computed as follows: 
A.  For each mobilehome park space, one hundred dollars ($100.00) with no additional sum for any directly accessory structure; 
B.  For any construction not falling within the definition of "trailer space," one percent of the valuation of the structure as determined for the issuance of a building permit; 
C.  Notwithstanding any of the foregoing provisions of this section, no fee shall be payable on account of construction of an addition to an existing single-family dwelling, which construction does not exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) in valuation. 
D.  For each travel trailer space, fifty dollars ($50.00), with no additional sum for any directly accessory structure. 
(Prior code § 22-71)  
4.16.020 - Fees due at time of permit application—Refund. 
Such fees shall be due and payable upon application to the city for a building permit for construction of any building or addition; provided, however, that there shall be a refund of such fees in the event the building permit is not used for such construction. 
(Prior code § 22-72).  
4.16.030 - Definitions for chapter. 
A.  The terms "mobilehome park space" and "travel trailer space" shall be as defined in the zoning ordinance of the city. 
B.  As used in this section, the term "person" includes every person, firm or corporation engaging in construction activities itself or through the services of any employee, agent or independent contractor. 
(Prior code § 22-73)  
4.16.040 - Taxes collected to be deposited in general fund. 
All of the sums collected pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited in the general fund of this city. 
(Prior code § 22-74)  
Chapter 4.20 - REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX 
 
4.20.010 - Title—Authority. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Real Property Transfer Tax Ordinance of the City of Coachella." It is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Part 6.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State of California, commencing with Section 11901. 
(Prior code § 22-34)  
4.20.020 - Imposed. 
There is imposed on each deed, instrument or writing by which any lands, tenements, or other realty sold within the city shall be granted, assigned, transferred or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, the purchaser or purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his or their direction, when the consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of sale) exceeds one hundred dollars ($100.00), a tax at the rate of twenty-seven and one-half cents ($0.275) for each five hundred dollars ($500.00) or fractional part thereof. 
(Prior code § 22-35)  
4.20.030 - Persons subject to tax. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be paid by any person who makes, signs or issues any document or instrument subject to the tax, or for whose use or benefit the same is made, signed or issued. 
(Prior code § 22-36)  
4.20.040 - Exemption for security instruments. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to any instrument in writing given to secure a debt. 
(Prior code § 22-37)  
4.20.050 - Exemption for governmental agencies. 
Any deed, instrument or writing to which the United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof, any state or territory, or political subdivision thereof, is a party, shall be exempt from any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter when the exempt agency is acquiring title. 
(Prior code § 22-38)  
4.20.060 - Conveyances under reorganization or adjustment plans exempt. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making, delivering or filing of conveyances to make effective any plan of reorganization or adjustment: 
A.  Confirmed under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as amended; 
B.  Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a railroad corporation, as defined in subdivision (m) of Section 205 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended; 
C.  Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a railroad corporation, as defined in subdivision (3) of Section 506 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended; or 
D.  Whereby a mere change in identity, form or place of organization is effected. 
Subsections A to D, inclusive, of this section shall only apply if the making, delivery or filing of instruments of transfer or conveyances occurs within five years from the date of such confirmation, approval or change. 
(Prior code § 22-39)  
4.20.070 - Conveyances under order of securities and exchange commission exempt. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making or delivery of conveyances to make effective any order of the Securities and Exchange Commission, as defined in subdivision (a) of Section 1083 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; but only if: 
A.  The order of the Securities and Exchange Commission in obedience to which such conveyance is made recites that such conveyance is necessary or appropriate to effectuate the provisions of Section 79k of Title 15 of the United States Code, relating to the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935; 
B.  Such order specifies the property which is ordered to be conveyed; 
C.  Such conveyance is made in obedience to such order. 
(Prior code § 22-40)  
4.20.080 - Transfer of certain partnership property. 
A.  In the case of any realty held by a partnership, no levy is imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of any transfer of an interest in a partnership or otherwise, if: 
1.  Such partnership (or another partnership) is considered a continuing partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; and 
2.  Such continuing partnership continues to hold the realty concerned. 
B.  If there is a termination of any partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, for purposes of this chapter, such partnership shall be treated as having executed an instrument whereby there was conveyed, for fair market value (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon), all realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination. 
C.  Not more than one tax shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of a termination described in subsection B, and any transfer pursuant thereto, with respect to the realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination. 
D.  No levy shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of any transfer between an individual or individuals and a legal entity or between legal entities that results solely in a change in the method of holding title to the realty and in which proportional ownership interests in the realty, whether represented by stock, membership interest, partnership interest, cotenancy interest, or otherwise, directly or indirectly, remain the same immediately after the transfer. 
(Ord. 891 § 7, 2003; prior code § 22-41)  
4.20.090 - Taken in lieu of foreclosure—Exception—Notations required on deed, etc.—Affidavit. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply with respect to any deed, instrument, or writing to a beneficiary or mortgagee, which is taken from the mortgagor or trustor as a result of or in lieu of foreclosure; provided, that such tax shall apply to the extent that the consideration exceeds the unpaid debt, including accrued interest and costs of foreclosure. Consideration, unpaid debt amount, and identification of grantee as beneficiary or mortgagee shall be noted on such deed, instrument, or writing or stated in an affidavit or declaration under penalty of perjury for tax purposes. 
(Ord. 891 § 9, 2003; prior code § 22-42)  
4.20.100 - Allocation of property assets between spouses under judgment of dissolution of marriage, separation, or agreement in contemplation of judgment of order. 
A.  Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply with respect to any deed, instrument, or other writing with purports to transfer, divide, or allocate community, quasi-community, or quasi-marital property assets between spouses for the purpose of effecting a division of community, quasi-community, or quasi-marital property which is required by a judgment decreeing dissolution of a marriage or legal separation, by a judgment of nullity, or by any other judgment or order rendered pursuant to the Family Code, or by a written agreement between the spouses, executed in contemplation of any such judgment or order, whether or not the written agreement is incorporated as part of any of those judgments or orders. 
B.  In order to qualify for the exemption provided in subsection A of this section, the deed, instrument, or other writing shall include a written recital, signed by either spouse, stating that the deed, instrument, or other writing is entitled to the exemption. 
(Ord. 891 § 10, 2003; prior code § 22-43)  
4.20.110 - Conveyance of realty by state or by political subdivision or agency with agreement for purchaser to reconvey. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply with respect to any deed, instrument, or other writing by which realty is conveyed by the state of California, any political subdivision thereof, or agency or instrumentality of either thereof, pursuant to an agreement whereby the purchaser agrees to immediately reconvey the realty to the exempt agency. 
(Ord. 891 § 11, 2003; prior code § 22-44)  
4.20.120 - Conveyance of state, political subdivision, or agency of realty financed by obligations issued by non-profit corporation. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply pursuant to any deed, instrument, or other writing by which the state of California, any political subdivision thereof, or agency or instrumentality of either, conveys to a non-profit corporation, realty, the acquisition, construction, or improvement of which is financed or refinanced by obligations issued by the non-profit corporation on behalf of a governmental unit, within the meaning of Section 1.103-1(b) of Title 26 of the Code of Federal Regulations. 
(Ord. 891 § 12, 2003; prior code § 22-45)  
4.20.130 - Inter vivos gift or death—Transaction for lands, tenements, or realty, or interests. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to any deed, instrument, or other writing which that purports to grant, assign, transfer, convey, divide, allocate, or vest lands, tenements, or realty or any interests therein, if by reason of such inter vivos as a gift, or by reason of the death of any person, such lands, tenements, realty, or interests therein are transferred outright to, or in trust for the benefit of, any person or entity. 
(Ord. 891 § 13, 2003; prior code § 22-46)  
4.20.140 - Administration. 
The county recorder shall administer this chapter in conformity with the provisions of Part 6.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and the provisions of any county ordinance adopted pursuant thereto. 
(Ord. 891 § 8 (part), 2003; prior code § 22-47)  
4.20.150 - Claims for refunds. 
Claims for refunds of taxes imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 5096) of Part 9 of Division 1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state of California. 
(Ord. 891 § 8 (part), 2003; prior code § 22-48)  
Chapter 4.24 - SALES AND USE TAX 
 
4.24.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Ordinance of the City of Coachella." 
(Prior code § 22-17)  
4.24.020 - Purposes. 
The city council declares that this chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes: 
A.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which complies with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State of California; 
B.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which incorporates provisions identical to those of the sales and use tax law of the state of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; 
C.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which imposes a tax at the rates specified in Sections 4(a)(1) and 5(a) of Ordinance No. 97 Section 22-19(a)(1) and 22-20(a); 
D.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which can be administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting city sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 22-18)  
4.24.030 - Sales tax. 
A.  1.  For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail a tax is hereby imposed upon all retailers in the city at the following fractions of one percent of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in the city on and after the operative dates of this section at the rates shown in the following schedule: 
Sales Tax Rate 	Operative Date 
.91 of one percent 	October 1, 1971 
.92 of one percent 	July 1, 1972 
.93 of one percent 	July 1, 1973 
.94 of one percent 	July 1, 1974 
.95 of one percent 	July 1, 1975 
.96 of one percent 	July 1, 1976 
.97 of one percent 	July 1, 1977 
.98 of one percent 	July 1, 1978 
.99 of one percent 	July 1, 1979 
1.00 of one percent 	July 1, 1980 
 
2.  For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his or her agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the board of equalization. 
B.  1.  Except as provided in this section, and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the code, as amended and in force and effect on the operative date of Ordinance No. 97, applicable to sales taxes, are adopted and made a part of this section as though fully set forth in this chapter. 
2.  Wherever, and to the extent that, in Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code the state of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the city shall be substituted therefor. Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to require the substitution of the name of the city for the word "state" when that word is used as part of the title of the state controller, the state treasurer, the state board of control, the state board of equalization, or the name of the state treasury, or of the Constitution of the state of California; nor shall the name of the city be substituted for that of the state in any section when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city or any agency thereof, rather than by or against the state board of equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter; and neither shall the substitution be deemed to have been made in those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state of California, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain gross receipts which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while those gross receipts remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; nor to impose this tax with respect to certain gross receipts which would not be subject to tax by the state under the provisions of that code; and, in addition, the name of the city shall not be substituted for that of the state in Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 and 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code as adopted. 
3.  If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional seller's permit shall not be required by reason of this section. 
4.  There shall be excluded from the gross receipts by which the tax is measured: 
a.  The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state of California upon a retailer or consumer. 
b.  The gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. 
(Ord. 891 § 14 (part), 2003; prior code § 22-19)  
4.24.040 - Use. 
A.  An excise tax is imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer at the following fractions of one percent of the sales price of the property on and after the operative dates of this section at the rates shown in the following schedule. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. 
Tax Rate 	Operative Date 
.91 of one percent 	October 1, 1971 
.92 of one percent 	July 1, 1972 
.93 of one percent 	July 1, 1973 
.94 of one percent 	July 1, 1974 
.95 of one percent 	July 1, 1975 
.96 of one percent 	July 1, 1976 
.97 of one percent 	July 1, 1977 
.98 of one percent 	July 1, 1978 
.99 of one percent 	July 1, 1979 
1.00 of one percent 	July 1, 1980 
 
B.  1.  Except as provided in this section, and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the code, as amended and in force and effect on the operative date of Ordinance No. 97, applicable to use taxes, are adopted and made a part of this section as though fully set forth in this section. 
2.  Whenever, and to the extent that, in Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, the state of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this city shall be substituted therefor. Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to require the substitution of the title of the state controller, the state treasurer, the state board of control, the state board of equalization, or the name of the state treasury, or of the Constitution of the state of California; nor shall the name of the city be substituted for that of the state in any section when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city or any agency thereof rather than by or against the state board of equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter; and neither shall the substitution be deemed to have been made in those sections, including but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state of California, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such storage, use or other consumption remains subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or to impose this tax with respect to certain storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the said provisions of that code; and in addition, the name of the city shall not be substituted for that of the state in Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence in this section), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 and 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code as adopted, and the name of the city shall not be substituted for the word "state" in the phrase "retailer engaged in business in this state" in Section 6203 nor in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. 
3.  There shall be exempt from the tax due under this section: 
a.  The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state of California upon a retailer or consumer. 
b.  The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which has been subject to sales tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city in this state. 
c.  In addition to the exemptions provided in Section 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, the storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or foreign government. 
(Ord. 891 § 14 (part), 2003; prior code § 22-20)  
4.24.050 - Amendments to statutes incorporated. 
All amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code enacted subsequent to the effective date of Ordinance No. 97 which relate to the sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code shall automatically become a part of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 22-21)  
4.24.060 - Enjoining collection forbidden. 
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or this city, or against any officer of the state or this city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. 
(Prior code § 22-22)  
Chapter 4.26 - TRANSACTIONS AND USE TAX[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1071, § 1, adopted Feb. 4, 2014, amended Ch. 4.26 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 4.26, §§ 4.26.010—4.26.140, pertained to transactions and use tax, and derived from Ord. No. 1030, § 3, adopted July 27, 2011. 
 
4.26.010 - Title. 
This ordinance shall be known as the City of Coachella Transactions and Use Tax Ordinance. The City of Coachella hereinafter shall be called "city." This ordinance shall be applicable in the incorporated territory of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1071, § 1, 11-4-14)  
4.26.020 - Operative date. 
"Operative date" means the first day of the first calendar quarter commencing more than one hundred ten (110) days after the adoption of this ordinance, the date of such adoption being as set forth below. 
(Ord. No. 1071, § 1, 11-4-14)  
4.26.030 - Purpose. 
This ordinance is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes: 
A.  To impose a retail transactions and use tax in accordance with the provisions of Part 1.6 (commencing with Section 7251) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and Section 7285.9 of Part 1.7 of Division 2 which authorizes the city to adopt this tax ordinance which shall be operative if a majority of the electors voting on the measure vote to approve the imposition of the tax at an election called for that purpose. 
B.  To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the State of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. 
C.  To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that imposes a tax and provides a measure therefore that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California State Sales and Use Taxes. 
D.  To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that can be administered in a manner that will be, to the greatest degree possible, consistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting the transactions and use taxes, and at the same time, minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1071, § 1, 11-4-14)  
4.26.040 - Contract with state. 
Prior to the operative date, the city shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this transactions and use tax ordinance; provided, that if the city shall not have contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract. 
(Ord. No. 1071, § 1, 11-4-14)  
4.26.050 - Transactions tax rate. 
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is hereby imposed upon all retailers in the incorporated territory of the city at the rate of one percent of the gross receipts of any retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in said territory on and after the operative date of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1071, § 1, 11-4-14)  
4.26.060 - Place of sale. 
For the purposes of this ordinance, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. 
(Ord. No. 1071, § 1, 11-4-14)  
4.26.070 - Use tax rate. 
An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date of this ordinance for storage, use or other consumption in said territory at the rate of one percent of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. 
(Ord. No. 1071, § 1, 11-4-14)  
4.26.080 - Adoption of provisions of state law. 
Except as otherwise provided in this ordinance and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are hereby adopted and made a part of this ordinance as though fully set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 1071, § 1, 11-4-14)  
4.26.090 - Limitations on adoption of state law and collection of use taxes. 
In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code: 
A.  Wherever the State of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this city shall be substituted therefor. However, the substitution shall not be made when: 
1.  The word "state" is used as a part of the title of the State Controller, State Treasurer, State Board of Control, State Board of Equalization, State Treasury, or the Constitution of the State of California; 
2.  The result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against this city or any agency, officer, or employee thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter. 
3.  In those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the State of California, where the result of the substitution would be to: 
a.  Provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or; 
b.  Impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the said provision of that code. 
4.  In Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. 
B.  The word "city" shall be substituted for the word "state" in the phrase "retailer engaged in business in this state" in Section 6203 and in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. 
(Ord. No. 1071, § 1, 11-4-14)  
4.26.100 - Permit not required. 
If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional transactor's permit shall not be required by this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1071, § 1, 11-4-14)  
4.26.110 - Exemptions and exclusions. 
A.  There shall be excluded from the measure of the transactions tax and the use tax the amount of any sales tax or use tax imposed by the State of California or by any city, city and county, or county pursuant to the Bradley-Burns Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law or the amount of any state-administered transactions or use tax. 
B.  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of transactions tax the gross receipts from: 
1.  Sales of tangible personal property, other than fuel or petroleum products, to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the county in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. 
2.  Sales of property to be used outside the city which is shipped to a point outside the city, pursuant to the contract of sale, by delivery to such point by the retailer or his agent, or by delivery by the retailer to a carrier for shipment to a consignee at such point. For the purposes of this paragraph, delivery to a point outside the city shall be satisfied: 
a.  With respect to vehicles (other than commercial vehicles) subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, and undocumented vessels registered under Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code by registration to an out-of-city address and by a declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, stating that such address is, in fact, his or her principal place of residence; and 
b.  With respect to commercial vehicles, by registration to a place of business out-of-city and declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, that the vehicle will be operated from that address. 
3.  The sale of tangible personal property if the seller is obligated to furnish the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of this ordinance. 
4.  A lease of tangible personal property which is a continuing sale of such property, for any period of time for which the lessor is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by the lease prior to the operative date of this ordinance. 
5.  For the purposes of subparagraphs (3) and (4) of this section, the sale or lease of tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised. 
C.  There are exempted from the use tax imposed by this ordinance, the storage, use or other consumption in this city of tangible personal property: 
1.  The gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to a transactions tax under any state-administered transactions and use tax ordinance. 
2.  Other than fuel or petroleum products purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. This exemption is in addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State of California. 
3.  If the purchaser is obligated to purchase the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of this ordinance. 
4.  If the possession of, or the exercise of any right or power over, the tangible personal property arises under a lease which is a continuing purchase of such property for any period of time for which the lessee is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by a lease prior to the operative date of this ordinance. 
5.  For the purposes of subparagraphs (3) and (4) of this section, storage, use, or other consumption, or possession of, or exercise of any right or power over, tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised. 
6.  Except as provided in subparagraph (7), a retailer engaged in business in the city shall not be required to collect use tax from the purchaser of tangible personal property, unless the retailer ships or delivers the property into the city or participates within the city in making the sale of the property, including, but not limited to, soliciting or receiving the order, either directly or indirectly, at a place of business of the retailer in the city or through any representative, agent, canvasser, solicitor, subsidiary, or person in the city under the authority of the retailer. 
7.  "A retailer engaged in business in the city" shall also include any retailer of any of the following: vehicles subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, or undocumented vessels registered under Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code. That retailer shall be required to collect use tax from any purchaser who registers or licenses the vehicle, vessel, or aircraft at an address in the city. 
D.  Any person subject to use tax under this ordinance may credit against that tax any transactions tax or reimbursement for transactions tax paid to a district imposing, or retailer liable for a transactions tax pursuant to Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code with respect to the sale to the person of the property the storage, use or other consumption of which is subject to the use tax. 
(Ord. No. 1071, § 1, 11-4-14)  
4.26.120 - Amendments. 
All amendments subsequent to the effective date of this ordinance to Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code relating to sales and use taxes and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, and all amendments to Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, shall automatically become a part of this ordinance, provided however, that no such amendment shall operate so as to affect the rate of tax imposed by this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1071, § 1, 11-4-14)  
4.26.130 - Enjoining collection forbidden. 
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or the city, or against any officer of the state or the city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this ordinance, or Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. 
(Ord. No. 1071, § 1, 11-4-14)  
4.26.140 - Severability. 
If any provision of this ordinance or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the ordinance and the application of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby. 
(Ord. No. 1071, § 1, 11-4-14)  
Chapter 4.28 - TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX 
 
4.28.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax Ordinance of the City of Coachella." 
(Prior code § 22-54)  
4.28.020 - Definitions. 
Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in this section govern the construction of this chapter: 
"Hotel" means any structure or any portion of any structure including mobile home spaces or trailer spaces which is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes, and includes any hotel, inn, tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodging house, rooming house, apartment house, dormitory, public or private club, mobile home or house trailer at a fixed location, or other similar structures or portion thereof. 
"Occupancy" means the use or possession, or the right to use or possession of any room or rooms or portion thereof, in any hotel for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes. 
"Operator" means the person who is the proprietor of a hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, or any other capacity. Where the operator performs his or her functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purpose of this chapter and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his or her principal. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both. 
"Person" means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit. 
"Rent" means the consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy of space in a hotel valued in money, whether to be received in money, goods, labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property and services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
"Tax administrator" means the director of finance. 
"Transient" means any and all persons who exercise occupancy or are entitled to occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other agreement, for a period of the first thirty (30) consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any such person so occupying space in a hotel shall be deemed to be a transient until the period of thirty (30) days has expired. The fact that a person continues to occupy the hotel subsequent to the thirty (30) day period does not alter his status as a transient for the first thirty (30) days. 
(Prior code § 22-55)  
4.28.030 - Imposed—Payment. 
A.  For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, a transient is subject to and shall pay a tax in the amount of nine percent of the rent charged by the operator for any period of time up to thirty (30) days, save and except such occupancy is for a term longer than thirty (30) days. Such tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the city, which is extinguished only by payment to the operator or to the city. The transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon the transient's ceasing to occupy space in the hotel. If for any reason the tax is not paid to the operator of the hotel, the tax administrator may require that such tax be paid direct to the tax administrator. 
B.  In the case of time sharing uses, the transient occupancy tax shall be computed by averaging the daily room rates for conventionally utilized transient living facilities of the same approximate size and within the same zone in the city as defined by the finance director and applying the tax rate under this chapter thereto. Upon computation of such daily average room rates, the taxes may be increased every year in an amount equivalent to the percentage increase in the Los Angeles Consumer Price Index and the applicable tax computed therefrom. The daily average room rate, as computed and adjusted in this section, shall also be collected for each day time sharing units are rented on a conventional basis. 
(Prior code § 22-56)  
4.28.040 - Exemptions. 
No tax shall be imposed upon: 
A.  Any person as to whom, or any occupancy as to which, it is beyond the power of the city to impose the tax provided in this section; 
B.  Any federal or state of California officer or employee when on official business; and 
C.  Any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by reason of express provision of federal law or international treaty. 
No exemption shall be granted except upon a claim therefor made at the time rent is collected and under penalty of perjury upon a form prescribed by the tax administrator. 
(Prior code § 22-57)  
4.28.050 - Operator's duties—Absorbing tax prohibited. 
Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter to the same extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of the rent charged, and each transient shall receive a receipt for payment from the operator. No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part will be refunded except in the manner hereinafter provided. 
(Prior code § 22-58)  
4.28.060 - Registration required—Certificate. 
Within thirty (30) days after commencing business, each operator of any hotel renting occupancy to transients shall register the hotel with the city clerk and obtain from him or her a "Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate" to be at all times posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. Such certificate shall, among other things, state the following: 
A.  The name of the operator; 
B.  The address of the hotel; 
C.  The date upon which the certificate was issued; 
D.  A statement that: 
"This Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax Ordinance by registering with the tax administrator for the purpose of collecting from transients the transient occupancy tax and remitting said tax to the tax administrator. This certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner, nor to operate a hotel without strictly complying with all local applicable laws, including but not limited to those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or office of this city. This certificate does not constitute a permit." 
(Prior code § 22-59)  
4.28.070 - Reporting and remitting tax. 
Each operator shall, on or before the last day of the month following the close of each calendar quarter, or at the close of any shorter reporting period which may be established by the tax administrator, make a return to the tax administrator, on forms provided by him or her, of the total rents charged and received and the amount of tax collected for transient occupancies. At the time the return is filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be remitted to the city clerk. The tax administrator may establish shorter reporting periods for any certificate holder if he or she deems it necessary in order to insure collection of the tax and he or she may further require information in the return. Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. All taxes collected by operators pursuant to this chapter shall be held in trust for the account of the city until payment thereof is made to the tax administrator. 
(Prior code § 22-60)  
4.28.080 - Penalties and interest. 
A.  Original Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty of ten (10) percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax. 
B.  Continued Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any delinquent remittance on or before a period of thirty (30) days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquent penalty of ten (10) percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax and the ten (10) percent penalty first imposed. 
C.  Fraud. If the tax administrator determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of twenty-five (25) percent of the amount of the tax is added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in subsections A and B of this section. 
D.  Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of one percent per month or a fraction thereof on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid. 
E.  Penalties Merged with Tax. Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this section shall become a part of the tax in this section required to be paid. 
(Prior code § 22-61)  
4.28.090 - Failure to collect and report tax—Determination of tax by tax administrator. 
If any operator shall fail or refuse to collect such tax and to make, within the time provided in this chapter, any report and remittance of such tax or any portion thereof required by this chapter, the city clerk shall proceed in such manner as he or she may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base his or her estimate of the tax due. As soon as the city clerk shall procure such facts and information as he or she is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this chapter and payable by any operator who has failed or refused to collect the same and to make such report and remittance, he or she shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this chapter. In case such determination is made, the city clerk shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed at his or her last known place of address. Such operator may within ten (10) days after the serving or mailing of such notice make application in writing to the city clerk for a hearing on the amount assessed. If application by the operator for a hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the tax, interest and penalties, if any, determined by the tax administrator shall become final and conclusive and immediately due and payable. If such application is made, the tax administrator shall give not less than five days' written notice in the manner prescribed in this chapter to the operator to show cause at a time and place fixed in such notice why the amount specified therein should not be fixed for such tax, interest and penalties. At such hearing the operator may appear and offer evidence why the specified tax, interest and penalties should not be so fixed. After such hearing the tax administrator shall determine the proper tax to be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the person in the manner prescribed in this chapter of such determination and the amount of such tax, interest and penalties. The amount determined to be due shall be payable after fifteen (15) days unless an appeal is taken as provided in Section 4.28.100. 
(Prior code § 22-62)  
4.28.100 - Appeals. 
Any operator aggrieved by any decision of the tax administrator with respect to the amount of such tax, interest and penalties, if any, may appeal to the council by filing a notice of appeal with the tax administrator within fifteen (15) days of the serving or mailing of the determination of tax due. The council shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal, and the tax administrator shall give notice in writing to such operator at his or her last known place of address. The findings of the council shall be final and conclusive and shall be served upon the appellant in the manner prescribed above for service of notice of hearing. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of notice. 
(Prior code § 22-63)  
4.28.110 - Records required—Right to inspect. 
It shall be the duty of every operator liable for the collection and payment to the city of any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of three years, all such records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he or she may have been liable for the collection of and payment to the city, which records the tax administrator shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. 
(Prior code § 22-64)  
4.28.120 - Refunds. 
A.  Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this chapter it may be refunded as provided in subsections B and C of this section provided a claim in writing therefor, stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the city clerk within three years of the date of payment. The claim shall be on forms furnished by the tax administrator. 
B.  An operator may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established in a manner prescribed by the tax administrator that the person from whom the tax has been collected was not a transient; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either been refunded to the transient or credited to rent subsequently payable by the transient to the operator. 
C.  A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid or paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city by filing a claim in the manner provided in subsection A of this section, but only when the tax was paid by the transient directly to the tax administrator, or when the transient having paid the tax to the operator, establishes to the satisfaction of the tax administrator that the transient has been unable to obtain a refund from the operator who collected the tax. 
D.  No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant establishes his or her right thereto by written records showing entitlement thereto. 
(Prior code § 22-65)  
4.28.130 - Actions to collect. 
Any tax required to be paid by any transient under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient to the city. Any such tax collected by an operator which has not been paid to the city shall be deemed a debt owed by the operator to the city. Any person owing money to the city under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such amount. 
(Prior code § 22-66)  
4.28.140 - Violations. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable therefor as provided by Section 1.08.010. 
Any operator or other person who fails or refuses to register as required in this chapter, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the city clerk, or who renders a false or fraudulent return or claim, is guilty of a misdemeanor, and is punishable as aforesaid. Any person required to make, render, sign or verify any report or claim, or who makes any false or fraudulent report or claim with intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due required by this chapter to be made, is guilty of a misdemeanor and is punishable as aforesaid. 
(Prior code § 22-67)  
Chapter 4.30 - UTILITY USERS TAX 
 
4.30.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter is enacted solely to raise revenue for the general governmental purposes of the city. All of the proceeds from the tax imposed by this chapter shall be placed in the city's general fund and used for the usual current expenses of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1017, § 1, 3-24-10)  
4.30.020 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall be construed as defined in this section. 
A.  "Ancillary telecommunication services" means services that are associated with or incidental to the provision, use or enjoyment of telecommunication services, including, but not limited to, the following services: 
1.  "Conference bridging service" means an ancillary service that links two or more participants of an audio or video conference call and may include the provision of a telephone number. Conference bridging service does not include the telecommunication services used to reach the conference bridge. 
2.  "Detailed telecommunications billing service" means an ancillary service of separately stating information pertaining to individual calls on a customer's billing statement. 
3.  "Directory assistance" means an ancillary service of providing telephone number information, and/or address information. 
4.  "Vertical service" means an ancillary service that is offered in connection with one or more telecommunication services, which offers advanced calling features that allow customers to identify callers and to manage multiple calls and call connections, including conference bridging services. 
5.  "Voice mail service" means an ancillary service that enables the customer to store, send or receive recorded messages. voice mail service does not include any vertical services that the customer may be required to have in order to utilize the voice mail service. 
B.  "Ancillary video services" shall mean services that are associated with or incidental to the provision or delivery of video services, including, but not limited to, electronic program guide services, search functions, recording services, interactive services or other communications services that are associated with or in incidental to the provision, use or enjoyment of video services. 
C.  "Billing address" shall mean the mailing address of the service user where the service supplier submits invoices or bills for payment by the customer. 
D.  "City" means the City of Coachella. 
E.  "City manager" means the city manager of city, or his or her authorized representative. 
F.  "Cogenerator" shall mean any corporation or person employing cogeneration (as defined in Section 216.6 of the California Public Utilities Code) for producing power for the generation of electricity for self use or sale to others from a qualified cogeneration facility (as defined in the federal Public Utility Regulatory Policies Act of 1978 and regulations thereunder). 
G.  "Communication services" means telecommunication services and ancillary telecommunication services. 
H.  "Gas" shall mean natural or manufactured gas or any alternate hydrocarbon fuel which may be substituted therefor. 
I.  "Mobile telecommunications service" has the same meaning and usage as set forth in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Act (4 U.S.C. Section 124) and the regulations thereunder. 
J.  "Month" means a calendar month. 
K.  "Municipal organization" shall mean an organization or association created by statute or by voluntary action, whose purpose is to facilitate the development and dissemination of uniform rulings or interpretations regarding the application of utility users taxes to communication services in the state. 
L.  "Nonutility supplier" shall mean: 
1.  A service supplier, other than a supplier of electric distribution services to all or a significant portion of the city, which generates electricity for sale to others, and shall include, but is not limited to, any publicly-owned electric utility, investor-owned utility, cogenerator, municipal utility district, federal power marketing authority, electric rural cooperative, or other supplier or seller of electricity; 
2.  An electric service provider (ESP), electricity broker, marketer, aggregator, pool operator, or other electricity supplier other than a supplier of electric distribution services to all or a significant portion of the city, which sells or supplies electricity or supplemental services to electricity users within the city; and 
3.  A gas service supplier, aggregator, marketer, or broker, other than a supplier of gas distribution services to all or a significant portion of the city, which sells or supplies gas to users within the city. 
M.  "Person" shall mean, without limitation, any natural individual, firm, trust, common law trust, estate, partnership of any kind, association, syndicate, club, joint stock company, joint venture, limited liability company, corporation (including foreign, domestic, and nonprofit), municipal district or municipal corporation (other than the city) cooperative, receiver, trustee, guardian, or other representative appointed by order of any court. 
N.  "Place of primary use" means the service address representative of where the customer's use of the communication service primarily occurs, which must be the residential street address or the primary business street address of the customer. 
O.  "Post-paid telecommunication service" means the telecommunication service obtained by making a payment on a communication-by-communication basis either through the use of a credit card or payment mechanism such as a bank card, travel card, credit card, or debit card, or by charge made to a service number which is not associated with the origination or termination of the telecommunication service. 
P.  "Prepaid telecommunication service" means the right to access telecommunication services, which must be paid for in advance and which enables the origination of communications using an access number or authorization code, whether manually or electronically dialed, and that is sold in predetermined units or dollars of which the number declines with use in a known amount. 
Q.  "Private telecommunication service" means a telecommunication service that entitles the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications channel or group of channels between or among termination points, regardless of the manner in which such channel or channels are connected, and includes switching capacity, extension lines, stations, and any other associated services that are provided in connection with the use of such channel or channels. A telecommunications channel is a physical or virtual path of telecommunications over which signals are transmitted between or among customer channel termination points (i.e., the location where the customer either inputs or receives the telecommunications). 
R.  "Service address" means the residential street address or the business street address of the service user. For a telecommunication service user, "service address" means any of the following: 
1.  The location of the telecommunication equipment from which the communication originates or terminates, regardless of where the communication is billed or paid; or, 
2.  If the location in subsection (1) of this definition is unknown (e.g., mobile telecommunications service or VoIP service), the service address means the location of the service user's place of primary use. 
3.  For prepaid telecommunication service, "service address" means the location associated with the service number. 
S.  "Service supplier" shall mean any person, including the city, that provides communication services, electricity, gas, water, sewer or refuse service to a user of such services within the city, and includes any person required to collect, or self-collect under section 4.30.070, and remit a tax as imposed by this chapter, including its billing agent in the case of electric, gas, or water service supplier. 
T.  "Service user" shall mean a person required to pay a tax imposed under the provisions of this chapter. 
U.  "State" shall mean the State of California. 
V.  "Streamlined sales and use tax agreement" shall mean the multistate agreement commonly known and referred to as the streamlined sales and use tax agreement, and as it is amended from time to time. 
W.  "Tax administrator" means the finance director of the city or his or her designee. 
X.  "Telecommunication services" means the transmission, conveyance, or routing of voice, data, audio, video, or any other information or signals to a point, or between or among points, whatever the technology used. The term "telecommunication services" includes such transmission, conveyance, or routing in which computer processing applications are used to act on the form, code or protocol of the content for purposes of transmission, conveyance or routing without regard to whether such services are referred to as voice over internet protocol (VoIP) services or are classified by the Federal Communications Commission as enhanced or value added, and includes video and/or data services that is functionally integrated with "telecommunication services". "Telecommunication services" include, but are not limited to, the following services, regardless of the manner or basis on which such services are calculated or billed: ancillary telecommunication services; mobile telecommunications service; prepaid telecommunication service; post-paid telecommunication service; private telecommunication service; paging service; 800 service (or any other toll-free numbers designated by the Federal Communications Commission); 900 service (or any other similar numbers designated by the Federal Communications Commission for services whereby subscribers who call in to pre-recorded or live service); and value-added nonvoice data service. 
Y.  "Value-added nonvoice data service" means a service that otherwise meets the definition of "telecommunication services" in which computer processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code, or protocol of the information or data primarily for a purpose other than transmission, conveyance or routing. 
Z.  "VoIP" (voice over internet protocol) shall mean the digital process of making and receiving real-time voice transmissions over any Internet protocol network. 
AA.  "800 service" shall mean a telecommunication service that allows a caller to dial a toll-free number without incurring a charge for the call. The service is typically marketed under the name "800", "855", "866", "877", and "888" toll-free calling, and any subsequent numbers designated by the Federal Communications Commission. 
BB.  "900 service" shall mean an inbound toll telecommunication service purchased by a subscriber that allows the subscriber's customers to call in to the subscriber's prerecorded announcement or live service. "900 service" does not include the charge for: collection services provided by the seller of the telecommunication service to the subscriber, or service or product sold by the subscriber to the subscriber's customer. The service is typically marketed under the name "900" service, and any subsequent numbers designated by the Federal Communications Commission." 
(Ord. No. 1017, § 1, 3-24-10)  
4.30.030 - Citizens oversight committee. 
A.  Citizens Oversight Committee Established. There shall be a citizens advisory committee called the "citizens oversight committee" (hereinafter "committee"), which shall annually review revenues and expenditures from the utility users taxes collected pursuant to this chapter. 
B.  Committee Membership. The committee shall have five citizen-members appointed by the city council. Committee members shall serve a term of four years. Terms shall be staggered. Appointees shall be residents of the city; however, no member of the committee shall be an elected official for any public entity whose jurisdiction encompasses, in whole or in part, the city. The police chief, fire chief, and one member of city council shall attend committee meetings, but shall not be voting members. 
C.  Committee Organization Procedures. The committee shall select one of its members as chairperson. The committee shall follow the rules of procedure of the city unless and until, upon the report and recommendation from the committee, the city council adopts a specific set of procedural rules for the committee. 
D.  Regular Meeting; Provision of Support Services and Information. The committee shall be subject to the provisions of the Brown Act (California Government Code sections 54950 et seq.) and shall meet at least once each calendar year. A regular meeting schedule shall be determined in accordance with the Brown Act and thereafter meetings shall be noticed by the city clerk. The city manager or his/her designee shall serve as executive staff to the committee. 
E.  Annual Report. The committee shall review an annual expense report of the city relative to activities funded with the tax monies. Not later than the last day of the sixth month following the end of each city fiscal year, the committee will present its findings and conclusions to the city council for its review. 
(Ord. No. 1017, § 1, 3-24-10)  
4.30.040 - Communication services users tax. 
A.  There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person in the city using communication services. The maximum tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of five percent of the charges made for such services and shall be collected from the service user by the communication service supplier or its billing agent. There is a rebuttable presumption that communication services, which services are capable of terminating a call to another person on the general telephone network, and which are billed to a billing address or service address in the city, are used, in whole or in part, within the city's boundaries, and such services are subject to taxation under this chapter. If the billing address of the service user is different from the service address, the service address of the service user shall be used for purposes of imposing the tax. As used in this section, the term "charges" shall include the value of any other services, credits, property of every kind or nature, or other consideration provided by the service user in exchange for the communication services. 
B.  "Mobile Telecommunications Service" shall be sourced in accordance with the sourcing rules set forth in the Federal Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Act (4 U.S.C. Section 124). The tax administrator may issue and disseminate to communication service suppliers, which are subject to the tax collection requirements of this chapter, sourcing rules for the taxation of other communication services, including, but not limited to, post-paid telecommunication services, prepaid telecommunication services, and private telecommunication services, provided that such rules are based upon custom and common practice that further administrative efficiency and minimize multi-jurisdictional taxation (e.g., streamlined sales and use tax agreement). 
C.  The tax administrator may issue and disseminate to communication service suppliers, which are subject to the tax collection requirements of this chapter, an administrative ruling identifying those communication services, or charges therefor, that are subject to the tax of subsection (A) above. This administrative ruling shall not impose a new tax, revise an existing tax methodology as stated in this section, or increase an existing tax, except as allowed by California Government Code Section 53750(h)(2). 
D.  As used in this section, the term "communication services" shall include, but not be limited to, charges for: connection, reconnection, termination, movement, or change of communication services; late payment fees; detailed billing; central office and custom calling features (including, but not limited to, call waiting, call forwarding, caller identification and three-way calling); voice mail and other messaging services; directory assistance; access and line charges; universal service charges; regulatory, administrative and other cost recovery charges; local number portability charges; and text messaging. As used in this section, the term "telecommunication services" shall not include separately stated charges for: installation or maintenance of wiring or equipment on a customer's premises and wire maintenance fees; sale or rental of tangible personal property; digital products delivered electronically, such as software, downloaded music, ring tones and reading materials; 911 surcharge; and sales for resale. 
E.  To facilitate the uniform interpretation and application of similar ordinance provisions in other local jurisdictions in the state, the tax administrator may, prior to issuing and disseminating a sourcing rule or an administrative tax ruling, submit its proposed sourcing rule or administrative tax ruling to a municipal organization for review and comment, according to the rules and procedures of that municipal organization, or its successor organization. 
F.  To prevent actual multi-jurisdictional taxation of communication services subject to tax under this section, any service user, upon proof to the tax administrator that the service user has previously paid the same tax in another state or city on such communication services, shall be allowed a credit against the tax imposed to the extent of the amount of such tax legally imposed in such other state or city; provided, however, the amount of credit shall not exceed the tax owed to the city under this section. 
G.  The tax on communication services imposed by this section shall be collected from the service user by the service supplier. The amount of tax collected in one month shall be remitted to the tax administrator, and must be received by the tax administrator on or before the twentieth day of the following month. 
(Ord. No. 1017, § 1, 3-24-10)  
4.30.050 - Electricity users tax. 
A.  There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person using electricity in the city. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of five percent of the charges made for such electricity, and for any supplemental services or other associated activities directly related and/or necessary for the provision of electricity to the end-user, which are provided by a service supplier or nonutility supplier to a service user. The tax shall be collected from the service user by the service supplier or nonutility supplier, or its billing agent. 
B.  As used in this section, the term "charges" shall apply to all services, components and items that are: i) necessary or common to the receipt, use and enjoyment of electric service; or, ii) currently, or historically have been, included in a single or bundled rate for electric service by a local distribution company to a class of retail customers. The term "charges" shall include, but is not limited to, the following charges: 
1.  Energy charges; 
2.  Distribution and transmission charges; 
3.  Metering charges; 
4.  Stand-by, reserves, firming, ramping, voltage support, regulation, emergency, or other similar minimum charges for services; 
5.  Customer charges, service establishment or reestablishment charges, demand charges, fuel or other cost adjustments, power exchange charges, independent system operator (ISO) charges, stranded investment or competitive transition charges (CTC), public purpose program charges, nuclear decommissioning charges, trust transfer amounts (bond financing charges), franchise fee, franchise surcharge, annual and monthly charges, and other charges, fees and surcharges which are necessary to or common for the receipt, use and enjoyment of electric service; and 
6.  Charges, fees, or surcharges for electricity services or programs, which are mandated by the California Public Utilities Commission, or the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, whether or not such charges, fees, or surcharges appear on a bundled or line item basis on the customer billing. 
C.  As used in this section, the term "charges" shall include the value of any other services, credits, property of every kind or nature, or other consideration provided by the service user in exchange for the electricity or services related to the provision of such electricity. 
D.  The tax administrator, from time to time, may survey the electricity service suppliers to identify the various unbundled billing components of electric retail service that they commonly provide to residential and commercial/industrial customers in the city, and the charges therefor, including those items that are mandated by state or federal regulatory agencies as a condition of providing such electric service. The tax administrator, thereafter, may issue and disseminate to such electric service suppliers an administrative ruling identifying those components and items which are: i) necessary or common to the receipt, use or enjoyment of electric service; or, ii) currently, or historically have been, included in a single or bundled rate for electric service by a local distribution company to a class of retail customers. Charges for such components and items shall be subject to the tax of subsection (A) above. 
E.  As used in this section, the term "using electrical energy" shall not be construed to mean the storage of such energy by a person in a battery owned or possessed by him or her for use in a automobile or other machinery or device apart from the premises upon which the energy was received; provided, however, that the term shall include the receiving of such energy for the purpose of using it in the charging of batteries; nor shall the term include electricity used and consumed by an electric public utility; nor shall the term include the mere receiving of such energy by an electric public utility or governmental agency at a point within the city for resale; or the use of such energy in the production or distribution of water by a public utility or a governmental agency. 
F.  The tax on electricity provided by self-production or by a nonutility supplier or an electric utility not under the jurisdiction of this chapter shall be collected and remitted in the manner set forth in section 4.30.070. All other taxes on charges for electricity imposed by this section shall be collected from the service user by the electric service supplier or its billing agent. The amount of the tax collected in one month shall be remitted to the tax administrator on or before the twentieth day of the following month or, at the option of the person required to collect or remit the tax, such person shall remit an estimated amount of the tax measured by the tax billed in the previous month or upon the payment pattern of the service user, which must be received by the tax administrator on or before the twentieth day of the following month, provided that the service user shall submit an adjusted payment or request for credit, as appropriate, within sixty (60) days following each calendar quarter. The credit, if approved by the tax administrator, may be applied against any subsequent tax bill that becomes due. 
(Ord. No. 1017, § 1, 3-24-10)  
4.30.060 - Gas users tax. 
A.  There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person using gas in the city, which is transported through a pipeline distribution system. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of five percent of the charges made for such gas, including all services related to the storage, transportation, and delivery of such gas. 
B.  As used in this section, the term "charges" shall apply to all services, components and items for gas service that are: i) necessary or common to the receipt, use and enjoyment of gas service; or, ii) currently, or historically have been, included in a single or bundled rate for gas service by a local distribution company to a class of retail customers. The term "charges" shall include, but is not limited to, the following charges: 
1.  The commodity charges for purchased gas, or the cost of gas owned by the service user (including the actual costs attributed to drilling, production, lifting, storage, gathering, trunkline, pipeline, and other operating costs associated with the production and delivery of such gas), which is delivered through a gas pipeline distribution system; 
2.  Gas transportation charges (including interstate charges to the extent not included in commodity charges); 
3.  Storage charges; provided, however, that the service supplier shall not be required to apply the tax to any charges for gas storage services when the service supplier cannot, as a practical matter, determine the jurisdiction where such stored gas is ultimately used; but it shall be the obligation of the service user to self-collect the amount of tax not applied to any charge for gas storage by the service supplier and to remit the tax to the appropriate jurisdiction; 
4.  Capacity or demand charges, service establishment or reestablishment charges, administrative charges, marketing charges, transition charges, customer charges, minimum charges, annual and monthly charges, and any other charges which are necessary or common to the receipt, use and enjoyment of gas service; and 
5.  Charges, fees, or surcharges for gas services or programs, which are mandated by the California Public Utilities Commission or the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, whether or not such charges, fees, or surcharges appear on a bundled or line item basis on the customer billing. 
C.  As used in this section, the term "charges" shall include the value of any other services, credits, property of every kind or nature, or other consideration provided by the service user in exchange for the gas or services related to the delivery of such gas. 
D.  The tax administrator, from time to time, may survey the gas service suppliers to identify the various unbundled billing components of gas retail service that they commonly provide to residential and commercial/industrial customers in the city, and the charges therefor, including those items that are mandated by state or federal regulatory agencies as a condition of providing such gas service. The tax administrator, thereafter, may issue and disseminate to such gas service suppliers an administrative ruling identifying those components and items which are: i) necessary or common to the receipt, use or enjoyment of gas service; or, ii) currently, or historically have been, included in a single or bundled rate for gas service by a local distribution company to a class of retail customers. Charges for such components and items shall be subject to the tax of subsection (A) above. 
E.  The following shall be excluded from the base on which the tax imposed in this section is computed: 
1.  Charges made for natural gas which is to be resold and delivered through mains and pipes; 
2.  Charges made for natural gas sold for use in the generation of electrical energy or for the production or distribution of water by a public utility or governmental agency; 
3.  Charges made by a gas utility for gas used and consumed in the conduct of business of gas public utilities; 
4.  Charges made for gas used in the propulsion of motor vehicles, as that phrase is defined in the vehicle code of the state, utilizing natural gas; and 
5.  Charges made for gas used by a nonutility supplier to generate electrical energy for its own use or for sale to others provided the electricity so generated is subject to the tax in accordance with section 4.30.070. 
F.  The tax on gas provided by self-production or by a nonutility supplier not under the jurisdiction of this chapter shall be collected and remitted in the manner set forth in section 4.30.070. All other taxes on charges for gas imposed by this section shall be collected from the service user by the gas service supplier or its billing agent. The amount of tax collected in one month shall be remitted to the tax administrator, and must be received by the tax administrator on or before the twentieth day of the following month; or, at the option of the person required to collect or remit the tax, such person shall remit an estimated amount of tax measured by the tax billed in the previous month or upon the payment pattern of the service user, which must be received by the tax administrator on or before the twentieth day of the following month, provided that the service user shall submit an adjusted payment or request for credit, as appropriate, within sixty (60) days following each calendar quarter. The credit, if approved by the tax administrator, may be applied against any subsequent tax bill that becomes due. 
(Ord. No. 1017, § 1, 3-24-10)  
4.30.070 - Collection of tax from service users receiving direct purchase of gas or electricity. 
A.  Any service user subject to the tax imposed by section 4.30.050 or section 4.30.060, which produces gas or electricity for self-use, or which receives gas or electricity directly from a nonutility supplier not under the jurisdiction of this ordinance, or which otherwise is not having the full tax due on the use of gas or electricity in the city that is directly billed and collected by the service supplier or its billing agent, shall report said fact to the tax administrator and shall remit the tax due directly to the tax administrator within thirty (30) days of such use. In lieu of paying said actual tax, the service user may, at its option, remit to the tax administrator within thirty (30) days of such use an estimated amount of tax measured by the tax billed in the previous month, or upon the pattern payment of similar customers of the service supplier using similar amounts of gas or electricity, provided that the service user shall submit an adjusted payment or request for credit, as appropriate, within sixty (60) days following each calendar quarter. The credit, if approved by the tax administrator, may be applied against any subsequent tax bill that becomes due. 
B.  The tax administrator may require said service user to identify its nonutility supplier and provide, subject to audit, invoices, books of account, or other satisfactory evidence documenting the quantity of gas or electricity used and the cost or price thereof. If the service user is unable to provide such satisfactory evidence, or, if the administrative cost of calculating the tax, in the opinion of the city, is excessive, the city may determine the tax by applying the tax rate to the equivalent charges the service user would have incurred if the gas or electricity used had been provided by the service supplier, which is the primary supplier of gas or electricity. 
(Ord. No. 1017, § 1, 3-24-10)  
4.30.080 - Water users tax. 
A.  There is imposed a tax upon every person using water in the city which is transported and delivered through a pipeline distribution system. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of five percent of the charges made for such water and shall be collected from the service user by the water service supplier, or its billing agent. 
B.  As used in this section, the term "charges" shall apply to all services, components and items that are: i) necessary for or common to the receipt, use or enjoyment of water service; or, ii) currently are or historically have been included in a single or bundled rate for water service by a local distribution company to a class of retail customers. The term "charges" shall include, but is not limited to, the following charges: 
1.  Water commodity charges (potable and nonpotable); 
2.  Distribution or transmission charges; 
3.  Metering charges; 
4.  Customer charges, late charges, service establishment or reestablishment charges, franchise fees, franchise surcharges, annual and monthly charges, and other charges, fees and surcharges which are necessary for or common to the receipt, use or enjoyment of water service; and 
5.  Charges, fees, or surcharges for water services or programs, which are mandated by a water district or a state or federal agency, whether or not such charges, fees, or surcharges appear on a bundled or line item basis on the customer billing. 
C.  As used in this section, the term "charges" shall include the value of any other services, credits, property of every kind or nature, or other consideration provided by the service user in exchange for the water services. 
D.  The tax administrator, from time to time, may survey the water service suppliers in the city to identify the various unbundled billing components of water retail service that they commonly provide to residential and commercial/industrial customers in the city, and the charges therefor, including those items that are mandated by a water district or a state or federal agency as a condition of providing such water service. The tax administrator, thereafter, may issue and disseminate to such water service suppliers an administrative ruling identifying those components and items which are: i) necessary for or common to the receipt, use or enjoyment of water service; or, ii) currently are or historically have been included in a single or bundled rate for water service by a local distribution company to a class of retail customers. Charges for such components and items shall be subject to the tax of subsection (A) above. 
E.  There shall be excluded from the base on which the tax imposed in this section is computed charges made for water which is to be resold and delivered through a pipeline distribution system; and charges made by a municipal water department, public utility or a county or municipal water district for water used and consumed by such department, utility or district in the conduct of the business of such department, utility or district. 
F.  The tax on water service imposed by this section shall be collected from the service user by the water service supplier or its billing agent. The amount of tax collected in one month shall be remitted to the tax administrator, and must be received by the tax administrator on or before the twentieth day of the following month. 
(Ord. No. 1017, § 1, 3-24-10)  
4.30.090 - Sewer user tax. 
A.  There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person in the city using sewer services provided by the city. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of five percent of the charges made for such sewer services at one location and shall be paid by the person paying for such sewer services. 
B.  The tax imposed in this section shall be collected from the service user by the city. If applicable, the amount of tax collected in one month shall be remitted to the tax administrator, and must be received by the tax administrator on or before the twentieth day of the following month. 
C.  The phrase "one location" as used in subsection (a) shall mean one or more contiguous sites for which the service user receives one or more utility billings. 
(Ord. No. 1017, § 1, 3-24-10)  
4.30.100 - Refuse hauling users tax. 
A.  There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person in the city receiving refuse hauling services from the city or any refuse hauler franchised by the city. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of five percent of the charges made for such service and shall be paid by the person paying for such refuse hauling service. 
B.  The tax imposed in this section shall be collected from the service user by the person furnishing the refuse hauling service. The amount of tax collected in one month shall be remitted to the tax administrator, and must be received by the tax administrator on or before the twentieth day of the following month. 
(Ord. No. 1017, § 1, 3-24-10)  
4.30.110 - Exemptions. 
The taxes imposed by this chapter shall not apply to: 
A.  Constitutional and Statutory Exemptions. 
1.  Any person or service user if imposition of such tax upon that person or service user would be in violation of a federal or state statute or the Constitution of the United States or the Constitution of the State of California, or otherwise exempted by this chapter; and 
2.  The city. 
B.  Special Exemptions. 
1.  Service users that meet both of the following criteria, and have demonstrated their compliance with the following criteria to the tax administrator's satisfaction, are hereby exempted from the utility users tax imposed by this chapter: 
(a)  Are at least sixty-five (65) years of age or older; and 
(b)  Where the combined gross income of all members of the service user's residence is less than the amount established for Riverside County by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development for very low income or extremely low-income families for the applicable household size. 
2.  The income exemption limit provided herein shall be revised annually by the tax administrator to conform to the most current very low income and extremely low-income limits for Riverside County for applicable household sizes, as determined by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) with regard to the Public Housing and Section 8 Program. 
C.  The exemptions granted by this section shall not eliminate the duty of the service supplier, nonutility supplier, or person to collect and remit utility user taxes for exempt persons, or the duty of exempt persons to pay such taxes, unless an exemption is applied for and granted in accordance with section 4.30.120. 
D.  This ordinance shall authorize the city to levy and collect a utility users tax up to a maximum of five percent of the charges made for any gas, electric, communications, video, sewer, refuse or water services used by any service user within the city, except where any such service user or utility service is made expressly exempt from utility users tax by this chapter. Notwithstanding the above, the city council is hereby expressly authorized, by order or resolution, to establish classes of persons or classes of utility service otherwise subject to payment of utility users tax imposed by this chapter, and to suspend the collection of utility users tax, in whole or in part, from such classes of persons or utility service, and may, from time to time, modify any such order or resolution, provided that no order or resolution of the city council shall result in the collection of utility users tax from any service user in the city for any class of utility service in excess of five percent of the charges made for such utility service. 
(Ord. No. 1017, § 1, 3-24-10)  
4.30.120 - Application for exemption. 
A.  Any service user that is exempt from the tax imposed by this chapter or from whom the city council has suspended collection of the tax imposed by this chapter pursuant to subsection 4.30.120(D) shall file an application with the tax administrator for said exemption or suspension; provided, however, this requirement shall not apply to a service user that is a state or federal agency or subdivision with a commonly recognized name. Said application shall be made upon a form approved by the tax administrator and shall state those facts, declared under penalty of perjury, which qualify the applicant for an exemption or suspension, and shall include the names of all utility service suppliers serving that service user. If deemed subject to an exemption or suspension by the tax administrator, such service user shall give the tax administrator timely written notice of any change in utility service suppliers so that the tax administrator can properly notify the new utility service supplier of the service user's tax exempt or suspended status. A service user that fails to comply with this section shall not be entitled to a refund of utility users taxes collected and remitted to the tax administrator from such service user as a result of such noncompliance. Upon request of the tax administrator, a service supplier or nonutility supplier, or their billing agents, shall provide a list of names and addresses of those customers which, according to their billing records, are deemed exempt or suspended from the payment of utility users tax. 
B.  The decision of the tax administrator may be appealed pursuant to section 4.30.230. Filing an application pursuant to section 4.30.230 and appeal to the city manager pursuant to section 4.30.230 is a prerequisite to a suit thereon. 
C.  Following application and approval of any exemption or suspension from the payment of all or any part of the utility users tax by the city, the tax administrator shall prepare a list of the persons exempted or suspended from the payment of such tax by virtue of this section and shall furnish a copy thereof to each service supplier. 
D.  Any service user who has been exempted or suspended from the collection of utility users tax pursuant to this section shall notify the tax administrator within ten (10) calendar days following a change in facts or circumstances which may disqualify said service user from receiving such exemption or suspension. It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to knowingly receive the benefits of an exemption or suspension provided by this section when the basis for such exemption or suspension does not exist or ceases to exist. 
(Ord. No. 1017, § 1, 3-24-10)  
4.30.130 - Substantial nexus/minimum contacts. 
A.  For purposes of imposing a tax or establishing a duty to collect and remit a tax under this chapter, "substantial nexus" and "minimum contacts" shall be construed broadly in favor of the imposition, collection and/or remittance of the utility users tax to the fullest extent permitted by state and federal law, and as it may change from time to time by judicial interpretation or by statutory enactment. Any communication service (including VoIP) used by a person with a service address in the city, which service is capable of terminating a call to another person on the general telephone network, shall be subject to a rebuttable presumption that "substantial nexus/minimum contacts" exists for purposes of imposing a tax, or establishing a duty to collect and remit a tax, under this chapter. A service supplier shall be deemed to have sufficient activity in the city for tax collection and remittance purposes if its activities include, but are not limited to, any of the following: maintains or has within the city, directly or through an agent or subsidiary, a place of business of any nature; solicits business in the city by employees, independent contractors, resellers, agents or other representatives; solicits business in the city on a continuous, regular, seasonal or systematic basis by means of advertising that is broadcast or relayed from a transmitter with the city or distributed from a location with the city; or advertises in newspapers or other periodicals printed and published within the city or through materials distributed in the city by means other than the United States mail. 
B.  The city shall make available, upon request, an accurate description of its jurisdictional boundaries based on street addresses, in an electronic format. If a service supplier relies upon such information provided by city, it shall not be responsible for any errors in taxation that may result. 
(Ord. No. 1017, § 1, 3-24-10)  
4.30.140 - Duty to collect—Procedures. 
The duty to collect and remit the taxes imposed by this chapter shall be performed as follows: 
A.  The tax shall be collected insofar as practicable at the time and along with the charges made in accordance with the regular billing practices of the service supplier. Where the amount paid by a service user to a service supplier is less than the full amount of the charge and tax which has accrued for the billing period, such amount and any subsequent payments by a service user may be applied to the utility service charge first until such charge has been fully satisfied. Any remaining balance shall be applied to the taxes due, except in those cases where a service user pays the full amount of the charges but notifies the service supplier of his or her refusal to pay the tax imposed on the charges. 
B.  The duty to collect tax from a service user shall commence with the beginning of the first full regular billing period applicable to the service user where all charges normally included in such regular billing are subject to the provisions of this chapter. Where a person receives more than one billing, one or more being for different periods than another, the duty to collect shall arise separately for each billing. 
C.  Bundling rule. If any nontaxable charges are bundled with and not separately stated from taxable service charges on the customer bill or invoice of a service supplier, the combined charge is subject to tax unless the service supplier identifies, by reasonable and verifiable standards, the portions of the combined charge that are nontaxable and taxable through the service supplier's books and records kept in the regular course of business, and in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and not created and maintained for tax purposes. The service supplier has the burden of proving the proper apportionment of taxable and nontaxable charges. If the service supplier offers a combination of taxable and non-taxable services, and the charges are separately stated, then for taxation purposes, the values assigned the taxable and non-taxable services shall be based on its books and records kept in the regular course of business and in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and not created and maintained for tax purposes. The service supplier has the burden of proving the proper valuation of the taxable and nontaxable services. 
(Ord. No. 1017, § 1, 3-24-10)  
4.30.150 - Filing return and payment. 
Each person required by this chapter to remit a tax shall file a return to the tax administrator, on forms approved by the tax administrator on or before the due date. The full amount of the tax collected shall be included with the return and filed with the tax administrator. The tax administrator is authorized to require such additional information as he/she deems necessary to determine if the tax is being levied, collected, and remitted in accordance with this chapter. Returns are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. Pursuant to Revenue and Tax Code Section 7284.6, the tax administrator, and its agents, shall maintain such filing returns as confidential information exempt from disclosure provisions of the Public Records Act. 
(Ord. No. 1017, § 1, 3-24-10)  
4.30.160 - Collection penalties. 
A.  Taxes collected from a service user, or self-collected by a service user subject to section 4.30.070, are delinquent if not received by the tax administrator on or before the due date. Should the due date occur on a weekend or legal holiday, the return must be received by the tax administrator on or before the first regular working day following the weekend or legal holiday. A direct deposit, including electronic fund transfers and other similar methods of electronically exchanging monies between financial accounts, made by a service supplier in satisfaction of its obligations under this subsection shall be considered timely if the transfer is initiated on or before the due date, and the transfer settles into the city's account on or before the following business day. 
B.  If a service supplier, or a service user subject to section 4.30.070, fails to remit any tax collected, on or before the due date, said person shall pay a penalty for such delinquencies at the rate as set forth by resolution of the city council of the total tax that is delinquent in the remittance, and shall pay interest at the rate as set forth by resolution of the city council, on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent, until paid. 
C.  The tax administrator shall have the power to impose additional penalties upon persons required to collect and/or remit taxes pursuant to the provisions of this chapter for fraud or gross negligence in reporting or remitting at the rate as set forth by resolution of the city council of the amount of the tax collected and/or required to be remitted, or as recomputed by the tax administrator. 
D.  For collection purposes only, every penalty imposed and such interest that is accrued under the provisions of this section shall become a part of the tax herein required to be paid. 
E.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the tax administrator may, in his or her discretion, modify the due dates of this chapter to be consistent with any uniform standards or procedures that are mutually agreed upon by UUT public agencies, or otherwise legally established, to create a UUT central payment location or mechanism. 
(Ord. No. 1017, § 1, 3-24-10)  
4.30.170 - Deficiency determination and assessment—Tax application errors. 
A.  The tax administrator shall make a deficiency determination if he or she determines that any person required to collect or self-collect taxes pursuant to the provisions of this chapter has failed to collect and remit the proper amount of tax by improperly or failing to apply the tax to one or more taxable services or charges. 
B.  The tax administrator shall mail a notice of such deficiency determination to the person required to pay or remit the tax, which notice shall refer briefly to the amount of the taxes owed, plus interest at the rate as set forth by resolution of the city council, on the amount of the tax from the date on which the tax should have been received by the city. Within fourteen (14) calendar days after the date of service of such notice, the person may request in writing to the tax administrator for a hearing on the matter. If the person fails to request a hearing within the prescribed time period, the amount of the deficiency determination shall become a final assessment, and shall immediately be due and owing to the city. 
C.  If the person requests a hearing, the tax administrator shall cause the matter to be set for hearing, which shall be held within thirty (30) days after receipt of the written request for hearing. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be mailed by the tax administrator to such person at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the hearing, and, if the tax administrator desires said person to produce specific records at such hearing, such notice may designate the records requested to be produced. 
D.  At the time fixed for the hearing, the tax administrator shall hear all relevant testimony and evidence, including that of any other interested parties. At the discretion of the tax administrator, the hearing may be continued from time to time for the purpose of allowing the presentation of additional evidence. Within a reasonable time following the conclusion of the hearing, the tax administrator shall issue a final assessment (or nonassessment), thereafter, by confirming, modifying or rejecting the original deficiency determination, and shall mail a copy of such final assessment to person owing the tax. The decision of the tax administrator may be appealed pursuant to section 4.30.230. Filing an application pursuant to section 4.30.230 and appeal to the city manager pursuant to section 4.30.230 is a prerequisite to a suit thereon. 
E.  Payment of the final assessment shall become delinquent if not received by the tax administrator on or before the thirtieth day following the date of receipt of the notice of final assessment. The penalty for delinquency shall be at the rate as set forth by resolution of the city council on the total amount of the assessment, along with interest at the rate as set forth by resolution of the city council, on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date of delinquency, until paid. The applicable statute of limitations regarding a claim by the city seeking payment of a tax assessed under this section 4.30.170 shall commence from the date of delinquency as provided in this subsection (E). 
F.  All notices under this section may be sent by regular mail, postage prepaid, and shall be deemed received on the third calendar day following the date of mailing, as established by a proof of mailing. 
(Ord. No. 1017, § 1, 3-24-10)  
4.30.180 - Administrative remedy—Nonpaying service users. 
A.  Whenever the tax administrator determines that a service user has deliberately withheld the amount of the tax owed by the service user from the amounts remitted to a person required to collect the tax, or whenever the tax administrator deems it in the best interest of the city, he or she may relieve such person of the obligation to collect the taxes due under this chapter from certain named service users for specific billing periods. Whenever the service user has failed to pay the amount of tax owed for a period of two or more billing periods, the service supplier shall be relieved of the obligation to collect taxes due. The service supplier shall provide the city with the names and addresses of such service users and the amounts of taxes owed under the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  In addition to the tax owed, the service user shall pay a delinquency penalty at the rate as set forth by resolution of the city council of the total tax that is owed, and shall pay interest at the rate as set forth by resolution of the city council, on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the due date, until paid. 
C.  The tax administrator shall notify the nonpaying service user that the tax administrator has assumed the responsibility to collect the taxes due for the stated periods and demand payment of such taxes, including penalties and interest. The notice shall be served on the service user by personal delivery or by deposit of the notice in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the service user at the address to which billing was made by the person required to collect the tax; or, should the service user have a change of address, to his or her last known address. 
D.  If the service user fails to remit the tax to the tax administrator within thirty (30) days from the date of the service of the notice upon him or her, the tax administrator may impose an additional penalty of fifteen (15) percent of the amount of the total tax that is owed. 
(Ord. No. 1017, § 1, 3-24-10)  
4.30.190 - Actions to collect. 
Any tax required to be paid by a service user under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the service user to the city. Any such tax collected from a service user which has not been remitted to the tax administrator shall be deemed a debt owed to the city by the person required to collect and remit and shall no longer be a debt of the service user. Any person owing money to the city under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such amount, including penalties and interest as provided for in this chapter, along with any collection costs incurred by the city as a result of the person's noncompliance with this chapter, including, but not limited to, reasonable attorneys fees and court costs. 
(Ord. No. 1017, § 1, 3-24-10)  
4.30.200 - Additional powers and duties of tax administrator. 
A.  The tax administrator shall have the power and duty, and is hereby directed, to enforce each and all of the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  The tax administrator may adopt administrative rules and regulations not inconsistent with provisions of this chapter for the purpose of interpreting, clarifying, carrying out and enforcing the payment, collection and remittance of the taxes herein imposed. A copy of such administrative rules and regulations shall be on file in the tax administrator's office. 
C.  Upon a proper showing of good cause, the tax administrator may make administrative agreements, with appropriate conditions, to vary from the strict requirements of this chapter and thereby: 
1.  Conform to the billing procedures of a particular service supplier (or service user subject to section 4.30.070) so long as said agreements result in the collection of the tax in conformance with the general purpose and scope of this chapter; or 
2.  To avoid a hardship where the administrative costs of collection and remittance greatly outweigh the tax benefit. 
A copy of each such agreement shall be on file in the tax administrator's office, and are voidable by the tax administrator or the city at any time. 
D.  The tax administrator may conduct an audit, to ensure proper compliance with the requirements of this chapter, of any person required to collect and/or remit a tax pursuant to this chapter. The tax administrator shall notify said person of the initiation of an audit in writing. In the absence of fraud or other intentional misconduct, the audit period of review shall not exceed a period of three years next preceding the date of receipt of the written notice by said person from the tax administrator. upon completion of the audit, the tax administrator may make a deficiency determination pursuant to section 4.30.170 for all taxes, penalties and interest owed and not paid, as evidenced by information provided by such person to the tax administrator. If said person is unable or unwilling to provide sufficient records to enable the tax administrator to verify compliance with this chapter, the tax administrator is authorized to make a reasonable estimate of the deficiency. Said reasonable estimate shall be entitled to a rebuttable presumption of correctness. 
E.  Upon receipt of a written request of a taxpayer, and for good cause, the tax administrator may extend the time for filing any statement required pursuant to this chapter for a period of not to exceed forty-five (45) days, provided that the time for filing the required statement has not already passed when the request is received. No penalty for delinquent payment shall accrue by reason of such extension. Interest shall accrue during said extension at the rate of three-quarters of one percent per month, prorated for any portion thereof. 
F.  The tax administrator shall determine the eligibility of any person who asserts a right to exemption from, or a refund of, the tax imposed by this chapter. 
G.  The tax administrator or the city manager, with the written approval of the city attorney, may compromise a claim pursuant to this chapter where the portion of the claim proposed to be released is less than the amount set by separate resolution of the city council relating to the settlement of general liability claims against the city and, with the approval of the city attorney and the city council, may compromise such a claim where the portion proposed to be released is equal to or greater than the amount set by separate resolution of the city council relating to the settlement of general liability claims against the city by the city manager. 
H.  Notwithstanding any provision in this chapter to the contrary, the tax administrator may waive any penalty or interest imposed upon a person required to collect and/or remit for failure to collect the tax imposed by this chapter if the noncollection occurred in good faith. In determining whether the noncollection was in good faith, the tax administrator shall take into consideration industry practice or other precedence. 
(Ord. No. 1017, § 1, 3-24-10)  
4.30.210 - Records. 
A.  It shall be the duty of every person required to collect and/or remit to the city any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of at least three years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he/she may have been liable for the collection of and remittance to the tax administrator, which records the tax administrator, or the tax administrator's designated representative, shall have the right to inspect at a reasonable time. 
B.  The city may issue an administrative subpoena to compel a person to deliver, to the tax administrator, copies of all records deemed necessary by the tax administrator to establish compliance with this chapter, including the delivery of records in a common electronic format on readily available media if such records are kept electronically by the person in the usual and ordinary course of business. As an alternative to delivering the subpoenaed records to the tax administrator on or before the due date provided in the administrative subpoena, such person may provide access to such records outside the city on or before the due date, provided that such person shall reimburse the city for all reasonable travel expenses incurred by the city to inspect those records, including travel, lodging, meals, and other similar expenses, but excluding the normal salary or hourly wages of those persons designated by the city to conduct the inspection. 
C.  The tax administrator is authorized to execute a nondisclosure agreement approved by the city attorney to protect the confidentiality of customer information pursuant to California Revenue and Tax Code Sections 7284.6 and 7284.7. The tax administrator, or the tax administrator's designated representative, may request from a person providing transportation services of gas or electricity to service users within the city a list of the names and addresses, and other pertinent information, of its transportation customers within the city pursuant to Section 6354(e) of the California Public Utilities Code. 
D.  If a service supplier uses a billing agent or billing aggregator to bill, collect, and/or remit the tax, the service supplier shall: 
1.  Provide to the tax administrator the name, address and telephone number of each billing agent and billing aggregator currently authorized by the service supplier to bill, collect, and/or remit the tax to the city; and 
2.  Upon request of the tax administrator, deliver, or effect the delivery of, any information or records in the possession of such billing agent or billing aggregator that, in the opinion of the tax administrator, is necessary to verify the proper application, calculation, collection and/or remittance of such tax to the city. 
E.  If any person subject to record-keeping under this section unreasonably denies the tax administrator, or the tax administrator's designated representative, access to such records, or fails to produce the information requested in an administrative subpoena within the time specified, then the tax administrator may impose a penalty of five hundred dollars ($500.00) on such person for each day following: 
1.  The initial date that the person refuses to provide such access; or 
2.  The due date for production of records as set forth in the administrative subpoena. 
This penalty shall be in addition to any other penalty imposed under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1017, § 1, 3-24-10)  
4.30.220 - Refunds. 
Whenever the amount of any tax has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the tax administrator under this chapter, it may be refunded as provided in this section: 
A.  The tax administrator or city manager may refund any tax that has been overpaid, paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the tax administrator under this chapter, provided that no refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant or his or her guardian, conservator, executor or administrator has submitted a written claim, under penalty of perjury, to the tax collector. The period for filing a claim for refund shall be one year from the time the tax was paid or erroneously or illegally collected; provided however, that in no event shall the period to file such claim expire prior to the shortest period allowable for filing a tax refund claim under Title 1, Division 3.6, Part 3, Section 911.2 of the California Government Code. Such claim must clearly establish claimant's right to the refund by written records showing entitlement thereto, and must clearly set forth the facts and legal theories under which the claimant believes he or she has right to a refund. Nothing herein shall permit the filing of a refund claim on behalf of a class or group of taxpayers. Where the amount of any individual refund claim is in excess of the amount set by separate resolution of the city council relating to the settlement of general liability claims against the city by the tax administrator or city manager, city council approval shall be required. 
B.  The filing of a written claim pursuant to Government Code Section 935 is a prerequisite to any suit thereon. Any action brought against the city pursuant to this section shall be subject to the provisions of Government Code Sections 945.6 and 946. 
C.  Notwithstanding the notice provisions of subsection (A) of this section, a service supplier that has collected any amount of tax in excess of the amount of tax imposed by this chapter and actually due from a service user (whether due to overpayment or erroneous or illegal collection of said tax), may refund such amount to the service user, or credit to charges subsequently payable by the service user to the service supplier, and claim credit for such overpayment against the amount of tax which is due upon any other monthly returns to the tax administrator, provided such credit is claimed in a return dated no later than one year from the date of overpayment or erroneous or illegal collection of said tax. The tax administrator shall determine the validity of the service user's claim of credit, and the underlying basis for such claim. 
D.  Notwithstanding the notice provisions of subsection (A) of this section, in the event that a service supplier, or a person required to self-impose a tax imposed by this chapter, remits a tax to the city in excess of the amount of tax imposed by this chapter, said service supplier, or a person required to self-impose a tax imposed by this chapter, may claim credit for such overpayment against the amount of tax which is due upon any other monthly returns to the tax administrator, provided such credit is claimed in a return dated no later than one year from the date of overpayment of said tax, and provided that the finance director shall first determine the validity of the service user's claim of credit, and the underlying basis for such claim. 
(Ord. No. 1017, § 1, 3-24-10)  
4.30.230 - Appeals. 
A.  The provisions of this section apply to any decision (other than a decision relating to a refund pursuant to section 4.30.220), deficiency determination, assessment, or administrative ruling of the tax administrator. Any person aggrieved by any decision (other than a decision relating to a refund pursuant to section 4.30.220), deficiency determination, assessment, or administrative ruling of the tax administrator, shall be required to comply with the appeals procedure of this section. Compliance with this section shall be a prerequisite to a suit thereon. Nothing herein shall permit the filing of a claim or action on behalf of a class or group of taxpayers. 
B.  If any person is aggrieved by any decision (other than a decision relating to a refund pursuant to section 4.30.220), deficiency determination, assessment, or administrative ruling of the tax administrator; he or she may appeal to the city manager by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within fourteen (14) days of the date of the decision, deficiency determination, assessment, or administrative ruling of the tax administrator which aggrieved the service user or service supplier. 
C.  The matter shall be set for hearing no more than thirty (30) days from the receipt of the appeal. The appellant shall be served with notice of the time and place of the hearing, as well as any relevant materials, at least five (5) calendar days prior to the hearing. The hearing may be continued from time to time upon mutual consent. At the time of the hearing, the appealing party, the tax administrator, the city manager, and any other interested person may present such relevant evidence as he or she may have relating to the determination from which the appeal is taken. 
D.  Based upon the submission of such evidence and the review of the city's files, the city manager shall issue a written notice and order upholding, modifying or reversing the determination from which the appeal is taken. The notice shall be given within fourteen (14) days after the conclusion of the hearing and shall state the reasons for the decision. The notice shall specify that the decision is final and that any petition for judicial review shall be filed within ninety (90) days from the date of the decision in accordance with Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6. If the city manager fails or refuses to act on a refund claim within the fourteen-day period, the claim shall be deemed to have been rejected by the city manager on the fourteenth day. 
E.  All notices under this section may be sent by regular mail, postage prepaid, and shall be deemed received on the third calendar day following the date of mailing, as established by a proof of mailing. 
(Ord. No. 1017, § 1, 3-24-10)  
4.30.240 - No injunction/writ of mandate. 
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action, or proceeding in any court against this city or against any officer of the city to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected and/or remitted. 
(Ord. No. 1017, § 1, 3-24-10)  
4.30.250 - Remedies cumulative. 
All remedies and penalties prescribed by this chapter or which are available under any other provision of law or equity, including, but not limited to, the California False Claims Act (Government Code Section 12650 et seq.) and the California Unfair Practices Act (Business and Professions Code Section 17070 et seq.), are cumulative. The use of one or more remedies by the city shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1017, § 1, 3-24-10)  
4.30.260 - Notice of changes to ordinance. 
If a tax under this chapter is added, repealed, increased, reduced, or the tax base is changed, the tax administrator shall follow the notice requirements of California Public Utilities Code Section 799. Prior to the effective date of the ordinance change, the service supplier shall provide the tax administrator with a copy of any written procedures describing the information that the service supplier needs to implement the ordinance change. If the service supplier fails to provide such written instructions, the tax administrator, or his or her agent, shall send, by first class mail, a copy of the ordinance change to all collectors and remitters of the city's utility users taxes according to the latest payment records of the tax administrator. 
(Ord. No. 1017, § 1, 3-24-10)  
4.30.270 - Penalties. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, or an infraction at the discretion of the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 1017, § 1, 3-24-10)  
4.30.280 - Future amendment to cited statute. 
Unless specifically provided otherwise, any reference to a state or federal statute in this chapter shall mean such statute as it may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1017, § 1, 3-24-10)  
4.30.290 - Independent audit of tax collection, exemption, remittance, and expenditure. 
The city shall annually verify that the taxes owed under this chapter have been properly expended according to applicable municipal law. The annual verification shall be performed by a qualified independent third party and the review shall employ reasonable, cost-effective steps to assure compliance, including the use of sampling audits. The verification shall not be required of tax remitters where the cost of the verification may exceed the tax revenues to be reviewed. 
(Ord. No. 1017, § 1, 3-24-10)  
Chapter 4.31 - CANNABIS/MARIJUANA BUSINESS TAX 
 
4.31.010 - Imposition of tax. 
A.  Every person engaged in operating or otherwise conducting a cannabis business within the city of Coachella, and regardless of whether such business has a permit pursuant to Chapters 5.68, 17.85 or any other provision of this code, shall pay the following cannabis business tax: 
1.  Up to a maximum of six cents for each dollar ($1.00) of gross receipts or fractional part thereof, whether at wholesale or retail, subject to adjustment by the city council pursuant to Section 4.31.050; and 
2.  Up to a maximum of fifteen dollars ($15.00) per square foot of space utilized in connection with the cultivation/manufacturing of cannabis or cannabis-infused products, subject to adjustment by the city council pursuant to Section 4.31.050. 
B.  No cannabis business shall be deemed to be exempt from the payment of the taxes identified above by any other provision of this code, unless expressly exempted under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1101, § 1, 11-18-16)  
4.31.020 - Purpose of tax. 
The purpose of this tax is to raise revenue to fund general government services. 
(Ord. No. 1101, § 1, 11-18-16)  
4.31.030 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter: 
A.  "Cannabis" means all parts of the plant Cannabis Sativa Linnaeus, Cannabis Indica, or Cannabis Ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. "Cannabis" also means the separated resin, whether crude or purified, obtained from marijuana. "Cannabis" also means "marijuana" as defined by Section 11018 of the Health and Safety Code. 
B.  A "Cannabis business" means any business, organization or facility, regardless of form, whether operating for profit or not for profit, where cannabis is planted, grown, harvested, dried, cured, graded, trimmed, stored, tested, manufactured, compounded, converted or processed into cannabis-infused products (e.g.: tinctures, oils, creams, candies and "medibles"), packaged, prepared, labeled, distributed, delivered, sold at retail or wholesale, or transported, or that does all or any combination of those activities. 
C.  "Gross receipts" means the total amount of monetary consideration actually received or receivable by a cannabis business for providing, at wholesale or retail, cannabis and cannabis-infused products, overhead costs, operating expenses, or related services whatsoever, including, but not limited to: membership dues, the value of monetary and in-kind contributions, payments, reimbursement of fees for cultivation, manufacturing, distribution, dispensing, storing, exchanging, processing, delivering, making available, or transmitting of cannabis or cannabis-infused products, any payments made, and anything else of value obtained by a cannabis business. Included in "gross receipts" shall be all receipts, cash, credits, and property of any kind without deduction of the cost of the property sold, the cost of the materials used, labor or service costs, interest paid or payable, or losses or other expenses whatsoever. 
D.  "Person" means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate or any other group or combination acting as a unit, which is conducting itself as a cannabis business. 
E.  "Space utilized in connection with the cultivation/manufacturing of cannabis or cannabis-infused products" means any space or ground, floor or other surface area (whether horizontal or vertical) which is used for either or both of the following: 
1.  Cannabis germination, seeding, vegetation, pre-flowering, flowering and harvesting; including without limitation activities such as growing, planting, lighting, warming, cooling, aerating, fertilizing, watering, irrigating, topping, pinching, cropping, curing or drying cannabis, as well as storing any products, supplies or equipment related to any such activities, no matter where such storage may take place or such storage space may be located. 
2.  The manufacture or processing of cannabis for wholesale or retail sale or into cannabis-infused products (e.g.: tinctures, oils and "medibles") for wholesale or retail sale, including compounding, converting, testing, packaging, preparing, labeling, distribution or transport, or all or any combination of those activities. 
(Ord. No. 1101, § 1, 11-18-16)  
4.31.040 - Payment obligation. 
All taxpayers subject to this chapter must pay the full tax imposed by this chapter regardless of any rebate, exemption, incentive, or other reduction set forth elsewhere in this Code, except as required by California or federal law. Failure to pay the tax shall be subject to penalties, interest charges, and assessments as the city council may establish and the city may use any or all other code enforcement remedies provided in this code. No provision in this code can lower the tax rate set forth in this chapter or otherwise reduce the amount of taxes paid hereunder unless the provision specifically states that the reduction applies. 
(Ord. No. 1101, § 1, 11-18-16)  
4.31.050 - City council authorization to adjust tax rate and/or methodology. 
The city council may impose the tax authorized by this chapter at a lower rate and may otherwise repeal or amend this chapter without a vote of the people. However, as required by California Constitution Article XIIIC (Proposition 218), voter approval is required for any amendment that would increase the maximum rate or methodology of any tax levied pursuant to this chapter. The people of the city of Coachella affirm that the following actions shall not constitute an increase of the maximum rate or methodology of the tax requiring subsequent voter approval: 
A.  The restoration of the rate of the tax to a rate that is no higher than the maximum set by this voter-approved chapter, if the city council has previously acted to reduce the rate of the tax; 
B.  An action that interprets or clarifies the methodology of the tax, or any definition applicable to the tax, so long as interpretation or clarification (even if contrary to some prior interpretation or clarification) is not inconsistent with the language of this chapter; 
C.  The establishment of a class of person or service that is exempt or excepted from the tax or the discontinuation of any such exemption or exception; and 
D.  Resuming collection of the tax imposed by this chapter, even if the city had, for some period of time, either suspended collection of the tax or otherwise failed to collect the tax, in whole or in part. 
(Ord. No. 1101, § 1, 11-18-16)  
4.31.060 - Payment of tax does not authorize illegal activity. 
The payment of the tax required pursuant to this chapter shall not be construed as authorizing the conduct or continuance of any illegal business or of a legal business in an illegal manner. Nothing in this chapter implies or authorizes that any activity connected with the distribution or possession of cannabis is legal unless otherwise authorized and allowed in strict and full conformance to the provisions of this Code, including without limitation the provisions of Chapters 5.68 and 17.85. 
(Ord. No. 1101, § 1, 11-18-16)  
4.31.070 - Cannabis cultivation/manufacturing tax is not a sales tax. 
The tax provided for under the provisions of this chapter is not a sales, transactions or use tax and shall not be calculated or assessed as such. The tax established under this chapter shall not be separately identified or otherwise specifically assessed or charged to any client of a cannabis business. 
(Ord. No. 1101, § 1, 11-18-16)  
4.31.080 - Amendments and administration. 
A.  This chapter was submitted to the voters for approval. Any amendment to this chapter to increase the tax above the maximum rate expressly provided in Section 4.31.010 shall not become effective until such amendment is approved by the voters. The voters expressly authorize the city council to amend, modify, change, or revise any other provision of this chapter as the city council deems in the best interest of the city, as set forth in Section 4.31.050. 
B.  The city manager or the city manager's designee shall promulgate rules, regulations and procedures to implement and administer this chapter to ensure the efficient and timely collection of the tax imposed by this chapter, including without limitation, formulation and implementation of penalties and interest to be assessed for failure to pay the tax as provided. 
C.  The city manager or the city manager's designee shall annually audit the taxes imposed by this chapter to verify that tax revenues have been properly expended in accordance with the law. 
D.  Pursuant to California Constitution Article XIIIB, the appropriation limit for the city is increased to the maximum extent over the maximum period of time allowed under law consistent with the revenues generated by the tax established by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1101, § 1, 11-18-16)  
4.31.090 - Returns and remittances. 
The tax shall be due and payable as follows: 
A.  The tax established by this chapter shall be collected quarterly. Each person owing tax shall prepare and file a tax return to the city manager setting out the total amount of tax owed for the preceding calendar quarter during which the tax was in effect. The return shall be filed not later than thirty (30) calendar days following the last day of the preceding each calendar quarter. At the time the tax return is filed, the full amount of the tax owed for the preceding calendar quarter shall be remitted to the city manager. 
B.  All tax returns shall be completed on forms provided by the director of finance. 
C.  Tax returns and payments for all outstanding taxes owed the city are immediately due to the city manager upon cessation of business for any reason. 
D.  Whenever any payment, statement, report, request or other communication received by the city manager is received after the time prescribed by this section for the receipt thereof, but is in an envelope bearing a postmark showing that it was mailed on or prior to the date prescribed in this section for the receipt thereof, or whenever the city manager is furnished substantial proof that the payment, statement, report, request, or other communication was in fact deposited in the United States mail on or prior to the date prescribed for receipt thereof, the city manager may regard such payment, statement, report, request, or other communication as having been timely received. If the due date falls on Friday, Saturday, Sunday, or a holiday, the due date shall be the next regular business day on which the City Hall is open to the public. 
E.  Unless otherwise specifically provided under other provisions of this chapter, the taxes required to be paid pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed delinquent if not paid on or before the due date specified in Subsection A of this section. 
F.  The city manager is not required to send a delinquency or other notice or bill to any person subject to the provisions of this chapter and failure to send such notice or bill shall not affect the validity of any tax or penalty due under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1101, § 1, 11-18-16)  
4.31.100 - Failure to pay tax. 
A.  Any person who fails or refuses to pay any tax required to be paid pursuant to this chapter on or before the due date shall pay penalties and interest as follows: 
1.  A penalty equal to twenty-five (25) percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax, plus interest on the unpaid tax calculated from the due date of the tax at a rate established by resolution of the city council; and 
2.  An additional penalty equal to twenty-five (25) percent of the amount of the tax if the tax remains unpaid for a period exceeding one calendar month beyond the due date, plus interest on the unpaid tax and interest on the unpaid penalties calculated at the rate established by resolution of the city council. 
B.  Whenever a check is submitted in payment of a tax and the check is subsequently returned unpaid by the bank upon which the check is drawn, and the check is not redeemed prior to the due date, the taxpayer will be liable for the tax amount due plus penalties and interest as provided for in this section plus any amount allowed under state law. 
C.  The tax due shall be that amount due and payable from January 1, 2017 or the first date on which the cannabis business first operated in the City, whichever date occurred last, together with applicable penalties and interest calculated in accordance with Subsection A of this section. 
D.  The city manager may waive the first and second penalties of twenty-five (25) percent each imposed upon any person if: 
1.  The person provides evidence satisfactory to the city manager that failure to pay timely was due to circumstances beyond the control of the person and occurred notwithstanding the exercise of ordinary care and the absence of willful neglect, and the person paid the delinquent tax and accrued interest owed the city prior to applying to the city manager for a waiver. 
2.  The waiver provisions specified in this Subsection shall not apply to interest accrued on the delinquent tax and a waiver shall be granted only once during any twenty-four-month period. 
(Ord. No. 1101, § 1, 11-18-16)  
4.31.110 - Refunds. 
A.  No refund shall be made of any tax collected pursuant to this chapter, except as provided in this section. 
B.  No refund of any tax collected pursuant to this chapter shall be made because of the discontinuation, dissolution, or other termination of a cannabis business. 
C.  Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty, or interest has been overpaid, paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this chapter, such amount may be refunded to the person who paid the tax provided that a written claim for refund is timely filed with the city manager, pursuant to Section 4.32.010 of this code. The period for filing a claim for refund shall be one year from the time the tax was paid or erroneously or illegally collected; provided however, that in no event shall the period to file such claim expire prior to the shortest period allowable for filing a tax refund claim under Government Code Section 911.2. Such claim must clearly establish claimant's right to the refund by written records showing entitlement thereto, and must clearly set forth the facts and legal theories under which the claimant believes he or she has right to a refund. Where the amount of any individual refund claim is in excess of the amount set by ordinance or resolution of the city council relating to the settlement of general liability claims against the city by the city manager, city council approval shall be required. 
D.  The filing of a written claim pursuant to Government Code Section 935 is a prerequisite to any suit thereon. 
E.  The city manager shall have the right to examine and audit all the books and business records of the claimant in order to determine the eligibility of the claimant to the claimed refund. No claim for refund shall be allowed if the claimant refuses to allow such examination of claimant's books and business records after request by the city manager to do so. 
F.  Any person entitled to a refund of taxes paid pursuant to this chapter may elect in writing to have such refund applied as a credit against a cannabis business's taxes for the next calendar quarter. 
G.  In the event that the tax was erroneously paid and the error is attributable to the city, the amount of the tax erroneously paid shall be refunded to the claimant. If the error is attributable to the claimant, the city shall retain the amount set forth in this chapter from the amount to be refunded to cover expenses. 
H.  The city manager shall initiate a refund of any tax which has been overpaid or erroneously collected whenever the overpayment or erroneous collection is uncovered by a City audit of tax revenues. 
(Ord. No. 1101, § 1, 11-18-16)  
4.31.120 - Enforcement. 
A.  It shall be the duty of the city manager to enforce each and all of the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  For purposes of administration and enforcement of this chapter generally, the city manager, with the concurrence of the city attorney, may from time to time promulgate administrative rules and regulations. 
C.  The city manager shall have the power to audit and examine all books and records of cannabis businesses as well as persons engaged in the operation of cannabis businesses, including both state and federal income tax returns, California sales tax returns, or other evidence documenting the gross receipts of or the transaction prices charged by a cannabis business or persons engaged in the operation of a cannabis business, for the purpose of ascertaining the amount of tax, if any, required to be paid by the provisions of this chapter, and for the purpose of verifying any statements or any item thereof when filed by any person pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. If such cannabis business or person, after written demand by the city manager, refuses to make available for audit, examination or verification such books, records, or equipment as the city manager requests, the city manager may, after full consideration of all information within the city manager's knowledge concerning the cannabis business and its business and activities of the person so refusing, make an assessment in the manner provided in Section 4.31.130. 
D.  The conviction and punishment of any person for failure to pay the required tax shall not excuse or exempt such person from any civil action for the tax debt unpaid at the time of such conviction. No civil action shall prevent a criminal prosecution for any violation of the provisions of this Chapter or of any State law requiring the payment of all taxes. 
E.  Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter or any regulation or rule passed in accordance herewith, or knowingly or intentionally misrepresenting to any officer or employee of the city any material fact in procuring the a certificate or permit from the city as provided for in this chapter or Chapters 5.68 or 17.85 of this code shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1101, § 1, 11-18-16)  
4.31.130 - Debts; deficiencies; assessments and appeals. 
A.  The amount of any tax, penalties, and interest imposed by the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt to the city and any person operating a cannabis business without having paid any applicable tax, penalties, and interest shall be liable in an action in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of the tax, and penalties and interest imposed on such cannabis business. 
B.  If the city manager is not satisfied that any statement filed as required under the provisions of this chapter is correct, or that the amount of tax is correctly computed, the city manager may compute and determine the amount to be paid and make a deficiency determination upon the basis of the facts contained in the statement or upon the basis of any information in his or her possession or that may come into his or her possession. One or more deficiency determinations of the amount of tax due for a period or periods may be made. When a person discontinues engaging in a cannabis business, a deficiency determination may be made at any time within three years thereafter as to any liability arising from engaging in such business whether or not a deficiency determination is issued prior to the date the tax would otherwise be due. Whenever a deficiency determination is made, notice shall be given to the person concerned in the same manner as notices of assessment are given under Subsections C, D, and E of this section. 
C.  Under any of the following circumstances, the city manager may make and give notice of an assessment of the amount of tax owed by a person under this chapter: 
1.  If the person has not filed any statement or return required under the provisions of this chapter; 
2.  If the person has not paid any tax due under the provisions of this chapter; 
3.  If the person has not, after demand by the city manager, filed a corrected statement or return, or furnished to the city manager adequate substantiation of the information contained in a statement or return already filed, or paid any additional amount of tax due under the provisions of this chapter; 
4.  If the city manager determines that the nonpayment of any tax due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of twenty-five (25) percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to penalties and interest otherwise stated in this chapter. 
5.  The notice of assessment shall separately set forth the amount of any tax known by the city manager to be due or estimated by the city manager, after consideration of all information within the city manager's knowledge concerning the business and activities of the person assessed, to be due under each applicable section of this chapter, and shall include the amount of any penalties or interest accrued on each amount to the date of the notice of assessment. 
D.  The notice of assessment shall be served upon the person either by handing it to him or her personally, or by a deposit of the notice in the United States mail, postage prepaid thereon, addressed to the person at the address of the location of the cannabis business appearing on the face of the business license issued under Chapter 5.04 of this Code, or to such other address as he or she shall register with the city manager for the purpose of receiving notices provided under this Chapter or Chapter 5.04; or, should the person have no business license issued and should the person have no address registered with the City Manager for such purpose, then to such person's last known address. For the purposes of this section, a service by mail is complete at the time of deposit in the United States mail. 
E.  Within ten (10) days after the date of service the person may apply in writing to the city manager for a hearing on the assessment. If application for a hearing before the city is not made within the time herein prescribed, the tax assessed by the city manager shall become final and conclusive. Upon receipt of any such application for hearing, the city manager shall cause the matter to be set for hearing before a hearing officer pursuant to the provisions of Section 1.10.070 (A) through (D) of this code. At such hearing said applicant may appear and offer evidence why the assessment as made by the city manager should not be confirmed and fixed as the tax due. Based upon the submission of such evidence and the review of the city's files, the hearing officer shall issue a written notice and order upholding, modifying or reversing the determination from which the appeal is taken. The notice shall be given within fourteen (14) calendar days after the conclusion of the hearing and shall state the reasons for the decision. The notice shall specify that the decision is final and that any petition for judicial review shall be filed within ninety (90) days from the date of the decision in accordance with Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6. If the hearing officer fails or refuses to act on an appeal within the fourteen-day period, the appeal shall be deemed to have been denied by the hearing officer on the fifteen (15th) calendar day. 
(Ord. No. 1101, § 1, 11-18-16)  
4.31.140 - No injunction/writ of mandate. 
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action, or proceeding in any court against this city or against any officer of the city to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected and/or remitted. 
(Ord. No. 1101, § 1, 11-18-16)  
4.31.150 - Future amendment to cited statute. 
Unless specifically provided otherwise, any reference to a state or federal statute in this chapter shall mean such statute as it may be amended from time to time; provided, that such reference to a statute herein shall not include any subsequent amendment thereto, or to any subsequent change of interpretation thereto by a state or federal agency or court of law, to the extent that such amendment or change of interpretation would require voter approval under California law, or to the extent that such change would result in a tax decrease. Only to the extent voter approval would otherwise be required or a tax decrease would result, the prior version of the statute (or interpretation) shall remain applicable. For any application or situation that would not require voter approval or would not result in a decrease of a tax, provisions of the amended statute (or new interpretation) shall be applicable to the maximum possible extent. To the extent that the city's authorization to collect or impose any tax imposed under this chapter is expanded or limited as a result of changes in state or federal law, no amendment or modification of this chapter shall be required to conform the tax to those changes, and the tax shall be imposed and collected to the full extent of the authorization up to the full amount of the tax imposed under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1101, § 1, 11-18-16)  
4.31.160 - Application of tax to retail medical cannabis and recreational cannabis businesses. 
A.  As of the effective date of this chapter, the Coachella Municipal Code only authorizes the operation of wholesale medical cannabis cultivation and manufacturing businesses within the city. However, a statewide initiative measure has qualified for the November 8, 2016 ballot known as the "Adult Use of Marijuana Act" (Proposition 64). If passed by California voters, this measure would legalize the personal use of cannabis/marijuana for recreational purposes, but would allow local agencies to reasonably regulate and tax activities tied to recreational cannabis/marijuana. 
B.  Should Proposition 64 or any similar state law authorizing recreational use of cannabis be passed, and should the Coachella Municipal Code be amended to authorize the operation of recreational cannabis businesses within the city, the People of Coachella expressly intend for the tax imposed herein to apply to such operations, on the same terms and conditions as set forth in this chapter. 
C.  Should the Coachella Municipal Code be amended to authorize the operation of retail medical cannabis businesses within the city, the People of Coachella further expressly intend for the tax imposed herein to apply to such operations, on the same terms and conditions as set forth in this chapter. 
D.  No provision of this chapter shall be construed to authorize the operation of retail medical or of any recreational cannabis businesses without further amendment to the city's municipal code. 
(Ord. No. 1101, § 1, 11-18-16)  
Chapter 4.32 - CLAIMS AGAINST CITY 
 
4.32.010 - Filing procedures for claims against city. 
A.  Pursuant to the authority contained in Section 935 of the Government Code of the state of California, the following claims and procedures are established for those claims against the city for money or damages not now governed by state or local laws. 
B.  Notwithstanding the exemptions set forth in Section 905 of the Government Code of the state of California, all claims against the city for damages or money, when a procedure for processing such claims is not otherwise provided by state or local laws, shall be presented within the time limitations and in the manner prescribed by Sections 910 through 915.2 of the Government Code of the state. Such claims shall further be subject to the provisions of Section 945 through 946 of the Government Code of the state relating to the prohibition of suits in the absence of the presentation of claims and action thereon by the council. 
(Prior code § 2-7)  
Chapter 4.36 - FEE AND SERVICE CHARGE REVENUE/COST COMPARISON SYSTEM 
 
4.36.010 - Findings and intent. 
A.  Pursuant to Article XIIIB of the California Constitution, it is the intent of the city council to require the ascertainment and recovery of costs reasonably borne from fees, charges and regulatory license fees levied therefor in providing the regulation, products or services hereinafter enumerated in this chapter. 
B.  The fee and service charge revenue/cost comparison system set forth in this chapter provides a mechanism for ensuring that fees adopted by the city for services rendered do not exceed the reasonable estimated cost for providing the services for which the fees are charged. 
C.  The adoption of this chapter is exempt from the California Environmental Quality Act (Public Resources Code Section 2100 et seq.), because it approves and sets forth a procedure for determining fees for the purpose of meeting the operating expenses of city departments, as set forth in Public Resources Code Section 21080(b)(8)(1). 
(Prior code § 30-1)  
4.36.020 - Delegation of authority—Direction to manager. 
A.  The city manager is delegated the authority and directed to provide documents to the city council to implement its enumerated policy to adjust fees and charges to recover the percentage of costs reasonably borne as established hereby, in providing the regulation, product or service enumerated in this chapter in the percentage of costs reasonably borne and on the schedule of rate review and revision as established in this chapter. 
B.  The city manager is delegated authority to issue executive orders defining terms, setting out administrative, fee collection, and financial procedures, definitions, and establishing effective dates of all fees set by the city council by resolution. All executive orders shall be originated and signed by the affected department head, shall be signed by the finance director certifying that the financial requirements of this chapter are complied with, and shall be signed by the city manager connoting [denoting] the effective date of the executive order and new or revised rate structure, procedure or definition. 
C.  "Costs reasonably borne" shall be as defined in Section 4.36.030. In adjusting fees and charges, the city manager shall act in an administrative and ministerial capacity and shall consider only the standards and criteria established by this chapter, and the procedures set and by applicable state law. All executive orders issued hereunder shall comply in all respects with this chapter, and the several schedules of fees and rates as set by the city council by resolution. 
(Prior code § 30-2)  
4.36.030 - Costs reasonably borne defined. 
"Costs reasonably borne," as used and ordered to be applied in this chapter are to consist of the following elements: 
A.  All applicable direct costs including, but not limited to salaries, wages, overtime, employee fringe benefits, services and supplies, maintenance and operation expenses, contracted services, special supplies, and any other direct expense incurred. 
B.  All applicable indirect costs including, but not restricted to, building maintenance and operations, equipment maintenance and operations, communications expenses, computer costs, printing and reproduction, vehicle expenses, insurance, debt service, and like expenses when distributed on an accounted and documented rational proration system. 
C.  Fixed asset recovery expenses, consisting of depreciation of fixed assets, and additional fixed asset expense recovery charges calculated on the current estimated cost of replacement, divided by the approximate life expectancy of the fixed asset. A further additional charge to make up the difference between book value depreciation not previously recovered and reserved in cash and the full cost of replacement, also shall be calculated and considered a cost so as to recover such unrecovered costs between book value and cost of replacement over the remaining life of the asset. 
D.  General overhead, expressed as a percentage, distributing and charging the expenses of the city council, city attorney, city administration, city clerk, city treasurer, economic development, finance department, personnel office, and city promotion, and all other staff and support service provided to the entire city organization. Overhead shall be prorated between tax-financed services and fee-financed services on the basis of such percentage so that each of taxes and fees and charges shall proportionately defray such overhead costs. 
E.  Departmental overhead, expressed as a percentage, distributing and charging the cost of each department head and his or her supporting expenses as enumerated in subsections A, B, C and F of this section. 
F.  Debt service costs, consisting of repayment of principal, payment of interest, and trustee fees and administrative expenses for all applicable bond, certificate, note or securities issues or loans of whatever nature or kind. Any required coverage factors or required or established reserves beyond basic debt service costs also shall be considered a cost if required by covenant within any securities ordinance, resolution, indenture or general law applicable to the city. 
(Prior code § 30-3)  
4.36.040 - Schedule of fees and service charges. 
A.  The city manager, finance director and each city department head, under the direction of the city manager, shall review annually the fees and service charges listed in the following, and provide and adjusted fee or charge schedule to the city council for its consideration so as to recover the listed percentage of costs reasonably borne necessary to provide the listed regulation, product or service. 
Regulation, Product or Service 	Percentage of Costs Reasonably Borne To Be Recovered 
Development services: 	
Annexation review 	100 
Architectural plan review 	100 
Architectural review/grading permit and inspection 	100 
Categorical exemption assessment review 	100 
Certificate of occupancy 	100 
Conditional use permit 	100 
Conditional use permit time extension review 	100 
Environmental impact report appeal review 	100 
Environmental impact report review 	100 
Environmental review 	100 
General plan review and revision 	100 
Lot line adjustment review 	100 
Planned unit development review 	100 
Subdivision parcel map check 	100 
Tentative parcel review 	100 
Williamson Act cancellation review 	100 
Zone change review 	100 
Zone variance review 	100 
Zone/subdivision ordinance amendment review 	100 
	
Public safety services: 	
Animal license 	72 
Burn regulation enforcement 	100 
CPR class 	50 
Fingerprints processing 	100 
Immigration/verification letter processing 	100 
Private water flow testing 	100 
Temporary alcohol use review 	100 
	
Utility and enterprise services: 	
Agenda/minute mailing service 	100 
Delinquent water turn off/on 	68 
Sewer leak testing 	100 
Utility line location 	100 
 
*B.  A minimum fee of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be charged in all instances. 
C.  The services as listed in this section shall be as defined in that certain document entitled "Cost Control System For The City of Coachella", dated December, 1990, as produced by Management Services Institute, Incorporated, of Anaheim, California. 
D.  All fees and charges set pursuant to this chapter and section shall take effect ten (10) days after the city manager signs an executive order stipulating that all provisions of this chapter have been complied with, and no written appeal has been filed. 
E.  The schedule of frequency of rate adjustments may be varied by the city manager to adjust revenues sufficient to meet debt service coverage requirements of any bond, certificate, or ordinance, resolution, indenture, contract, or action under which securities have been issued by the city which contain any coverage factor requirement. 
F.  The city manager may vary the review schedule listed in this section if, in the judgement of the city manager and a directly affected and requesting department head, a gross inequity would be perpetrated by not revising the rate schedule. Any such rate revision which deviates from the review schedule as set in this chapter shall be reported to the city council at its next succeeding meeting. 
(Prior code § 30-4)  
4.36.050 - Statutory public meeting. 
Pursuant to California Government Code Sections 54992, 54994.1 and 54994.2, the city clerk shall cause notice to be provided as set out in government code Sections 54992, 54994.1, and 6062a, and the city council periodically, at least annually, shall receive at a regularly scheduled meeting oral and written presentations concerning fees and charges proposed to be increased or added. Such notice, oral and written presentation, and public meeting shall be provided prior to the city council taking any action on any new or increased fees or charges. At least one such public hearing shall be held annually, in conjunction with the city annual budget process and hearing. 
(Prior code § 30-5)  
4.36.060 - Provision of data. 
Pursuant to the California Government Code, at least ten (10) days prior to the required public hearing set out in this chapter, the city manager shall make available to the public appropriate data indicating the cost, or estimated cost required to support the fees and charges for which changes are proposed to be made or fees or charges imposed. The city manager also shall provide a summary of the present fee and charge schedules and those proposed at such annual public hearing. A general explanation of such changes also shall be published per the requirements of Government Code Section 6062a. 
(Prior code § 30-6)  
4.36.070 - Appeal to city council. 
A.  Any person who feels that any fee or charge determined and set is in excess of the percentage of costs reasonably borne to be recovered as set out in this chapter, or that such fee or charge has been reviewed prior to or has not been reviewed within the review schedule as set out in this chapter, may appeal in writing to the city council. 
B.  No fee or charge for which an appeal has been filed shall take effect until heard by the city council. Such appeal shall be placed on the agenda of the next ensuing council meeting after receipt of such appeal, and heard at the next ensuing council meeting. Such appealed fee or charge shall take effect immediately upon hearing by the city council unless ordered otherwise by the city council by ordinance amending this chapter. 
(Prior code § 30-7)  
Chapter 4.40 - TRANSPORTATION MITIGATION FEE 
 
4.40.010 - Transportation mitigation fee. 
A.  The city council of the city finds that future development within the city and within the Coachella Valley to the year 2010 will result in traffic volumes in excess of capacity on the regional system of streets, arterials and highways now existing. 
B.  The city council finds that failure to expand the capacity of the existing circulation system will cause unacceptable levels of congestion on the streets and arterials of the regional system. 
C.  The city council also finds and declares that in the absence of this chapter imposing a fair share traffic fee upon new development, existing and future sources of revenue are inadequate to fund substantial portions of the regional transportation system improvements needed to avoid unacceptable levels of congestion and related adverse impacts. 
D.  The city council finds that exactions from development will construct only a portion of the local and regional facilities and that the adoption of this transportation uniform mitigation fee article will raise the additional revenues needed to construct the improvements to accommodate traffic that will be generated by development of land within the city and within the Coachella Valley. 
E.  The city council also finds that the Coachella Valley area transportation study has determined the extent to which the new development of land will generate traffic volumes impacting the roadway system and that this chapter establishes a fair and equitable method for distributing the unfunded costs of transportation improvements necessary to accommodate the traffic volumes generated by such development. 
F.  The city council further finds that the regional transportation improvements and the transportation uniform mitigation fee established by this chapter are based on the findings of the 1987 Coachella Valley Area Transportation Study whose policy-committee members represented all nine cities in the Coachella Valley and Riverside County. This study has established that growth in the year 2010 will affect the entire regional transportation system and therefore the area of impact for future development is the entire Coachella Valley as defined in this chapter. The study made the following additional findings: 
1.  Population and employment within the Coachella Valley is expected to double by the year 2010 and would cause levels of service E and F (as defined in the National Academy of Sciences 1964 Highway Capacity Manual and as updated in the 1985 Highway Capacity Manual, Special Report 209) on existing streets and arterials. 
2.  The Coachella Valley area transportation study shows that by the year 2010 the Coachella Valley will increasingly become a more integrated and interdependent Valley, most as intercity trips for both residents and visitors. 
3.  The 1987 Coachella Valley area transportation study modeled and evaluated the effect of projected growth to the year 2010 on all major streets and highways in the Coachella Valley and found that without expansion, the transportation system would suffer severe congestion. Further, the study showed that the recommended transportation improvements would accommodate the traffic anticipated in the year 2010 at the desired level of service C. 
4.  In the year 2010, according to the Coachella Valley area transportation study, the valley will remain a self-contained community where jobs and the labor force are well-balanced. The increase in intercity travel, however, will result in an increase in average trip length. 
5.  Existing and future sources of public revenues are insufficient to fund all the needed transportation improvements. 
6.  The revenues generated by this transportation mitigation fee will provide the additional funds necessary to construct the transportation improvements and provide the additional capacity needed by the year 2010 to accommodate the traffic generated by the development of land in the city and in the Coachella Valley. 
7.  The transportation mitigation fee is a fair and equitable method of distributing the cost of transportation improvements among the developments which will generate the increased traffic. 
G.  The city council adopts all findings and incorporates by reference all findings contained in the following reports/studies, attached as exhibits on file in the office of the city clerk: 
1.  Coachella Valley area transportation study, dated December, 1987, exhibit A on file in the office of the city clerk; 
2.  Transportation Uniform Mitigation Fee Ordinance Report, dated June, 1988, exhibit B on file in the office of the city clerk; 
3.  Transportation Expenditure Plan: Scope and Cost Review, May, 1988 by Bechtel Civil, Inc., exhibit C on file in the office of the city clerk; 
4.  Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE), 3rd Edition, exhibit D on file in the office of the city clerk, with the exception as referenced in Section 4.40.020. 
(Prior code § 31-26)  
4.40.020 - Definitions. 
"Coachella Valley" means those combined boundaries of the Palm Springs unified school district, Desert Sands unified school district and that part of the Coachella unified school district within Riverside County. 
"Regional system" means the regional system of roads, streets and highways identified by CVAG in its 2016 Transportation Project Prioritization Study (TPPS) to accommodate growth in the Coachella Valley to the year 2040. Only those projects scoring above 7.5 points in the TPPS are included for TUMF consideration. 
"The Coachella Valley area transportation study" means that report published by the Southern California Association of Governments and dated December, 1987, attached as exhibit A on file in the office of the city clerk, or as subsequently amended by the entities/jurisdictions of the Coachella Valley Association of Governments. 
"Average weekday trips" means the average number of daily vehicle trips to or from a designated land use Monday through Friday. 
"Change of use" means any change in the use of an existing building which results in the increase of vehicular trips. 
"Trip generation rate" means the number of average weekday trips generated by a particular land use. The trip generation rate for each of the following land-use categories shall be the rate published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE), 4th edition, or as revised, as noted in Section VII: "Trip Generation Land Use Code," attached as exhibit D on file in the office of the city clerk, calculated upon the measurement specified in this chapter. If a developer is required to prepare a traffic study, the trip-generation rate shall be as determined by that traffic study and approved by the appropriate general purpose government, but in no case may the rates be less than the ITE rates calculated upon the measurement as specified in this chapter. Trip generation rates shall be calculated based upon the following measurement: 
A.  Residential. Single-family, multi-family, condominiums, planned unit developments, and mobilehomes shall be calculated per dwelling unit. 
B.  Lodging. Hotels, resort hotels, and motels shall be calculated per room. 
C.  Restaurants. Low turnover, sit-down, high turnover, and drive-through shall be calculated per one thousand (1,000) square feet gross floor area. 
D.  Retail. Stand-alone convenience store and shopping centers, shall be calculated per one thousand (1,000) gross square feet. 
E.  Office Space. Office space shall be calculated per one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area. 
F.  Banks. Walk-in, with drive-through, savings and loan and savings and loan with drive-through shall be calculated per one thousand (1,000) gross square feet. 
G.  Light Industry/Manufacturing. Industrial park and manufacturing shall be calculated per one thousand (1,000) gross square feet. 
H.  Medical. Hospitals shall be calculated per one thousand (1,000) gross square feet. 
I.  Recreation. Golf courses independent of hotels shall be calculated per parking space; racquet clubs shall be calculated per court. 
J.  Convention Centers. Shall be calculated per one thousand (1,000) gross square feet. 
"Development" means any activity which requires discretionary or ministerial action by the city resulting in the issuance of grading, building, plumbing, mechanical, or electrical permits, or certificates of occupancy issued by the city to construct, or change the use of, a building or property. Where development applies to an enlargement of an existing building, or a change of use of an existing building which results in increased vehicle trips, the average weekday trips shall be only the additional trips in excess of those associated with the existing use. 
"The Coachella Valley Association of Governments", hereinafter "CVAG," means the legal entity which will manage and administer the transportation uniform mitigation fee in accordance with the laws of the state of California. 
(Prior code § 31-27) 
(Ord. No. 1126, § 1, 11-14-18)  
4.40.030 - Applicability. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply only to new development yet to receive final discretionary approval and or issuance of a building permit or other development right and to any reconstruction or new use of existing buildings that results in change of use and generates additional vehicular trips. The provisions of this chapter shall take effect on July 1, 1989. 
(Prior code § 31-28)  
4.40.040 - Establishment of transportation mitigation fee. 
A.  There is established a transportation uniform mitigation fee, the proceeds of which shall be placed in the trust fund established by CVAG and used to construct the transportation improvements and provide the additional capacity needed by the year 2010 to accommodate the traffic generated by the development of land in the city and in the Coachella Valley. 
B.  The amount of the mitigation fee shall be based on the trip generation rate and as recommended by CVAG. The council shall adopt by resolution the fee amount recommended by CVAG or may adopt a higher fee amount. The executive committee of CVAG shall annually review and, if necessary, amend the amount of the recommended mitigation fee to insure that it is a fair and equitable method of distributing the costs of the improvements necessary to accommodate traffic volumes generated by future growth. 
C.  The council shall annually review and, if necessary amend the amount of the mitigation fee to insure that it is a fair and equitable method of distributing the costs of the improvements necessary to accommodate traffic volumes generated by future growth. If the amount of the recommended mitigation fee is amended by CVAG pursuant to CVAG's annual review, the council shall amend its fee amount in accord or in an amount greater. 
D.  No tract map, parcel map, conditional use permit, land use permit or other entitlement shall be approved unless payment of the mitigation fee is a condition of approval for any such entitlement. The mitigation fee shall be paid to the city. 
E.  No building or similar permit, certificate of occupancy or business license reflecting a change of use shall be issued unless the applicant has paid the mitigation fee. 
F.  Mitigation fees shall be imposed and collected by the city and shall be transmitted to CVAG to be placed in the Coachella Valley Transportation Mitigation Trust Fund. All interest or other earnings of the fund shall be credited to the fund. 
(Prior code § 31-29)  
4.40.050 - Exemptions. 
The following developments are exempted from payment of the fee required by this chapter: 
A.  Low and lower-income residential housing, including single-family homes, apartments, and mobilehomes built for those whose income is no more than eighty (80) percent of the median income in the San Bernardino-Riverside Standard Metropolitan Statistical Area and as determined and approved by the legislative body or its designee. The sales or rental price shall not exceed the affordability criteria as established under HUD Section 8 guidelines. 
(Prior code § 31-30) 
(Ord. No. 1126, § 2, 11-14-18)  
4.40.060 - Credits. 
A.  Where a developer improves those regional streets identified in Section 4.40.080 beyond the requirements established in subsection B of this section, the developer shall receive a credit against the Transportation Uniform Mitigation Fee. To receive a credit, the developer shall obtain in advance an agreement with CVAG pursuant to CVAG's rules and regulations. That credit shall be an amount equal to the actual engineering and construction costs incurred at the time of the development to the extent that CVAG has included those costs in its estimated cost of constructing the regional system. 
B.  The fees required by this chapter shall be in addition to any fees, conditions or exactions for on-site and off-site improvements imposed upon projects pursuant to state and local laws, ordinances, or administrative policy which may authorize the imposition of conditions, fees or exactions on development and the developer shall not be entitled to any credits for such fees, conditions or exactions. 
C.  If a developer constructs, or is required by the city to construct, any portion of the regional network as identified in Section 4.40.080 in excess of that required to meet standard street requirements as provided by local ordinances, municipal codes, and the city's general plan, the developer shall be entitled to a credit for the cost of such excess construction. All such construction on the regional network must have the approval of CVAG as to plans and detailed costs estimates. 
D.  Should the credit exceed the applicant's total fee, the difference may be credited against any of the applicant's future development within five years which would be subject to the fee. The credit may not be refunded in cash. 
E.  Should a developer provide improvements which benefit adjacent undeveloped land, the developer may be reimbursed for a proportionate share of the cost of such improvements contingent upon future fees contributed from other benefited developments and pursuant to special agreements made in advance with CVAG and in accordance with CVAG's rules and regulations. 
(Prior code § 31-31)  
4.40.070 - Appeal process. 
An applicant who disputes the fee may file a written notice of appeal with the executive committee of CVAG within fifteen (15) days of imposition of the fee. The executive committee of CVAG must decide the appeal by majority vote and within sixty (60) days of the filing of the appeal. 
(Prior code § 31-32)  
4.40.080 - List of projects on the regional system. 
The following transportation projects are those which when completed will together mitigate the traffic impacts of future growth in the year 2010 throughout the Coachella Valley. The following list of projects shall be annually reviewed and may be amended from time to time by CVAG. 
A  Freeway Interchanges. 
1.  Gene Autry at I-10; 
2.  Ramon at I-10; 
3.  Monterey at I-10; 
4.  Cook at I-10; 
5.  Washington at I-10; 
6.  Jefferson at I-10; and 
7.  Avenue 56 at Highway 86. 
B.  Railroad Crossings South of I-10. 
1.  Gene Autry Trail; 
2.  Ramon; 
3.  Monterey; 
4.  Cook; 
5.  Washington; and 
6.  Avenue 56. 
C.  Major Primary Arterial (Involving Multiple Jurisdictions). 
1.  Mid-Valley Parkway (by segment): 
a.  Gene Autry Trail/Palm Drive; 
b.  Gene Autry to Monterey; 
c.  Palm Springs Bypass (Whitewater Bypass); 
2.  Gene Autry/Palm Drive (North of PS Bypass); 
3.  Ramon; 
4.  Gerald Ford; 
5.  Frank Sinatra; 
6.  Monterey; 
7.  Cook; 
8.  Country Club; 
9.  48th Ave.; 
10.  Madison; 
11.  Jefferson; 
12.  Fred Waring Drive; 
13.  52nd Ave.; 
14.  Date Palm Drive; 
15.  Vista Chino; 
16.  Washington; 
17.  Bob Hope; and 
18.  Avenue 56. 
D.  Bridges Across Whitewater (Widening or New Bridge). 
1.  Gene Autry; 
2.  Ramon; 
3.  Frank Sinatra; 
4.  Monterey; 
5.  Cook; 
6.  El Dorado; 
7.  Madison; 
8.  Washington; 
9.  Jefferson; 
10.  Fred Waring Drive (two bridges); 
11.  Vista Chino; and 
12.  Country Club. 
E.  Bridges Over Other Channels: 
1.  48th at All American (two bridges); 
2.  Madison (two bridges); 
3.  Jefferson (three bridges); 
4.  Washington (La Quinta Evac Channel); 
5.  52nd at All American Canal; 
6.  Avenue 56 at Coachella Valley Storm Channel (widen); and 
7.  Ramon Road at Baristo Channel. 
The Uniform Transportation Mitigation Fee shall be solely used toward funding the engineering and construction of, and purchasing right-of-way for, these regional system project and any other purpose consistent with this chapter. The fee may not be used for system maintenance. 
CVAG shall annually establish priorities for the regional system projects based on the criteria set forth in the Uniform Transportation Mitigation Fee Ordinance Report, Section 4.3, exhibit B. 
(Prior code § 31-34)  
Chapter 4.44 - SPECIAL GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND 
 
4.44.010 - Gas tax fund—Created. 
To comply with the provisions of Article 5, Chapter 1, Division 1, of the Streets and Highways Code, Statutes of 1935, Page 29, as amended, there is created in the city treasury a special fund to be known as "Special Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund." 
(Prior code § 20-1)  
4.44.020 - Same—Contents. 
All moneys received by the city from the state under the provisions of the Streets and Highways Code for the acquisition of real property or interests therein, or for the construction, maintenance or improvement of streets or highways within the city, other than state highways, shall be paid into the Special Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund. 
(Prior code § 20-2)  
4.44.030 - Same—Expenditures. 
All moneys in the Special Tax Street Improvement Fund shall be expended exclusively for the purposes authorized by and subject to all of the provisions of Article 5, Chapter 1, Division 1, of the Streets and Highways Code. 
(Prior code § 20-3)  
Chapter 4.45 - DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1013, adopted Feb. 10, 2010, amended ch. 4.45 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 4.45 pertained to the same subject matter, consisted of §§ 4.45.010—4.45.120, and derived from Ord. 943, 2006. 
 
4.45.010 - Purpose and findings. 
City council finds that: 
1.  The purpose of this chapter is to establish provisions for assessing and collecting fees as a condition of a development approval. 
2.  The purpose of the fees established by this chapter is to impose upon development projects the costs of constructing public facilities which are reasonably related to the impacts of the development project. New development in the city will require the construction of new public facilities. The city council finds that it is in the interest of the public's health, safety and welfare for new development to pay the costs of constructing the public facilities reasonably related to the impacts of the new development. 
3.  The fees established by this chapter shall be used for those purposes identified in section 4.45.60. 
4.  The city council finds that there is a reasonable relationship between the use of the fees established by this chapter and the types of development projects on which the fees are imposed. The public facilities for which the fees are collected are reasonably related to the types of development to which they apply. 
5.  The city council finds that there is a reasonable relationship between the need for the public facilities and the type of development projects to which the fees apply. 
6.  The city council finds that there is a reasonable relationship between the amount of the fees and the costs of the public facilities or portions thereof attributable to the development project on which the fees are imposed. 
(Ord. No. 1013, § 2, 2-10-10)  
4.45.020 - Basis for calculation of development impact fees. 
The city approves, adopts and incorporates the facilities study, which establishes the following: 
1.  The total estimated cost of such public facilities, including design, engineering, construction, installation and management of such construction and installation; 
2.  Allocation of such cost among the residential, commercial and industrial types of development within the city; 
3.  Formulas based on the density of residential unit development and the square footage of commercial and industrial building development, to determine the amount of fees payable for each such type of development; 
4.  Specific fees payable for each residential unit and square footage of commercial and industrial buildings in each development project; 
(Ord. No. 1013, § 2, 2-10-10)  
4.45.030 - Need for public facilities. 
In order to implement the goals and objectives of the city's general plan and applicable specific plans by accommodating the need for public facilities and mitigating the financial and physical impacts for all development projects within the city, the following public facilities must be constructed, installed, and paid for or financed: 
1.  General government facilities. 
2.  Library facilities. 
3.  Park and recreation facilities. 
4.  Street facilities. 
5.  Fire facilities. 
6.  Police facilities. 
(Ord. No. 1013, § 2, 2-10-10)  
4.45.040 - Need for development impact fees. 
The city council has determined, based on the facilities study, the city general plan, and applicable specific plans, as well as substantial evidence submitted in public hearing, that development impact fees are needed in order to finance these public facilities and to allocate the responsibility to pay each development project's fair share of the costs of constructing and installing such public facilities. 
(Ord. No. 1013, § 2, 2-10-10)  
4.45.050 - Consistency with city general and specific plans. 
In establishing these development impact fees, the city council finds that they are consistent with the city's general plan and applicable specific plans, and declares that it has considered the effects of such fees with respect to the city's housing needs defined in the housing element of the city general plan, and the standards and criteria for public facilities applied in comparable developments within the city, in accordance with California Government Code Section 65913.2. 
(Ord. No. 1013, § 2, 2-10-10)  
4.45.060 - Use of development impact fees. 
Development impact fees hereby are established for each development project located with the city, predicate on the following findings regarding their use: 
A.  General government facilities fees will be used to enable the city to ensure that its citizens have adequate facilities for the daily administrative service operations of the city and for the city council, planning commission, various boards and commissions of the city, as well as for community organization meetings and events. General government facilities in the City of Coachella primarily include public works facilities and the city hall. 
B.  Library facilities fees will be used for the land acquisition and construction costs of a public library facility as part of the Riverside County Library System, to serve the new residential development in the city. 
C.  Park and recreation facility fees will be used to ensure that city park land dedicated pursuant to the 2006 Parks and Recreation Master Plan which incorporated the standard for parkland dedication in-lieu fee as allowed under the Quimby Act of three acres per thousand population, or otherwise, will be improved with the financial resources provided by this development impact fee in addition to those of the Coachella Valley Parks and Recreation District. Typical improvements will include turf, fields, fencing, play apparatus, lighting, restrooms and parking. 
D.  Street facilities fees will be used for the following purposes: 
1.  Construction or installation of improvements to add or modify traffic signals and related devices to maintain service levels that are directly impacted by specific development projects; 
2.  Construction or installation of street rehabilitation and construction improvements to add or modify land and circulation capacity to maintain service levels that are directly impacted by specific development projects. 
3.  Construction or installation of bridge and grade circulation improvements to add or modify bridge and grade separation service levels for areas specifically impacted by a development project. 
4.  Construction or installation of bus shelter improvements to add or improve shelters in accordance with the regional transit plan and specifically impacted by development projects. 
E.  Fire facility fees ensure residents of the city have adequate fire protection facilities including buildings, land, equipment and vehicles based on the facility standard of one fire station for every three thousand (3,000) dwelling units. 
F.  Police facility fees ensure residents and workers of the city have adequate police protection facilities including buildings, land, equipment and vehicles.  
4.45.070 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section: 
A.  "Development approval" means the approval of an application required for the development of a development project pursuant to the normal regulations, processes and procedures of the city and approval of all plans by the city that culminate in the authorization to an owner, or the owner's developer, to proceed with the actual physical development of the development project, including the issuance of all necessary permits and other entitlements for the development of land, such as conditional use permits, site approvals, variances subdivision and parcel maps. 
B.  "Development project" means any parcel of land within the city to be developed or improved by an owner or a developer for a purpose permitted by city regulations applicable to such parcel for which a development approval is required. 
C.  "Residential development" means a development project to be developed or improved by an owner or developer for single-family or multifamily residential uses as permitted by city regulations applicable to the subject parcel. 
D.  "Development impact fee" means a monetary exaction based on the facilities study, other than a tax or special assessment, that is to be charged by the city to the applicant, either an owner or a developer, in connection with development approval of a development project for the purpose of defraying the estimated cost of the public facilities related to the development project, but does not include a fee specified in Section 66477 of the California Government Code, a fee for processing applications for regulatory actions or approvals, or other fees collected under city development agreements. 
E.  "Public facilities" means all those public facilities, improvements and community amenities described in the facilities study and in section 4.45.60. 
F.  "Final inspection" or "certificate of occupancy" shall have the meaning described in the most recently adopted building code of the City of Coachella. 
(Ord. No. 1013, § 2, 2-10-10)  
4.45.080 - Establishment and imposition of development impact fees. 
A.  [Established.] The development impact fees will be established by city council resolution for each development project located within the city, for the specified categories of public facilities. 
B.  Annual Adjustments. 
1.  After adoption, the amount of development impact fees shall be adjusted administratively on an annual basis beginning July 1, 2012, by a price escalator which is the greater of: 
(a)  The Construction Price Index as published by the California Department of Transportation; or 
(b)  The Engineering News Record, Construction Cost Index. 
2.  Such price escalator shall be applied automatically by administrative action of the city manager annually, unless the city council takes some specific action to modify such application. 
C.  Imposition and Development Impact Fee. The total amount of development impact fees shall be calculated, fixed and imposed as of the date specified in the city council resolution establishing the development impact fees, excepting only those development projects that are subject to an existing development agreement where such agreement expressly provides for the amount and timing of development impact fees. 
D.  Time of Payment. 
1.  Payment of development impact fees on developments shall be required and set by city council resolution establishing the development impact fees. 
2.  The obligation to pay the fee shall inure to the benefit of, and be enforceable by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1013, § 2, 2-10-10)  
4.45.090 - Creation of special fund and accounts. 
A.  There hereby is created a development impact fee fund, within the city's fund structure and accounting system, which shall contain an account for each development impact fee collected pursuant to this chapter and all interest accruing from the investment of such fees contained within each account. 
B.  All development impact fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited in the appropriate fee account within the development impact fee fund. Funds within each account within the fund may be encumbered, obligated or expended by appropriation or other action of the city council for specific projects which are of the same category of public facilities as those for which the fees were collected. 
(Ord. No. 1013, § 2, 2-10-10)  
4.45.100 - Density and use basis of fees. 
A.  Except as provided herein, the final approved density for residential dwelling units or square footage for commercial and industrial buildings in development projects shall be used as the basis for computation of the required development impact fees. If a legal parcel contains more than one allowable residential building unit density, then the applicable fees shall be prorated by the acreage of such parcel attributable to each allowed density. Public properties also shall be classified into the category of residential, commercial, or industrial use, and pay the development impact fee imposed for that classification of use. 
B.  Fees for churches, public or private schools, day care centers, congregate care facilities and any other such group or noncommercial use permitted in residential zones shall be computed based on the commercial zone rates contained in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1013, § 2, 2-10-10)  
4.45.110 - Project credit. 
A.  Entitlement. Whenever an owner or a developer is required to construct or install a public facility described in the facilities study, as a condition of a development approval of a development project, the owner or developer shall be entitled to receive a project credit pursuant to this chapter. 
B.  Basis and Procedure. The basis and procedure for earning and receiving a project credit are as follows: 
1.  The owner or developer of any development project within the city shall have constructed a public facility described in the facilities study and required to be constructed as a condition of the development approval of the development project. 
2.  In the event that an owner or developer constructs such a public facility, the owner or developer may apply the project credit to offset an obligation of the owner or developer to pay a fee imposed pursuant to this chapter, provided that the project credit shall be limited to reducing an obligation for a fee in the same fee category as the category of the public facility so constructed. After deducting a project credit against the applicable fee due hereunder, the owner or developer shall pay the obligation remaining in the fee category against which the project credit was applied. 
3.  The city engineer shall determine the amount of the project credit for the construction of a public facility described in the facilities study requested by an owner or developer. The amount of each project credit shall be certified by the city engineer after final completion and acceptance of each such public facility, based on final accepted and approved "as-built plans" and specifications and verification of the actual cost to construct the public facility, subject to appeal to the city council. 
4.  A project credit may be earned for each phase of the development project by an owner or developer, provided the owner or developer deposits performance and payment bonds for the applicable public facilities or otherwise guarantees their completion, as required by the city engineer, subject to appeal to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1013, § 2, 2-10-10)  
4.45.120 - Project reimbursements. 
A.  The city acknowledges that a public facility described in the facilities study may cost the owner or developer more to construct or install than the fee otherwise payable hereunder as the owner's or developer's fair share for such a public facility. In the event that an owner or developer constructs a public facility described in the facilities study and the actual cost to construct or install it exceeds the fee otherwise payable hereunder as the owner's or developer's fair share for such a public facility, such an owner or developer shall be entitled to a project reimbursement in an amount equal to the difference between the actual cost to construct or install such public facility and the fee payable hereunder for the fair share of such cost. The amount of the reimbursement shall include the cost to acquire any land or right-of-way needed for the public facility in addition to the actual cost to construct or install the public facility. 
B.  The city shall offer a project reimbursement agreement to each owner or developer who has constructed a public facility for the amount that the actual reasonable cost to construct or install the public facility exceeds the amount of the development impact fee that said owner or developer would be obligated to pay under this chapter. The project reimbursement agreement shall obligate the payment of said amount to the owner or developer provided that the obligation shall be limited to funds contained in the development impact fee account for the type of public facility constructed or installed by the owner or developer. Neither the general fund nor any other fund shall be liable for the payment of the amount contained in the project reimbursement agreement. The priority of the use of funds in each development impact fee account shall be reserved to the city council such that it may determine what funds shall be used to construct public facilities and what funds shall be used to make payments to owners and developers under any project reimbursement agreement. 
C.  No project reimbursement agreement authorized by this chapter shall be for a term of more than ten (10) years from execution, unless otherwise provided in a development agreement approved by the city. The form and substance of any such reimbursement agreement shall be determined by the city engineer and the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 1013, § 2, 2-10-10)  
4.45.130 - Appeal of city manager or city engineer decision. 
An owner or developer of any development project may appeal any determination of the city manager or city engineer hereunder, including, but not limited to, those regarding the total amount of development impact fees due, a project credit, actual project cost and determination of project reimbursement, by filing a written appeal to the city council within fifteen (15) days of such determination. Such written appeal shall contain all of the grounds for the appeal, and the owner or developer shall be precluded from asserting any other grounds in such appeal or in any action or proceeding thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 1013, § 2, 2-10-10) 
Exhibit A 
City of Coachella 
Development Impact Fees 
One-Time Charges 
Development Impact Fee 	Unit of Measure Per 	Fee Amount 
Infrastructure: 		
Traffic Safety Fees: 		
Residential 	Dwelling Unit (EDU) 	$297 
Hotel, Motel 	Room 	297 
Office 	1,000 s.f. (gross) 	297 
Commercial 	1,000 s.f. (gross) 	371 
Restaurants and Gaming 	1,000 s.f. (gross) 	371 
Gasoline 	1,000 s.f. (gross) 	371 
Open Uses and Vehicle Sales 	Acre 	742 
Street Construction and Rehabilitation: 
Residential 	Dwelling Unit (EDU) 	326 
Hotel, Motel 	Room 	326 
Office 	1,000 s.f. (gross) 	417 
Commercial 	1,000 s.f. (gross) 	326 
Restaurants and Gaming 	1,000 s.f. (gross) 	408 
Gasoline 	1,000 s.f. (gross) 	417 
Open Uses and Vehicle Sales 	Acre 	816 
Bus Shelter and Bus Stop Safety Zone: 
Residential 	Dwelling Unit (EDU) 	77 
Hotel, Motel 	Room 	77 
Office 	1,000 s.f. (gross) 	90 
Commercial 	1,000 s.f. (gross) 	77 
Restaurants and Gaming 	1,000 s.f. (gross) 	96 
Gasoline 	1,000 s.f. (gross) 	105 
Open Uses and Vehicle Sales 	Acre 	114 
Bridge and Grade Separation Fees: 
Residential 	Dwelling Unit (EDU) 	652 
Hotel, Motel 	Room 	652 
Office 	1,000 s.f. (gross) 	652 
Commercial 	1,000 s.f. (gross) 	652 
Restaurants and Gaming 	1,000 s.f. (gross) 	834 
Gasoline 	1,000 s.f. (gross) 	834 
Open Uses and Vehicle Sales 	Acre 	1,632 
Park Improvement Fee: 
Residential 	Dwelling Unit (EDU) 	$3,541 
Hotel, Motel 	Room 	0 
Office 	1,000 s.f. (gross) 	0 
Commercial 	1,000 s.f. (gross) 	0 
Restaurants and Gaming 	1,000 s.f. (gross) 	0 
Gasoline 	1,000 s.f. (gross) 	0 
Open Uses and Vehicle Sales 	Acre 	0 
Public Safety Capital Improvement Fee: 
Residential 	Dwelling Unit (EDU) 	1,514 
Hotel, Motel 	Room 	1,514 
Office 	1,000 s.f. (gross) 	1,514 
Commercial 	1,000 s.f. (gross) 	1,514 
Restaurants and Gaming 	1,000 s.f. (gross) 	1,514 
Gasoline 	1,000 s.f. (gross) 	1,514 
Open Uses and Vehicle Sales 	Acre 	1,514 
City Hall and Library: 
City Hall: 
Residential 	Dwelling Unit (EDU) 	622 
Hotel, Motel 	Room 	622 
Office 	1,000 s.f. (gross) 	622 
Commercial 	1,000 s.f. (gross) 	622 
Restaurants and Gaming 	1,000 s.f. (gross) 	622 
Gasoline 	1,000 s.f. (gross) 	622 
Open Uses and Vehicle Sales 	Acre 	622 
Library: 
Residential 	Dwelling Unit (EDU) 	298 
Hotel, Motel 	Room 	0 
Office 	1,000 s.f. (gross) 	0 
Commercial 	1,000 s.f. (gross) 	0 
Restaurants and Gaming 	1,000 s.f. (gross) 	0 
Gasoline 	1,000 s.f. (gross) 	0 
Open Uses and Vehicle Sales 	Acre 	0 
  
Chapter 4.46 - PUBLIC ARTS FEE, FUND AND PROGRAM 
 
4.46.010 - Purpose. 
A.  California Government Code Section 15813 recognizes that the city has a responsibility for expanding public experience with art. 
B.  Cultural and artistic resources, including artwork and the performing arts, enhance the quality of life for individuals living in, working in, and visiting the city. 
C.  Balanced development of cultural and artistic resources preserves and improves the quality of the urban environment and increases real property values. 
D.  As development and revitalization of the real property within the city continue, the opportunity for creation of cultural and artistic resources is diminished. As this development and revitalization continue as a result of market forces, urbanization of the community results. As these opportunities are diminished and this urbanization occurs, the need to develop alternative sources for cultural and artistic outlets to improve the environment, image and character of the community is increased. 
E.  Development of cultural and artistic assets should be financed by those whose development and revitalization diminishes the availability of the community's resources for those opportunities and contributes to community urbanization. 
F.  Establishment of this art in public places program ("APPP") will promote the general welfare through balancing the community's physical growth with revitalization and its cultural and artistic resources. 
(Ord. No. 1034, § 6, 1-11-12)  
4.46.020 - Program execution. 
The public arts commission, as established in Section 2.68.010 et seq. of the Municipal Code, shall implement the duties established in this chapter. The city council may prescribe by resolution, other duties, and the appointment process for the members of the commission. 
(Ord. No. 1034, § 7, 1-11-12)  
4.46.030 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter: 
A.  "Commission" means the Coachella Public Arts Commission as established in Municipal Code Section 2.68.010 et seq. 
B.  "Public arts fund" means a separate fund and account which is established to receive monies collected for the designated purposes of the public arts program. 
C.  "Public arts program" means the program adopted by the city council. 
D.  "Arts administrator" means the staff person hired by the city to administer the public arts program. The salary and other compensation of the arts administrator may be paid from the arts fund to the extent such person is performing the duties prescribed herein. 
(Ord. No. 1034, § 8, 1-11-12)  
4.46.040 - Public arts fund. 
A.  Creation. There is established a public arts fund into which shall be deposited all funds collected under this chapter of the Coachella Municipal Code and such other funds as may be appropriated by the city council or donated to the city for expenditures in conjunction with the public arts program. 
B.  Accounting. This fund shall be maintained by the city treasurer, with accounting records established to sufficiently identify and control these funds. 
C.  Use of Fund. The funds shall be used solely for the acquisition, installation, improvement, maintenance and insurance of artwork to be displayed in the city and the administration of the public arts program. 
D.  Permissible Expenditures. 
(1)  The cost of artwork and its installation; 
(2)  The cost of purchase or lease of art sites; 
(3)  Waterworks, landscaping, lighting and other objects which are commissioned from an artist as an integral aspect of a structure or site or which are necessary for the proper aesthetic presentation and structural placement of the artwork; 
(4)  Frames, mats, pedestals, and other objects which are necessary for the proper presentation of the artwork; 
(5)  Expenditures for maintenance and repair of artworks; 
(6)  Administrative expenses, including legal, to otherwise implement, uphold or carry out any provision of this chapter. 
E.  Ineligible Expenditures. 
(1)  Reproductions of original work except limited editions; 
(2)  Unlimited editions of original work; 
(3)  Mass-produced art objects; 
(4)  Works that are decorative, ornamental or functional landscape or architectural elements except when commissioned from an artist as an integral aspect of a structure or site; 
(5)  Architectural rehabilitation or historical preservation of buildings. 
F.  Endowments. The public arts fund shall also be used as a depository for endowments, bequests, grants or donations. Such endowments, bequests, grants or donations may be expended as set forth in subsections (C) and (D) of this section and when approved by the commission: 
(1)  Art exhibitions or displays; 
(2)  Promotion of art education within the community, either separate from or complementary to art programs of schools, museums or other nonprofit organizations. 
G.  Replacement. For those artworks that have been purchased with monies from the public arts fund or donated to the city, the city council may determine to sell or exchange existing artworks for replacement artworks. Any funds obtained from the sale of artwork shall be credited to the public arts fund. 
(Ord. No. 1034, § 9, 1-11-12)  
4.46.050 - Projects subject to public arts program requirements. 
A.  Requirements. Except as provided in subsection (B) of this section, the requirements of this chapter shall apply to all works of construction and rehabilitation for which a building permit is required, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  New commercial and industrial construction; 
(2)  Remodeling or reconstruction of existing commercial or industrial property; 
(3)  New residential subdivisions or developments of two or more units, whether by detached single-family residential structures, condominiums, apartments, duplexes, townhouses or other dwelling units being built in the same tract by the same owner or developer; 
(4)  New individual single-family residential units constructed on a lot located in an existing subdivision whose building permit valuation is over two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00). 
B.  Exceptions. The requirements of this chapter shall not apply to the following activities: 
(1)  Public projects undertaken by any agency of the city, the state, county, school district or any other governmental entity; 
(2)  Remodeling, repair or reconstruction of structures to comply with earthquake seismic safety code standards or which have been damaged by fire, flood, wind, earthquake or other calamity; 
(3)  Remodeling, repair or reconstruction of residential units; 
(4)  Nonprofit social service or cultural institution projects; 
(5)  Low to moderate housing projects as defined by household income Health and Safety Code Section 50093; 
(6)  Affordable housing developments receiving city, state or federal assistance; 
(7)  Private educational institutions which provide general education equivalent to the public school system (kindergarten through high school or any part thereof); 
(8)  Architectural rehabilitation or historical preservation of properties which are designated as Class 1 historic sites by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1034, § 10, 1-11-12)  
4.46.060 - Certificates of occupancy. 
A.  No final city approval, such as final inspection or a certificate of occupancy, for any project subject to this chapter shall be granted or issued unless and until full compliance with the public arts program is achieved, in one or more of the following ways: 
(1)  The approved artwork has been placed in a manner satisfactory to the commission. 
(2)  In-lieu art fees have been paid. 
(3)  Financial security in an amount equal to the acquisition and installation costs of an approved artwork, in a form approved by the city attorney, have been posted. 
(4)  An approved artwork has been donated and accepted by the commission. 
B.  Full compliance with the public arts program shall not be deemed to exist until the entire program allocation for the project, as defined in Section 4.46.070 has been provided. 
(Ord. No. 1034, § 11, 1-11-12)  
4.46.070 - Requirement to provide artwork or pay development fee. 
A.  The applicant shall be deemed to have satisfied his or her obligations under this chapter through the placement of artwork in a manner consistent with this chapter, valued at an amount equal to the program allocation. 
B.  In lieu of placement of an approved artwork, the applicant may, at his or her discretion, pay to the city for deposit into the public arts fund an amount equal to the program allocation set forth in subsection (D) of this section. 
C.  Fees are to be collected with respect to all projects prior to issuance of a building permit, except in the case of residential developments of more than one dwelling unit, where the fee shall be collected on a pro rata basis for each dwelling when it receives its final inspection or certificate of occupancy, whichever occurs first. 
D.  The program allocation, as used in this chapter, is the percentage of the building cost which is set aside for the city's public arts program. The total building valuation shall be computed using the latest building valuation data as set forth by the International Conference of Building Officials (ICBO) unless, in the opinion of the building official, a different valuation measure more accurately represents the value of the building. Excluding land acquisition and off-site improvement costs, the program allocation shall be an amount equal to the percentage of the total building valuation for an applicable project, as listed herein: 
(1)  One-half (½) of one percent for new commercial and industrial construction; 
(2)  One-half (½) of one percent for remodel or reconstruction of existing commercial or industrial property; 
(3)  One-quarter (¼) of one percent for new residential subdivisions or developments of two or more units, whether by detached single-family residential structures, condominiums, apartments, duplexes, townhouses or other dwelling units being built in the same tract by the same owner or developer. A project shall be considered a development of two or more units when two or more building permits are issued to the same person for development of new residential structures within a one-hundred-eighty-day period; 
(4)  One-quarter (¼) of one percent for new individual single-family residential units constructed on a lot located in an existing subdivision for that portion of building permit valuation in excess of two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00). 
E.  Nothing in this section shall prohibit the applicant from placing an approved artwork with acquisition and installation costs in an amount less than the program allocation; provided that the applicant shall also pay to the public arts fund an amount equal to the difference between the program allocation and the costs of acquisition and installation of such artwork. 
F.  Nothing herein shall restrict the city council from waiving the requirements of this chapter, in whole or in part, with respect to any project otherwise subject to the provisions of this chapter, provided that the city council determines that the project applicant has entered into an agreement with the city providing for the applicant's acquisition and installation of artwork in connection with the development of the project which addresses the goals and aims of this chapter in a manner equally or more favorable to the city than would be achieved by strict compliance with this chapter. In such an event, the city council shall make findings to this effect on the basis of substantial evidence. 
(Ord. No. 1034, § 12, 1-11-12)  
4.46.080 - Art site acceptability. 
A.  Placement of Art by Applicant. The applicant shall place artwork in outdoor areas of the private property that are accessible and used by the public a minimum of eighteen (18) hours per day. Interior spaces, including lobbies, courtyards, malls, etc., may be eligible if they are accessible to the public a minimum of twelve (12) hours per day. 
B.  Art Purchased through Public Arts Fund. When selecting the location for art purchased through the public arts fund, preference shall be given to publicly accessible public places. This would include libraries, parks, office buildings, sidewalks, traffic islands, etc. Lobbies, plazas, adjacent open spaces or exterior treatment of publicly owned buildings shall be potential sites, but the offices themselves of publicly owned buildings shall not be considered acceptable sites. 
(Ord. No. 1034, § 13, 1-11-12)  
4.46.090 - Criteria for artwork selection. 
A.  Eligible requirements for each project will be established by the commission. Specifically excluded are artworks done by students under the supervision of art instructors to satisfy course requirements and artists who are members of the commission. The following criteria shall be considered in the selection of artwork: 
(1)  Quality of the artwork; 
(2)  Media. All visual art forms may be considered, subject to limitations set by the selection jury or the commission; 
(3)  Style. Artworks of all schools, styles, and tastes should be considered for the city collection; 
(4)  Environment. Artworks and art places should be appropriate in scale, material, form and content for the immediate, general, social and physical environments with which they relate; 
(5)  Permanence. Consideration should be given to structural and surface integrity, permanence, and protection against theft, vandalism, weathering, excessive maintenance, and repair costs; 
(6)  Elements of design. Consideration should take into account that public art, in addition to meeting aesthetic requirements, also may serve to establish focal points, terminate areas, modify, enhance, or define specific spaces, or establish identity; 
(7)  Diversity. The public arts program should strive for diversity of style, scale, media, artists, including ethnicity and gender and equitable distribution of artworks and art places throughout the city. 
B.  The following methods may be used to select artwork: 
(1)  Direct Purchase. A completed work of art may be purchased for a specific project or location; 
(2)  Direct Commission. An artist may be chosen directly by an artist-selection jury and paid to submit a proposal. Artists will be selected on the basis of their qualifications for a particular project and its probability of successful completion; 
(3)  Limited Competition. A small number of artists may be invited and paid by the selection jury to submit proposals; 
(4)  Open Competition. Any artist may apply subject to limitations established by the selection jury. No proposal fee is paid to artists; however, a small number of finalists may be selected to submit details, models or plans for which a fee is paid. 
C.  In selecting an artwork, the commission may appoint a selection jury of qualified persons. The jury shall be subject to the provisions of the Brown Act. 
D.  Review by Department of Planning and Zoning. A department of planning and zoning representative shall review the artwork and its placement and landscaping elements and may refer the artwork to the planning commission for approval pursuant to the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1034, § 14, 1-11-12)  
4.46.100 - Maintenance of artwork on public and private property. 
A.  Public Artwork on Public Property. A maintenance fund shall be established as part of the public arts program. Procedures for custody, maintenance and conservation of artwork shall be established by the commission as well as a maintenance schedule. Specific instructions for care of each work shall be kept on file as part of the collection management. The commission will strive to include maintenance provisions in the artwork contracts that stipulate the length of time (typically one year) the artist will be responsible for repairs, that urge artists to provide a maintenance manual, and that allow the artist first-refusal on repair contracts within the fair market rate of remuneration. Regular inspection-for-condition reporting shall be conducted so that the collection is maintained in the best possible condition as supervised by designated city personnel. When necessary, a conservation plan will be established prioritizing the work which is to be done. 
B.  Private Artwork on Private Property. The obligation to provide all maintenance necessary to preserve the artwork in good condition shall remain with the owner of the site. Art installed on or integrated into a construction project pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall not be removed or altered without the approval of the commission. Artwork installed pursuant to this chapter shall be maintained as specified in the written agreement between the city and the private property owner with regard to that artwork. Maintenance of artwork, as used in this chapter, shall include without limitation, preservation of the artwork in good condition to the satisfaction of the city, protection of the artwork against physical defacement, mutilation or alteration, and securing and maintaining fire and extended coverage insurance against vandalism and other similar acts in an amount to be determined by the city attorney. Prior to placement of an approved artwork, applicant and the owner of the site shall execute and record a covenant in a form approved by the city for maintenance of the artwork. Failure to maintain the artwork as provided herein is declared to be a public nuisance. If the artwork is not maintained in the manner prescribed, or is removed or altered without approval of the commission, in addition to all other remedies provided by law, the city may, upon reasonable notice, perform all necessary repairs, maintenance, secure insurance, or take such legal or other action deemed necessary to have the artwork maintained and if necessary, restored, and the costs therefor shall become a lien against the real property. 
(Ord. No. 1034, § 15, 1-11-12)  
4.46.110 - Application procedures for placement of artwork on private property. 
Any artwork being placed on private property as part of the city's public arts program shall be a one-of-a-kind piece. The city encourages applicants to submit an application prior to the development of the architect's schematic design. The requirements and procedures for the processing of a public arts program proposal application (an "arts application") shall be as follows: 
(1)  Upon submission of a development project application for a project subject to the requirements of this chapter, the department of planning and zoning shall provide to the project applicant a copy of this chapter, an arts application form and the name and phone number of the city's arts administrator. 
(2)  The project applicant shall submit to the arts administrator, the completed arts application form describing the manner in which the project applicant intends to comply with this chapter. 
(3)  The arts application shall include: 
(a)  Preliminary sketches, photographs, or other documentation of sufficient descriptive clarity to indicate the nature of the proposed artwork; 
(b)  An appraisal or other evidence of the value of the proposed artwork, including acquisition and installation costs; 
(c)  Preliminary plans containing such detailed information as may be required by the commission to adequately evaluate the location of the artwork in relation to the proposed development, and its compatibility with the proposed development (the artwork shall be an integral part of the landscaping and/or architecture of the building), including compatibility with the character of adjacent conforming developed parcels and existing neighborhoods if necessary to evaluate the proposal; 
(d)  A narrative statement to demonstrate that the artwork will be displayed in an area open and freely available to the general public, or otherwise provide public accessibility in an equivalent manner based on the characteristics of the artwork or its placement on the site; and 
(e)  Maintenance factors required to insure its permanence. 
(Ord. No. 1034, § 16, 1-11-12)  
4.46.120 - Approval procedures for placement of artwork on private property. 
A.  The application for the proposed artwork and its placement will be considered at a monthly public meeting of the commission. A department of planning and zoning representative will also review the artwork and its placement and landscaping elements and may refer the application to the planning commission for approval pursuant to the zoning ordinance. Any changes, questions or recommendations shall be conveyed in writing to the applicant. The commission will determine when all issued have been addressed and accept or reject the artwork. The applicant will be notified in writing of the commission's decision. 
B.  If the applicant proposes or the planning commission or city council recommends significant revisions to the architecture or physical design and layout of the proposed project subsequent to the receipt of the commission's approval, the application shall, if legally permitted, be returned to the commission for further review and recommendation concerning the revised proposal prior to final approval unless the council otherwise directs. 
C.  A contract between the city and the applicant spelling out all requirements, including insurance and maintenance, shall be executed prior to the city's final acceptance of the applicant's art-in-lieu proposal. 
(Ord. No. 1034, § 17, 1-11-12)  
4.46.130 - Procedure for refund of public arts fee for artwork in lieu of fee. 
If in-lieu artwork has been placed subsequent to payment of a public arts fee, the applicant shall submit to the arts administrator a written request for refund of the amount spent on the artwork placed on the applicant's property. The amount to be refunded shall not exceed the amount that would have been paid into the public arts fund should the applicant have chosen to pay a fee instead of place artwork on the site. The request for reimbursement shall be submitted after the artwork is installed, approved by the commission and accepted by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1034, § 18, 1-11-12)  
4.46.140 - Ownership of artwork on private property. 
Artwork placed on the applicant's property by the applicant in satisfaction of the applicant's program requirement shall remain the property of the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 1034, § 19, 1-11-12)  
4.46.150 - Application procedure for donation of artwork to the city. 
The prospective donor shall submit to the arts administrator: 
(1)  Sketches, photographs, or other documentation of sufficient descriptive clarity to indicate the nature of the proposed artwork to be donated; 
(2)  Additional samples of artist's work other than the proposed donation; 
(3)  Background information on artist who created the proposed donation; 
(4)  Installation costs, if available; 
(5)  Maintenance factors required to ensure its permanence. 
(Ord. No. 1034, § 20, 1-11-12)  
4.46.160 - Review and acceptance of artwork donated to the city. 
The proposed donation will be considered at a monthly public meeting of the commission. All details of the proposed donation, including the feasibility and expense of placing and caring for the work of art will be considered. The commission will review and discuss the donation and will direct the arts administrator as to any questions to be asked of the donor or artist. A personal appearance by artist may be requested. The commission will determine when all issues have been addressed and accept or reject the artwork. 
(Ord. No. 1034, § 21, 1-11-12)  
Chapter 4.48 - COACHELLA VALLEY MULTIPLE SPECIES HABITAT CONSERVATION PLAN/NATURAL COMMUNITY CONSERVATION PLAN MITIGATION FEE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1029, adopted September 19, 2011, amended ch. 4.48 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 4.48 pertained to the same subject matter and derived from Ord. 992, 2008. 
 
4.48.010 - Short title. 
This ordinance shall be known as the "Coachella Valley Multiple Species Habitat Conservation Plan/Natural Community Conservation Plan Mitigation Fee Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 1029, 9-14-11)  
4.48.020 - Findings. 
City council finds and determines as follows: 
A.  In order to realize the goals and objectives of the Coachella Valley Multiple Species Habitat Conservation Plan/Natural Community Conservation Plan ("MSHCP") and to mitigate the impacts caused by new development in the city, lands supporting species covered by the MSHCP must be acquired, monitored and managed in order to achieve habitat conservation in perpetuity. 
B.  The local development mitigation fee (the "fee") is necessary in order to supplement the financing of the acquisition of lands supporting species covered by the MSHCP and related public services, and to pay for new development's fair share of the cost of acquisition and perpetual conservation. 
C.  The appropriate source of funding for the costs associated with mitigating the impacts of new development to the natural ecosystems and covered species within the city, as identified in the MSHCP, is a fee paid for by residential, commercial and industrial development. The amount of the fee is determined by the nature and extent of the impacts from the development to the identified natural ecosystems and the relative cost of mitigating such impacts. 
D.  The fee does not reflect the entire cost of the lands which need to be acquired and perpetually conserved in order to implement the MSHCP and mitigate the impact caused by new development. Additional revenues will be required from other sources. The city finds that the benefit to each development project is greater than the amount of the fee to be paid by that project. 
E.  The use of the fee is apportioned relative to the type and extent of impacts caused by the development. 
F.  The costs of funding the proper mitigation for natural ecosystems and covered species identified in the MSHCP which are impacted by new development are apportioned relative to the type and extent of impacts caused by the development. 
G.  The facts and evidence provided to and considered by the city council establish that there is a reasonable relationship between the need for acquiring and conserving in perpetuity the natural ecosystems and covered species identified in the MSHCP, and the impacts to such natural ecosystems and species created by the types of development on which the fee will be imposed; and that there is a reasonable relationship between the fee's use and the types of development for which the fee is charged. This reasonable relationship is described in more detail in the mitigation fee nexus report. 
H.  The fees collected pursuant to this ordinance are reasonable and will not exceed the estimated total cost of the acquisition and perpetual conservation of the lands necessary to protect natural ecosystems and covered species, the plan and schedules for which are set forth in the MSHCP. Conservation of the land shall require monitoring and management beyond the life of the MSHCP permit. 
I.  The fee shall be used to finance the acquisition and perpetual conservation of lands and certain improvements necessary to implement the goals and objectives of the MSHCP. 
(Ord. No. 1029, 9-14-11)  
4.48.030 - Administrative responsibility. 
The city manager of the city shall be responsible for the administration of this ordinance. Detailed administrative procedures concerning the implementation of this ordinance may be established and set forth in a resolution adopted by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1029, 9-14-11)  
4.48.040 - Definitions. 
As used in this ordinance, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
"Certificate of Occupancy" means a certificate of occupancy issued by the city in accordance with all applicable ordinances, regulations, and rules of the city and state law. 
"City" means the City of Coachella, California. 
"City council" means the city council of the City of Coachella, California. 
"Commission" means the Coachella Valley Conservation Commission, the governing body established pursuant to the MSHCP that is delegated the authority to oversee and implement the provisions of the MSHCP. 
"Conservation" means all the actions necessary for the permanent protection of species, natural communities and habitat land as required of the Coachella Valley Conservation Commission under the MSHCP including land acquisition, land management, biological monitoring, law enforcement and administration. 
"Conservation areas" has the same meaning and intent as such term is defined and utilized in the MSHCP. 
"Credit" means a credit allowed pursuant to Section 4.48.110 of this ordinance, which may be applied against the fee paid. 
"Fee" means the local development mitigation fee adopted pursuant to the Mitigation Fee Act, Gov. Code section 66000 et seq.. 
"Final inspection" means a final inspection of a project as defined by the building codes of the city. 
"Gross acreage" means the total property area as shown on a land division map of record, or described through a recorded legal description of the property. This area shall be bounded by road right-of-way and/or legal property lines. 
"Local development mitigation fee" or "fee" means the development impact fee imposed pursuant to the provisions of this ordinance. 
"Multiple species habitat conservation plan" or "MSHCP" means the Coachella Valley Multiple Species Habitat Conservation Plan/Natural Community Conservation Plan, adopted by the city council on October 10, 2007. 
"Ordinance" means this Ordinance No. 1029 of the City of Coachella, California. 
"Project" means any project undertaken pursuant to the issuance of a building permit or any other approval, ministerial or discretionary development permit, by the city as required by the applicable ordinances, regulations, and rules of the city and state law. Projects undertaken by or on behalf of the city are subject to the fee. 
"Project area" means the area, measured in acres, from the adjacent road right-of-way line to the limits of project improvements. Project area includes all project improvements and areas that are disturbed as a result of the project improvements on an owner's gross acreage, including all areas depicted on the forms required to be submitted to the city pursuant to this ordinance and/or other applicable development ordinance or regulation of the city. 
"Residential unit" means a building or portion thereof used by one family and containing but one kitchen, which unit is designed or occupied for residential purposes, including a single-family dwelling, a unit within a multiple-family dwelling, and mobile homes on permanent foundations, but not including hotels and motels. 
"Revenue" or "revenues" means any funds received by the city on behalf of the commission pursuant to the provisions of this ordinance for the purpose of defraying all or a portion of the cost of acquiring and perpetually conserving vegetation communities and natural areas within the city and the region which are known to support threatened, endangered or key sensitive populations of plant and wildlife species. 
(Ord. No. 1029, 9-14-11)  
4.48.050 - Local development mitigation fee. 
To assist in providing revenue for the conservation of lands necessary to implement the MSHCP, the fee shall be paid for each project, or portion thereof, to be constructed within the city. Five categories of the fee are defined and include: (1) residential units, density less than 8.0 dwelling units per acre; (2) residential units, density between 8.1 and 14.0 dwelling units per acre; (3) residential units, density greater than 14.1 dwelling units per acre; (4) commercial acreage; and (5) industrial acreage. Because there can be mixed traditional commercial, industrial and residential uses within the same project, for fee assessment purposes only, the fee which is applicable to commercial or industrial projects shall be calculated by reference to the project area of each parcel upon which the commercial or industrial portions shall be sited. If the mixed use includes residential units, the fee applicable to the parcels upon which residential units are to be sited shall be calculated by reference to the appropriate residential fee category. If the mixed use occurs on the same parcel, the fee which is applicable to commercial or industrial projects shall be calculated by reference to the project area of the parcel. A fee schedule which contains the fee which is applicable to each of the five fee categories shall be adopted and may, from time to time, be amended by resolution ("resolution"). 
The amount of the fee required to be paid for a commercial or industrial project shall be based on the project area, as calculated by city staff based on the subdivision map, plot plan, and/or other information submitted to or required by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1029, 9-14-11)  
4.48.060 - Imposition of the local development mitigation fee. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of the city's municipal code, no permit shall be issued for any project except upon the condition that the fee applicable to such project has been paid in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1029, 9-14-11)  
4.48.070 - Payment of local development mitigation fee. 
A.  The fee shall be paid in full at the time of the issuance of a building permit for the project; provided, however, that if the city's municipal code provides for all fees assessed pursuant to the Mitigation Fee Act to be collected at a later time, then the fee collected pursuant to this ordinance shall be collected at the same time as that mandated by the city's municipal code for the payment of all such other fees. 
B.  In no event shall a final inspection be made or a certificate of occupancy be issued prior to full payment of the fee. 
C.  The fee shall be assessed one time per lot or parcel, except in cases of the construction of additional residential units, subsequent development of portions of a commercial or industrial parcel for which the fee was not originally collected, or changes in land use. The additional fee required to be paid in the case of such exceptions shall not include the amount of any previously paid fee for that parcel. No refunds shall be provided for changes in land use to a lower fee category. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to provide documentation of any previously paid fee. 
D.  The fee required to be paid under this ordinance shall be the fee in effect at the time of payment. 
E.  Notwithstanding anything in the city's municipal code, or any other written documentation to the contrary, the fee shall be paid whether or not the project is subject to conditions of approval by the city. 
F.  If all or part of the project is sold prior to payment of the fee, the project shall continue to be subject to the requirement to pay the fee as provided herein. 
G.  For projects which the city does not require a permit, final inspection or issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the fee shall be paid prior to any use or occupancy. 
H.  For purposes of this ordinance, congregate care residential facilities and recreational vehicle parks shall pay the commercial acreage fee. 
(Ord. No. 1029, 9-14-11)  
4.48.080 - Refunds. 
A.  Except as provided in Section 4.48.080(B), there shall be no refund of all or part of any fee paid under this ordinance, except in cases of overpayment or miscalculation of the applicable fee. 
B.  Collection of the fee associated with the Fringe-toed Lizard Habitat Conservation Plan (FTL HCP) ceased upon issuance of the MSHCP permit. Projects that paid the FTL HCP fee are required to pay the local development mitigation fee but may obtain a refund of the FTL HCP fee from CVCC. Refunds shall be granted subject to the rules and regulations established by the Coachella Valley Conservation Commission. 
(Ord. No. 1029, 9-14-11)  
4.48.090 - Collection, accounting and disbursement of local development mitigation fees. 
A.  Subject to the provisions of this section, all fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall be collected, administered and remitted for deposit into the account established therefore, to the commission in compliance with all applicable policies and procedures of the commission monthly. The fees will be expended solely for the purpose of conservation of the vegetation communities and natural areas within the city and the region which support species covered in the MSHCP in accordance with the plan and schedules set out in the MSHCP and the policies that have or may be adopted pursuant thereto. 
B.  The city may recover the costs of administering the provisions of this ordinance using the revenues generated by the fees, in an amount and subject to the rules and regulations established by the commission. 
(Ord. No. 1029, 9-14-11)  
4.48.100 - Automatic annual fee adjustment. 
The fee established by this chapter shall be revised annually by means of an automatic adjustment at the beginning of each fiscal year based on the average percentage change over the previous calendar year set forth in the Consumer Price Index for "All Urban Consumers" in the Los Angeles-Anaheim-Riverside Area, measured as of the month of December in the calendar year which ends in the previous fiscal year. The first fee adjustment shall not be made prior to a minimum of ten (10) months subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1029, 9-14-11)  
4.48.110 - Exemptions. 
The following types of construction shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter: 
A.  Reconstruction of a residential unit or commercial or industrial building damaged or destroyed by fire or other natural causes. 
B.  Rehabilitation or remodeling to an existing residential unit, commercial or industrial building, and additions to an existing residential unit or commercial or industrial building. 
C.  Secondary residential units, constructed on residential property previously developed with a single-family dwelling, and meeting all state and city requirements for such units. 
D.  Existing improvements that are converted from an existing permitted use to a different permitted use, provided that no additional area of the property is disturbed as a result of such conversion. 
E.  Projects for which the city is restrained by law from collecting the fee due to a development agreement or vested tentative map entered into with or issued by the city prior to October 1, 2008. 
F.  Construction of a family residential unit upon property wherein a mobile home, installed pursuant to an installation permit, was previously located prior to the effect date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
G.  Guest dwellings constructed on residential property previously developed with a single-family dwelling. 
H.  Additional single-family residential units located on the same parcel pursuant to the provisions of any agricultural zoning classifications set forth in chapters 17.10 and 17.12. 
I.  Kennels and catteries established in connection with an existing single-family residential unit and as defined in chapters 17.10 and 17.12. 
J.  Projects are exempt from paying the fee provided they meet each of the following three conditions: 
1.  Completion of required infrastructure improvements including, but not limited to, underground utilities, exterior project area walls, streets and curbs and issuance of at least one building permit for a discrete primary structure, such as a single-family home, prior to October 1, 2008, (date of MSHCP permit approval). 
2.  Continuous construction activity since October 1, 2008, as demonstrated by issuance of a building permit for a discrete primary structure and/or a certificate of occupancy permit for a discrete primary structure in each six-month period between October 1, 2008, and April 1, 2011. 
3.  City registration of the project and proposed lots to be exempted, in accordance with CVCC procedures, by September 1, 2011. 
Projects not meeting the standard exemption criteria above, that made verifiable payments, as part of a legal settlement, to specifically fund acquisition of habitat for a species listed as "endangered" under the Federal Endangered Species Act are required to pay the LDMF but are eligible to receive a refund, on a pro rata per acre basis based on the actual acreage being assessed the LDMF. Any such projects and proposed lots to be exempted must be registered in accordance with CVCC procedures by September 1, 2011. 
(Ord. No. 1029, 9-14-11)  
4.48.120 - Fee credits. 
The city may grant to owners or developers of real property, a credit against the fee that would otherwise be charged pursuant to this chapter, for the dedication of land within a MSHCP conservation area, provided, however, that no credit shall be given unless (A) the dedication is secured by a conservation easement acceptable to a grantee legally authorized to accept and hold such easements pursuant to Civil Code § 815.3 or pursuant to other legal instrument that ensures the area will be conserved in perpetuity; (B) the land to be dedicated is appropriate for conservation and dedication thereof is consistent with and furthers the goals of the MSHCP; and (C) the dedication and credit complies with all procedures and policies of the commission. The amount of the credit granted shall be determined by an estimate of the fair market value of the land dedicated. Any credit granted by the city shall be given in stated dollar amounts only. 
An applicant for a proposed project may apply for credit to reduce the amount of the fee required to be paid prior to approval of the project. Any credit granted and the amount of the fee to be paid shall be included as a condition of approval of the project. However, if an applicant has already received approval from the city and has not previously applied for a credit to reduce the amount of the fee required to be paid, an applicant may apply for such credit at any time prior to issuance of a grading permit for the project and any credit granted shall in that case be included as a condition of approval of the grading permit issued for the project. 
(Ord. No. 1029, 9-14-11)  
4.48.130 - Severability. 
This chapter and the various parts, sections, and clauses thereof, are hereby declared to be severable. If any part, sentence, paragraph, section, or clause is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid, the remainder of this chapter shall not be affected thereby. If any part, sentence, paragraph, section, or clause of this chapter, or its application to any person [or] entity is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall affect only such part, sentence, paragraph, section, or clause of this chapter, or person or entity; and shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provision, parts, sentences, paragraphs, sections, or clauses of this chapter, or its application to other persons or entities. The city council hereby declares that this chapter would have been adopted had such unconstitutional or invalid part, sentence, paragraph, section, or clause of this chapter not been included herein; or had such person or entity been expressly exempted from the application of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1029, 9-14-11)  
4.48.140 - Effective date. 
This chapter shall take effect sixty (60) days after the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. Upon the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, Ordinance 992 shall be repealed and superseded in its entirety by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1029, 9-14-11)  
Chapter 4.49 - HOTEL OPERATIONS INCENTIVE PROGRAM 
 
4.49.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide an incentive program for the operation and maintenance of quality and first class hotel facilities which enhance the tourist and travel experience for visitors to the city of Coachella, provide attractive and desirable visitor serving facilities and experiences, and assist the city in achieving its tourism goals. In the implementation of this program, the city council finds: 
A.  The general welfare and material well-being of the residents of the city of Coachella depend in large measure upon the growth and expansion of the tourism and travel industries in the city. 
B.  The operation, maintenance, and expansion of the inventory of quality hotels and first class hotels in the city of Coachella will create desirable visitor serving facilities that will contribute to the growth and expansion of tourism and travel opportunities in the city, provide employment opportunities for the residents of the city, and promote and enhance the economy of the city. 
C.  It is in the best interest of the city of Coachella to induce and encourage the, operation, and maintenance of hotel facilities that would not otherwise exist, thereby creating new sources of tax revenues for the city's general fund which supports the public services that the city provides its residents. 
D.  The authority granted and the purposes to be accomplished by this chapter are properly local governmental and public purposes for which public funds can be expended and that the operation, maintenance, and expansion of the inventory of quality and hotels is of paramount importance to the city of Coachella, its residents, and businesses. 
(Ord. No. 1106, 5-24-17)  
4.49.020 - Definitions. 
For the provisions of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
"Adjusted tax rate" means the hotel operations incentive program tax rates which shall be exclusively utilized for the calculation of the operating assistance to be paid by the city to qualified operators of hotels participating in the hotel performance incentive program. 
"Comfort hotel" means a hotel which provides appropriate standards of physical features and operational services established for hotels by the American Automobile Association, J.D. Power & Associates, Forbes, or Smith's Travel Research Service. 
"Existing hotel" means a property that was constructed, occupied, and used as a hotel on or before January 1, 2018. 
"First class hotel" means a hotel which provides standards of physical features and operational services which meet or exceed the higher rating criteria established for hotels by the American Automobile Association, J.D. Power & Associates, Forbes, or Smith's Travel Research Service. 
"First class hotel standard" means standards of physical features and operation which qualify a hotel as a first class hotel and which include operation of the hotel on a twenty-four (24) hours per day/seven days a week basis with housekeeping services, food and beverage services, room services, banquet and meeting services, concierge and bellman services, and parking services. 
"Fully entitled" means a hotel that has received and/or been issued all discretionary permits and entitlements from the city required for the construction of a new hotel. 
"Hotel" means any property containing four or more guest rooms used by four or more guests for compensation and where the guest rooms are designed and intended as transient occupancy accommodations. 
"New hotel," "first class new hotel," and "comfort new hotel" means a first class hotel or comfort hotel that is or was fully entitled as a hotel after January 1, 2018, but before December 31, 2020. The term "new hotel" does not include all, or any portion of, or addition to, an existing hotel. 
"Operating covenants" means the covenants described in Section 4.49.050 of this Code. 
"Operator" means the person who is proprietor of a hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sub-lessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, franchisee, or any other capacity, or the assignee or designee of such proprietor. 
"Transient occupancy" means an uninterrupted stay of no more than twenty-eight (28) consecutive calendar days. 
"Transient occupancy tax base" means the existing transient occupancy rate in place at the adoption of this ordinance, nine percent. 
(Ord. No. 1106, 5-24-17)  
4.49.030 - Eligibility for incentive program. 
A.  To qualify for the hotel operations incentive program for any hotel, the operator shall: 
1.  Complete and submit to the city manager, the city's application for the hotel operations incentive program and outline the following expected from the hotel: 
a.  New full time and part-time jobs to be created; 
b.  New hospitality uses to capture share of regional tourism economy and attract additional hospitality uses to city; 
c.  Local tax generation from uses (transient occupancy tax, sales taxes, and increased level of property taxes) to improve the quality of life in the city. 
2.  Provide free use of meeting facilities in the hotel for city events and Coachella-based public entities, not-for-profit charities, and community organizations. 
3.  Provide independent, third-party, certification acceptable to the city of the level of quality of the first class hotel or comfort hotel. 
4.  Execute the operating covenants which shall include provisions regarding continuing use, maintenance, non-discrimination, and such other provisions as the city council in its sole discretion, may reasonably determine are necessary or appropriate to preserve the goals and intent of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1106, 5-24-17)  
4.49.040 - Incentive program. 
A.  First Class New Hotels. The city shall pay to an operator of a first class new hotel an amount equal to fifty (50) percent of the adjusted tax rate. Such payments shall be made for twenty (20) years from the certificate of occupancy for the hotel or until the operator has been paid twenty-five million dollars ($25,000,000.00), whichever event occurs first. 
The city and a qualified participant under this section may enter into an agreement, at the sole discretion of the city, to receive an increase in the percent of the adjusted tax rate, for no longer than the first two years of the qualified participant's incentive program. 
Without regard to any preceding conditions of this section, the program shall terminate at any point the first class new hotel is not operated as a first class hotel. 
B.  Comfort New Hotels. The city shall pay to an operator of a comfort hotel with one hundred twenty-five (125) or more rooms an amount equal to fifty (50) percent of the adjusted tax rate and such payments shall be made for twenty (20) years from the certificate of occupancy for the hotel or until the operator has received twenty-five million dollars ($25,000,000.00), whichever event occurs first. 
1.  The city shall pay to an operator of a comfort hotel with fifty-one (51) to one hundred twenty-four (124) rooms an amount equal to fifty (50) percent of the adjusted tax rate and such payments shall be made for ten (10) years or until the operator has received ten million dollars ($10,000,000.00), whichever event occurs first. 
2.  The city shall pay to an operator of a comfort hotel with fifty (50) or fewer rooms an amount equal to fifty (50) percent of the adjusted tax rate and such payments shall be made for five years or until the Operator has received five million dollars ($5,000,000.00), whichever event occurs first. Without regard to any preceding conditions of this section, the program shall terminate at any point the hotel is not operated as a comfort hotel. 
(Ord. No. 1106, 5-24-17)  
4.49.050 - Operating covenants. 
Each operator eligible to participate in the city's hotel operations incentive program shall execute operating covenants approved by the city council, and recorded with the county of Riverside recorder's office. 
(Ord. No. 1106, 5-24-17)  
4.49.060 - General fund revenues. 
All transient occupancy tax revenues remitted to the city by an operator of a hotel covered by operating covenants as provided in this chapter shall be deemed general fund revenues of the city and shall be deposited in the city's general fund and subject to an annual appropriation by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1106, 5-24-17)  
4.49.070 - Administrative rules and regulations. 
Consistent with the intent and goals of this chapter, the city manager may adopt administrative rules and regulations for implementation and furtherance of the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1106, 5-24-17)  
Title 5 - BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS  
Chapter 5.04 - BUSINESS LICENSES GENERALLY  
Article I - General Provisions 
 
5.04.010 - Maximum fee. 
The city council shall periodically review the rate schedule and method of collecting the business license tax and adjust such fee to conform with current conditions. 
(Prior code § 13-1)  
5.04.020 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this section, unless it is plainly evident from the context that a different meaning is intended, the words and phrases used herein shall have meanings as set forth in this section. 
"Business" includes professions, trades and occupations, and all and every kind of calling whether or not carried on for profit. 
"Fixed place of business" means the premises occupied in the city for the particular purpose of conducting a business thereat and regularly kept open with a competent person in attendance for the purpose of attending to such business. Where a location requires a sales and use tax permit by the state board of equalization, a license applicant shall produce a valid state of California sales and use tax permit in order to be adjudged by the director of finance as having a fixed place of business within the city. 
"Gross receipts," except as otherwise specifically provided, shall include the total of amount actually received or receivable from sales and the total amounts actually received or receivable for the performance of any act or service, of whatever nature it may be, for which a charge is made or credit allowed, whether or not such act or service is done as a part of or in connection with the sale of materials, goods, wares or merchandise. Included in "gross receipts" shall be all receipts, cash, credits, redemption stamps, and property of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom on account of the cost of the property sold, the cost of materials used, labor or service costs, interest paid or payable, or losses or other expenses whatsoever. Excluded from "gross receipts" shall be the following: 
A.  Cash discounts allowed and taken on sales; 
B.  Any tax which is measured by the sales price or the gross receipts from the sale or which is a stated sum per unit of such property sold, included in or added to the purchase price and collected from the consumer or purchases; 
C.  Such part of the sale price of property returned by purchasers upon rescission of the contract of sale as is refunded either in cash or by credit; 
D.  Receipts of persons acting as agents or brokers, other than receipts received as commissions or fees earned, or charges of any character made or compensation of any character received for the performance of any service as agent or broker; provided, that any agent or broker dealing in stocks or other similar written instruments evidencing a right to participate in the assets of any business, or dealing in bonds or other evidences of indebtedness, who also deals in such property as a principal, shall include in the gross receipts by which the tax is measured the amount of his or her trading profits resulting from such dealings. No deduction from receipts attributable to trading as a principal shall be made unless such deduction is provided for in this section; 
E.  Receipts of refundable deposits, except that refundable deposits forfeited and taken into income of the business shall not be excluded; 
F.  As to a retail gasoline dealer, a portion of his or her receipts from the sale of motor vehicle fuel equal to the motor vehicle fuel license tax imposed by and previously paid under the provisions of Part 2 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state of California; 
G.  As to a retail gasoline dealer, the special motor fuel tax imposed by Section 4041 of Title 26 of the United States Code if paid by the dealer or collected by him or her from the consumer or purchaser; 
H.  Credit allowed on property accepted as part of the purchase price and collected from the consumer or purchaser; 
I.  The difference between the balance owed and paid on a defaulted purchase or finance contract upon repossession by seller and the amount received from resale of the repossessed article by the repossessing seller; 
J.  Cash value of sales, trades or transactions between departments or units of the same business; 
K.  Sales for convenience where sales of new goods, wares or merchandise are made by a person engaged in selling such articles to another person engaged in selling like or similar articles: 
1.  Where the primary purpose of the particular transaction of [or] sale is to accommodate the purchaser rather than to make a sale in the ordinary course of business; 
2.  Where, in the particular kind of business involved, a similar manner of dealing is frequent or customary in the circumstances under which the particular sale is made; and 
3.  Where goods, wares or merchandise of like or similar kind and of substantially equivalent value to that which was sold is received in consideration. 
"Manufacture" or "process" embraces all the activities of a commercial or industrial nature wherein labor or skill is applied, by hand or machinery, to materials so that as a result thereof a new, different or useful article of tangible personal property or substance of trade or commerce is produced and shall include the production or fabrication of specially made or custom-made articles. 
"Manufacturer" means every person who, directly or by contracting with others for the necessary labor or mechanical services, manufactures for sale or for commercial or industrial use from his or her own materials or ingredients any articles, substances or commodities. 
"Mill" means U.S. money of account, equal to one thousandth of a dollar or one-tenth of a cent. 
"Newly established business" means a business in existence and operation for less than three months. 
"Person" includes all domestic and foreign corporations, associations, syndicates, joint stock corporations, partnerships of every kind, clubs, businesses, or common law trusts, societies, and individuals transacting and carrying on any business in the city, other than as an employee. 
"Sale" includes the transfer, in any manner or by any means whatsoever, of title to property for a consideration; the serving, supplying or furnishing for a consideration of any property; and a transaction whereby the possession of property is transferred and the seller retains the title as security for the payment of the price shall likewise be deemed a sale. The foregoing definitions shall not be deemed to exclude any transaction which is or which, in effect, results in a sale within the contemplation of law. 
"Sale at retail" and "retail sale" mean every sale of tangible personal property (including articles produced, fabricated or imprinted) other than sale to one who purchases for the purpose of resale as tangible personal property in the regular course of business or who purchases for the purpose of consuming the property purchased in producing for sale a new article of tangible personal property or substance, of which such property becomes an ingredient or component, or as a chemical used in processing, when the primary purpose of such chemical is to create a chemical reaction directly through contact with an ingredient of a new article being produced for sale. 
"Sale at wholesale" and "wholesale sale" mean any sale of tangible personal property which is not a "sale at retail" and mean any charge made for labor and services rendered for persons who are not consumers, in respect to real or personal property, if such charge is expressly defined as a "retail sale" above when rendered to or for consumers. Sales otherwise classified as "retail sale" above may nevertheless be classified as "wholesale sales" under this section if the vendor can establish to the satisfaction of the director of finance that the sale was made to a governmental agency, public utility, manufacturer, processor or contractor who consumed the articles in the course of his or her own operations and did not offer the articles for resale to the general public except as an integral part of manufacturing, construction or service. 
"Utility" and "public utility" mean any person furnishing the public with communication, water, light, heat or power, subject to regulation by the public utilities commission of the state of California. 
"Vehicle" means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public street or highway, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Prior code § 13-2)  
5.04.030 - Gender. 
Whenever the masculine is used in this chapter it shall also include the feminine and neuter. 
(Prior code § 13-3)  
5.04.040 - Singular and plural. 
Whenever the singular is used in this chapter it shall include the plural. 
(Prior code § 13-4)  
Article II - License Requirements 
 
5.04.050 - License required. 
It is unlawful and deemed a misdemeanor for any person, whether as principal or agent, clerk or employee, either for himself or herself or for any other person, or for anybody corporate, or as an officer of any corporation, or otherwise, to commence or carry on any profession, trade, calling, occupation, or business, or to cause or direct any person to commence or carry on any profession, trade, calling, occupation, or business specified in this chapter, in the city, without first having procured a license from the city so to do, or without complying with any and all regulations of such profession, trade, calling, occupation, or business contained in this chapter or in other ordinances of the city, and the carrying on of any profession, trade, calling, occupation, or business mentioned herein without first having procured a license from the city so to do, or without complying with any and all regulations of such profession, trade, calling, occupation, or business contained in this chapter or in other ordinances of the city, shall constitute a separate violation hereof for each and every day that such profession, trade, calling, occupation, or business is so carried on. Persons described in this chapter who engage in such profession, trade, calling, occupation, or business in the city without the required license shall, in addition to the penalties provided herein, sustain a penalty of twenty-five (25) percent of the license fee due. 
(Prior code § 13-15) 
(Ord. No. 1098, § 28, 12-14-16)  
5.04.060 - Contents of license. 
All licenses shall be prepared and issued by the director of finance of the city upon payment of the sum to be paid therefor and each license so issued shall state upon the face thereof the following: 
A.  The name of the person to whom the license is issued; 
B.  The kind or kinds of business licensed; 
C.  The location of such business; 
D.  The date of the expiration of such license; 
E.  Such other information as the director of finance shall determine. 
(Prior code § 13-16)  
5.04.070 - License tax, how payable. 
All license taxes due as stated in this chapter shall be paid in advance, in lawful money of the United States, at the office of the director of finance. 
(Prior code § 13-17)  
5.04.080 - Terms of licenses—Delinquency. 
A.  All license taxes due as stated in this chapter shall be due and payable, and delinquent as follows: 
1.  Daily License. Due on its effective date and delinquent at five p.m. on due date. 
2.  Monthly License. Due on the first day of each month for which license is sought and delinquent at five p.m. on the tenth day of the month. 
3.  Quarterly License. Due on the first day of January, April, July and October. Delinquent at five p.m. on the last day of the first month in which the quarterly license is due. 
4.  Semiannual License. Due on the first day of January and July. Delinquent at five p.m. on the last day of the first month in which the semiannual license is due. 
5.  Annual License. Due on the first day of January. Delinquent at five p.m. on January 31st. 
B.  To all delinquent licenses there shall be added a penalty of fifteen (15) percent of the amount of the tax due for the period, and an additional fifteen (15) percent for each month delinquent thereafter, providing that the amount of such penalty to be added shall in no event exceed sixty (60) percent of the amount of the license tax due. 
C.  The director of finance for good cause may extend for not more than thirty (30) days the time for paying any sum required to be paid as stated in this chapter, provided a written request therefor is filed with the director of finance prior to the delinquency date. 
(Prior code § 13-18)  
5.04.090 - Proration. 
Proration of any license tax due as stated in this chapter shall be made for any portion of the period for which a license tax is payable; except in the case of a first annual license tax based upon a method other than gross receipts, the tax may be prorated as follows: 
A.  If application is made during the quarter beginning January first, one hundred (100) percent of such fee shall be paid; 
B.  If application is made during the quarter beginning April first, seventy-five (75) percent of such fee shall be paid; 
C.  If application is made during the quarter beginning July first, fifty (50) percent of such fee shall be paid; 
D.  If application is made during the quarter beginning October first, twenty-five (25) percent of such fee shall be paid. 
(Prior code § 13-19)  
5.04.100 - Duration of license. 
No license shall be issued for a period of more than twelve (12) months. No license shall be issued for any period extending beyond the thirty-first day of December. 
(Prior code § 13-20)  
5.04.110 - Limitations. 
No greater or lesser amount of money shall be charged or received for any license tax than provided for in this chapter, and no license shall be sold or issued for any period of time other than provided for in this chapter; provided, that this section shall not refer to such penalties as are provided in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 13-21)  
5.04.120 - Branch establishments. 
Separate licenses must be obtained for each branch establishment or location of the business engaged in, as if each such branch establishment or location where a separate business, and each license shall authorize the licensee to engage only in the business licensed at the location or in the manner designated in such license; provided, that warehouses, distributing plants and other locations which generate no additional gross receipts but are used in connection with and incidental to a business licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to be separate places of business or branch establishments. 
(Prior code § 13-22)  
5.04.130 - Duplicate licenses. 
Duplicate licenses may be issued by the director of finance to replace any license pre-viously issued which has been lost or destroyed, upon the licensee filing an affidavit attesting to such fact, and at the time of filing such affidavit paying to the director of finance the sum of five dollars ($5.00). 
(Prior code § 13-23)  
5.04.140 - Transfer of license. 
No license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be transferred, except that when a licensee transfers his or her business from one location to another in the city the license previously issued may be amended to authorize the conduct of the business at the new location. The license transfers and amendments in this chapter authorized may be obtained upon application therefor to the director of finance and the payment of the sum of ten dollars ($10.00). 
(Prior code § 13-24)  
5.04.150 - Retention of license. 
All licenses must be retained in the following manner: 
A.  Any licensee transacting and carrying on business at a fixed place of business in the city shall show evidence of such license upon demand. 
B.  Any licensee transacting and carrying on business but not operating at a fixed place of business in the city shall keep the license upon his or her person at all times while transacting and carrying on such business. 
(Prior code § 13-25)  
5.04.160 - Refunds. 
License fees, penalties and costs collected or received by the city may be refunded as specified by resolution of the city council. 
(Prior code § 13-26)  
Article III - Procedure for Issuance 
 
5.04.170 - Application for issuance of license. 
A.  Every person required to have a license under the provisions of this chapter shall make application for the same to the director of finance of the city. Such application shall be a written statement upon a form provided by such director of finance and shall be written by the applicant under penalty of perjury or sworn to by the applicant before a person authorized to administer oaths. The application shall set forth such information as may be necessary properly to determine the amount of the license tax to be paid by the applicant. 
B.  If the amount of the license tax to be paid by the applicant is based upon gross receipts, such application shall set forth the gross receipts for the applicable period as provided in Section 5.04.020 of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 13-37)  
5.04.180 - Application for issuance of peddler—Solicitor license. 
Applicants for licenses to commence, manage, engage in, maintain, conduct or carry on the business described in Section 5.04.380(Q) and Section 5.04.380(R) as "peddling" or "soliciting" shall furnish to the director of finance the following additional information: 
A.  Name and description of applicant; 
B.  Permanent home address and full local address of applicant; 
C.  A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold; 
D.  If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with credentials establishing the exact relationship; 
E.  The length of time for which the right to do business is desired; 
F.  The place where the goods or property proposed to be sold, or orders taken for the sale thereof, are manufactured or produced; where such goods or products are located at the time such application is filed; and the proposed method of delivery; 
G.  Photograph of applicant and photograph of any vehicle used in such peddling or solicitation taken within sixty (60) days immediately prior to the date of filing application; the picture of the applicant shall be two inches by two inches, showing the head and shoulders of applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner; 
H.  The names of at least two reliable property owners of the county of Riverside, state of California, who will certify as to the applicant's good character and business respectability or, in lieu of the names of references, such other available evidence as to the good character and business responsibility of the applicant as will enable an investigator to properly evaluate such character and business responsibility; 
I.  A statement as to whether or not applicant has been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor; 
J.  A statement by a reputable physician of the city, dated not more than ten (10) days prior to submission of application, certifying the applicant to be free of contagious, infectious or communicable diseases; 
K.  Present a valid and unexpired certification issued by Riverside County Department of Health certifying the storage and maintenance facilities for any perishable foods and/or food products have been inspected and meet Riverside County health and safety regulations for food handling; 
L.  Meet all additional requirements as described in Section 5.04.380(Q) and Section 5.04.380(R); 
M.  A valid and current policy or sufficient certificate or certificates evidencing the policy or policies of liability insurance, covering all operations of the applicant and his or her agent, and employees. The policy or policies shall contain an endorsement naming the city as additional insured, shall provide that the city will be given thirty (30) days' written notice prior to cancellation or material change, shall be in the minimum amount of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) and shall be obtained at the licensee's cost and expense; 
N.  If peddling is done through the use of a pushcart, the applicant shall furnish the following additional information: 
1.  The number of pushcarts owned, operated, leased, or controlled by the applicant, that will be used in the city. 
2.  A description of the logo, color scheme; insignia, and any other distinguishing characteristics of the applicant's pushcarts, accompanied by a color photograph of each pushcart to be used in the city; if the pushcarts to be used are identical, one color photograph may be submitted. 
3.  The character, location, hours and routing of pushcart operations; and 
O.  Such other information as the director of finance of the city deems appropriate. 
When any change occurs regarding the written information required by this section, prior to or after issuance of a business license, the applicant shall give written notification of such change to the business license division within two weeks of such change. 
(Prior code § 13-38)  
5.04.190 - State license required. 
Any person engaged in or carrying on any profession, trade, calling, occupation or business which is regulated or licensed by the state shall make presentation of a valid unexpired state license as prima facie evidence that such person is so licensed by the state. 
(Prior code § 13-39)  
5.04.200 - Specific location required. 
Each license shall be issued for a specific location or premise except where this chapter expressly allows otherwise. 
(Prior code § 13-40)  
5.04.210 - Application for first license. 
A.  Every person making application for first business license shall, prior to such application, have a determination made by the planning division of the city community development department that such profession, trade, calling, occupation, or business conforms to city zoning ordinances. Any license issued contrary to the provisions of this section shall be void and of no effect. 
B.  Every person making application for first business license shall, prior to approval of such application, obtain all necessary inspections, as required by city ordinances, from the building division of the city community development department, the Coachella fire protection district, and the city police department. Any license issued contrary to the provisions of this section shall be void and of no effect. 
C.  Every person making application for a first license shall estimate the gross receipts, the number of tables, alleys, machines, devices or other applicable basis for the period to be covered by the license to be issued. Such estimate, if accepted by the director of finance as being reasonable, shall be used in determining the amount of license tax to be paid by the applicant; provided, however, the amount of the license tax so determined shall be tentative only, and such person shall, within thirty (30) days after the expiration of the period for which such license was issued, furnish the director of finance with a sworn statement upon a form to be provided by such director of finance setting forth such information as may be therein required and showing, during the period of such license, the gross receipts, the number of tables, alleys, machines, devices or other applicable basis. The license tax shall be ascertained and paid upon such applicable basis, credit being given for the tentative license tax previously paid. 
(Prior code § 13-41)  
5.04.220 - Application for renewal of license. 
A.  In all cases, the applicant for the renewal of a license shall submit to the director of finance, for his or her guidance in ascertaining the amount of the license tax to be paid by the applicant, a written statement, upon a form to be provided by such director of finance, written under penalty of perjury or sworn to before a person authorized to administer oaths. Such form shall set forth such information concerning the type of the applicant's business and the gross receipts derived therein or other applicable basis during the preceding licensing period as may be required by the director of finance to enable him or her to ascertain the amount of the license tax to be paid by such applicant pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  The director of finance shall determine the average monthly gross receipts, the number of tables, alleys, machines, devices or other applicable basis and compute the license fee payable for twelve (12) months. The license fee payable for the next period shall be the amount based upon the computed twelve (12) months of applicable base. For the purpose of this section, a fractional part of a month shall be considered as a full month. 
(Prior code § 13-42)  
5.04.230 - Statements not conclusive. 
No statement shall be conclusive as to the matters set forth in this chapter, nor shall the filing of the same preclude the city from collecting by appropriate action such sum as is actually due and payable as stated in this chapter. The director of finance of the city shall have the right, to be exercised by himself or herself or a member of his or her department, to inspect the books of any person engaged in or carrying on any profession, trade, calling, occupation or business within the city for the purpose of ascertaining the true license tax of such person. This right can be exercised after five days' written notice to such person. If any person required to make such statement referred to in this section shall fail to do so, such person shall be required to pay a license tax at the amount to be determined by the director of finance for the profession, trade, calling, occupation or business carried on by such person and such person shall be guilty of a violation hereof and be punishable therefor as provided by the code of the city. 
(Prior code § 13-48)  
5.04.240 - Information confidential. 
A.  The information furnished or secured pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed confidential in character, and shall not be subject to public inspection, and shall be kept so that the contents thereof shall not become known except to the persons charged with the administration of this chapter. 
B.  Unless in compliance with judicial order, or as may be required for the proper administration of this chapter, the director of finance, his or her agents and employees, shall not divulge facts or information obtained in the administration of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 13-44)  
5.04.250 - Determination of license tax in certain cases. 
A.  If any person fails to file any required statement within the time prescribed, or if, after demand therefor has been made by the director of finance, he or she fails to file a corrected statement within fifteen (15) days after notification so to do, or it appears to the satisfaction of the director of finance that a statement filed does not set forth the true facts of the business for which the license is required, the director of finance shall determine the amount of license tax due from such person by means of such information as it may be able to obtain. 
B.  In case such determination is made, the director of finance shall give notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the U.S. Post Office at Coachella, California, postage prepaid, addressed to the person so assessed at the address appearing on his or her last license or application. Such person may, within ten (10) days after the serving or mailing of such notice, make application in writing to the director of finance for a hearing on the amount of the license tax. If such application is made, the director of finance shall give not less than five days' written notice in the manner prescribed in this chapter to the licensee to show cause, at a time and place fixed in such notice, why said amount specified therein should not be fixed for such license. At such hearing the licensee may appear and offer evidence why such specified tax should not be fixed as the license tax. After such hearing, the director of finance shall determine the proper tax to be charged and shall forthwith give written notice to the licensee in the manner prescribed herein of such determination and the amount of such tax. 
C.  If application by the licensee for a hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the license tax determined by the director of finance shall become final and conclusive. 
(Prior code § 13-45)  
5.04.260 - Appeal. 
A.  Any person aggrieved by any decision of an administrative officer or agent with respect to the issuance or refusal to issue a license, or the amount of a license tax, may appeal to the council by filing a notice of appeal with the director of finance within fifteen (15) days of such decision. The council shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal and the director of finance shall give notice in writing to such person of the time and place of hearing by serving it personally or by depositing it in the U.S. Post Office at Coachella, California, postage prepaid, addressed to such persons at the address appearing on his or her last license or application. The findings of the council shall be final and conclusive and shall be served upon the applicant in the manner prescribed above for service of notice of hearing. 
B.  The amount of any license tax finally determined as provided in Section 5.04.250 shall be due and payable as of the date the original license fee was due and payable, together with any penalties that may be due thereon. 
(Prior code § 13-46)  
5.04.270 - Rules and regulations. 
Rules and regulations supplementing the provisions of this division shall be established from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(Prior code § 13-47)  
Article IV - Stickers 
 
5.04.280 - Vehicle stickers. 
Where a license tax is determined by the number of vehicles, upon the issuance of a license the director of finance shall deliver to the licensee one sticker, emblem, device, sign or license facsimile for each vehicle used by the licensee in the conduct of his or her business. Such sticker, emblem, device, sign or license shall be prominently displayed within such vehicle. 
(Prior code § 13-58)  
5.04.290 - Coin and vending machine and pushcart stickers. 
Upon the issuance of a license, the director of finance shall deliver to the licensee one sticker for each coin or vending machine or pushcart approved by the city in the conduct of the licensee's business. Such sticker shall be attached in a conspicuous place on each approved machine and pushcart. This section shall not apply to coin and vending machines in cases where the license fee is based upon gross receipts. 
(Prior code § 13-59)  
5.04.300 - Stickers—Forms, etc. 
Each such sticker shall have thereon the words "COACHELLA, CALIFORNIA," or any abbreviation thereof, the current year, and shall be in such form and color and contain such other information as the director of finance shall determine. 
(Prior code § 13-60)  
5.04.310 - Sticker for substitute vehicles. 
Additional stickers, emblems, devices, signs or license facsimiles may be issued by the director of finance for substitute or alternate vehicles if the licensee applies in writing to the director of finance, setting forth that such substitute or alternate vehicle will not be used in the city on days when the regular vehicle or vehicles will be used in the city. 
(Prior code § 13-61)  
Article V - License Taxes 
 
5.04.320 - License tax. 
The amount of license taxes to be paid to the city by any person engaged in or carrying on any profession, trade, calling, occupation or business hereinafter designated shall be fixed by resolution. Such license tax shall be paid by every person engaged in carrying on or maintaining any such profession, trade, occupation, calling or business in the city. For every person engaged in carrying on or maintaining any profession, trade, occupation, calling or business the license tax shall be as set forth by resolution of the city council. 
(Prior code § 13-72)  
5.04.330 - Annual registration tax. 
A.  Any person engaged in or carrying on any profession, trade, calling, occupation or business hereinafter designated shall pay an annual registration tax of twenty dollars ($20.00). All license taxes provided for in this chapter for the privilege of engaging or carrying on any profession, trade, calling, occupation or business are imposed in addition to the annual registration tax. The annual registration tax shall be nonrefundable but shall be prorated for that portion of a licensing period to which the tax applies. The annual registration tax is due and payable at the time the application described in Sections 5.04.210, 15.04.220 and 5.04.230 is made to the director of finance. 
B.  Notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter, an annual registration tax shall not be charged for branch establishments of licensed businesses as set forth in Section 5.04.120, provided the business transacted by such branch is classified hereunder in the same category as the primary or principal licensed business. 
(Prior code § 13-73)  
5.04.340 - Businesses designated as classification I for the purpose of assessing fees. 
The following businesses are designated classification I for the purpose of assessing fees and the specific fees shall be fixed by resolution: 
A.  Retail Sales and Miscellaneous. Every person conducting or carrying on the business of selling at retail any goods, wares and merchandise or commodities, or conducting, maintaining or carrying on any trade, occupation, calling or business at a fixed place of business within the city not otherwise specifically licensed by other subdivisions of this chapter. 
B.  Transporting Persons. Every person conducting or carrying on the business of transporting persons for hire, picking up and or discharging passengers within the city. 
C.  Deliveries of petroleum products. 
D.  Distribution of Stamps, Coupons, Etc. Every person who distributes any stamps, coupons, tickets, cards or other devices to be issued to purchasers of goods, wares, merchandise, services or any other thing of value, which stamps, coupons, tickets, cards or other devices shall entitle such purchaser to procure from the person issuing the stamps, coupons, tickets, cards or other devices, or from any other person, any goods, wares, merchandise, services, money or any other thing of value free of charge upon the presentation of one or a number of such stamps, coupons, tickets, cards or other devices. 
E.  Amusements—Games, Devices, Etc. 
1.  Bowling, skee ball or bat ball alley, shuffleboard, pinball machines or any other similar devices, equipment or means of entertainment requiring the deposit of a coin, slug or other device. 
2.  Sundry games or devices including shuffleboard, skee ball or other games of like character not operated by the insertion of a coin or slug. 
3.  Pool hall or billiard parlor. 
4.  Ice or roller skating rink; this shall not apply to any exhibition given in a restaurant, cafe, hotel or theater when the public is not permitted to participate in such exhibition. 
5.  Jukeboxes, devices for playing of records, or music automatically upon the deposit of a coin, slug or other device, or any other mechanical musical device or machine of like character not licensed hereunder. 
6.  Shooting gallery. 
7.  Public bowling alley. 
8.  Public swimming pool or plunge. 
F.  Golf Courses, Concerts, Lectures, Riding Academies, Etc. 
1.  Golf course, miniature golf course, bicycle course, golf practice driving course or archery range. 
2.  Concerts, lectures, motion pictures, indoor tennis matches, theatrical performances, vaudeville performances or any similar type of entertainment not otherwise specifically licensed hereunder, where an admission fee is charged. 
3.  Riding academy where instructions in horseback riding are given, or horses or other animals are maintained for hire, or a feed or livery stable. 
G.  Advertising, Outdoor, Etc. Erecting, installing, maintaining or operating outdoor advertising, advertising structures, billboards, signboards or similar devices. 
H.  Ambulance Service. Any person engaged in or carrying on the business of providing ambulance service in the city: 
1.  Shall make presentation of a valid, unexpired county of Riverside license, as set forth in Riverside County Ordinance No. 577.2, regulating ambulance services, as prima facie evidence that such person is so licensed by the county. 
2.  Shall make presentation of a valid, unexpired California Highway Patrol certification that all minimum requirements of the state regulating ambulance services have been met. 
I.  Automobile Parking Lot. 
1.  It is further provided that before any license shall be issued the applicant therefor shall file with the traffic engineer plats and plans of the grounds or parcel of land to be used as an automobile parking lot indicating thereon the boundaries, adjoining houses, or structures of any nature whatever, also the number of square feet used and the arrangement for parking automobiles. A schedule of prices to be charged for parking and the hours of parking shall be shown on such application. Before a license can be issued, such application must be approved in writing by the city manager and the chief of the Coachella fire district. Such application may be rejected by the city manager if the location or the proposed arrangement of automobiles to be parked on the parking lot is, in the opinion of the chief of the Coachella fire district, a fire hazard, or otherwise incompatible with the public safety, or if the prospective operator has previously had his or her license to operate a parking lot in the city revoked. 
2.  Every person conducting, managing or carrying on such business of storage or parking automobiles shall post signs in conspicuous places at or near the point of entrance, indicating thereon in figures not less than ten (10) inches in height the exact amount to be charged and the hours during which attendants will remain to watch parked cars. 
3.  It is unlawful for any person to park or cause to be parked any automobile where any part of such machine extends over any sidewalk or walkway. It is further provided that a barrier or guard rail be placed on the parking lot preventing automobiles from rolling back or going over any portion of the sidewalk other than a driveway built expressly to carry weight of automobiles. 
4.  It is unlawful for any person operating a parking lot or space to solicit patronage by standing on the streets or sidewalks and asking or requesting or ballyhooing members of the public to use such parking space or to make any other unnecessary noise or disturbance whatever. 
5.  Plank entrances or exits shall not be allowed except on permission from the traffic engineer. 
6.  Every parking lot or space shall be equipped with fire extinguishing equipment as provided in the Fire Prevention Code of the city. 
7.  On every parking lot or space the dust must be laid by sprinkling water or other dust-settling fluid on the ground or surface as often as may be necessary to lay such dust. 
8.  Upon five days' notice and a hearing before the city manager, the city manager may revoke the license of any operator of a parking lot who violates any of the provisions of this section. 
J.  Automobile, Truck, Trailer, Motor Scooter, Motorcycle, Etc., Rentals. Renting automobiles, trucks, motor scooters, motorcycles or trailers for a period of two weeks or less. 
K.  Automobile body shop or repair shop. 
L.  Barber shop or beauty shop. 
M.  Barber or beauty school. 
N.  Business Services. Stenographic, typing and business services of like or similar character. 
O.  Cold storage or refrigeration plant. 
P.  Collection agency. 
Q.  Commercial printing. 
R.  Credit reporting bureau. 
S.  Dance school. 
T.  Gardener. 
U.  Health studio, physical fitness studio or reducing salon. 
V.  Hospital, sanitarium, rest home, nursing home or asylum. 
W.  Hotels, Motels, Apartment Houses, Rooming Houses, Etc. Hotel, motel or rooming house, boardinghouse, apartment house, house court or bungalow court having three or more rental units; also, persons engaged in the business of renting or letting rooms, apartments or other accommodations for dwelling, sleeping, housekeeping or lodging, where such persons have a total of three or more such units, Section 5.04.120 notwithstanding. 
X.  Janitorial service. 
Y.  Lawnmower, tool, scissor sharpening or saw filer. 
Z.  Locksmith. 
AA.  Masseur and masseuse. 
BB.  Messenger service. 
CC.  Newspaper distributor. 
DD.  Notary public. 
EE.  Nursery school. 
FF.  Piano, musical instrument or singing lessons. 
GG.  Ticket agency. 
HH.  Trade School or College, Business School or College. 
1.  Where instruction is given in any trade, profession, calling or occupation, and a fee is charged for such instruction. 
2.  Where any trade, profession, calling or occupation is carried on in connection with any of the trade schools, trade colleges, business colleges or schools licensed hereunder, a separate license must be obtained for the conduct of such trade, profession or occupation. 
II.  Trailer (house) or mobilehome park. 
JJ.  Travel bureau. 
KK.  Vending Machine. Merchandise and/or service. 
(Prior code § 13-74)  
5.04.350 - Businesses designated as classification II for the purpose of assessing fees. 
The following businesses are designated classification II for the purpose of assessing fees and the specific fees shall be fixed by resolution: 
A.  Wholesaling and Newspaper Publications. Every person conducting or carrying on the business consisting of newspaper publication or selling, handling and storing at wholesale any goods, wares and merchandise or commodities at a fixed place of business in the city. 
B.  Deliveries of Petroleum Products. Every person conducting or carrying on the business of making deliveries of petroleum products either from within the city limits and/or from outside the city limits to places within the city limits. 
(Prior code § 13-75)  
5.04.360 - Businesses designated as classification III for the purpose of assessing fees. 
The following businesses are designated classification III for the purpose of assessing fees and the specific fees shall be fixed by resolution: 
A.  Manufacturing, Packing and Processing. Every person conducting or carrying on a business consisting of manufacturing, packing or processing any goods, wares or merchandise at a fixed place of business within the city. 
For the purposes of this subsection, the tax shall be applicable to the value of the manufactured or processed product, as reflected by the licensee's method of accounting, using generally accepted principles of accounting consistently applied, less the cost of purchased raw materials or, in the alternative, less the value of the raw materials or the value of the partially completed product at the time it enters the manufacturing process within the city. 
B.  Public Utility. Except any public utility which makes an annual payment to the city under a franchise or similar agreement. 
(Prior code § 76)  
5.04.370 - Businesses, professions or occupations designated as classification IV for the purpose of assessing fees. 
The following businesses are designated classification IV for the purpose of assessing fees and the specific fees shall be fixed by resolution: 
Accountant 
Abstract and title 
Advertising agent 
Appraiser 
Architect 
Artist 
Assayer 
Attorney-at-law 
Auditor 
Bacteriologist 
Book agent 
Broker or commission agent 
Chemist 
Certified public accountant 
Chiropodist 
Chiropractor 
Civil, electrical, mining, chemical, structural, consulting or hydraulic engineer 
Dentist 
Designer, illustrator or decorator 
Detective agency and/or private patrol 
Drugless practitioner 
Electrologist 
Employment agency 
Engraver 
Entomologist 
Feed, grain and fruit broker 
Geologist 
Illustrator or show card writer 
Interpreter 
Lapidary 
Mortician 
Naturopath 
Occulist 
Optician 
Optometrist 
Osteopath 
Physicians 
Physiotherapist 
Podiatrist 
Real estate broker 
Reporters—court, convention and/or certified shorthand 
Roentgenologist 
Surgeon 
Surveyor 
Stock and bond broker 
Taxidermist 
Veterinarian 
 
(Prior code § 13-78)  
5.04.380 - Business subject to miscellaneous tax rates. 
For every person conducting or carrying on any business described in this section, the license tax shall be as set forth by resolution: 
A.  General Contractors, Subcontractors and Specialty Contractors. 
1.  Every person conducting or carrying on the business of house moving, grading, paving, wrecking, sewer, pipeline, trenching, excavating contractor or conducting or carrying on the business of general contractor constructing, altering, repairing, wrecking or salvaging buildings, highways, roads, railroads, excavations or other structures, projects or improvements. 
2.  Every person conducting or carrying on the business of electrical, plumbing, painting, masonry, glazier, cement, floor, heating, plastering, roofing, sash, sheet metal, tile, lathing and any other contractor or subcontractor not specifically mentioned in this section. 
The election to obtain an annual license or quarterly license shall be at the sole discretion of the applicant and shall be exercised upon application for a first license as described in Section 5.04.200. Upon application for a renewal license, an applicant shall elect to obtain either an annual license or a quarterly license. No license shall be issued for any period extending beyond December 31st of the current calendar year as provided in Section 5.04.100. 
This section shall apply to any person who for himself or herself shall engage in the business of erecting or constructing houses for the purpose of leasing, renting or selling the same and who does not employ a contractor who shall act as superintendent. 
Any contractor conducting or carrying on the business of selling goods, wares or merchandise as a retailer in addition to his or her contracting business shall, in addition to the contractor's license provided therein, secure a license for such retail business as required in this chapter. 
B  Transportation, Trucking and Towing. 
1.  Every person not having a fixed place of business within the city who makes wholesale or retail deliveries of goods or services by motor vehicle within the city or who maintains, installs, or repairs goods, wares or merchandise or equipment inside the city or who provides a service not otherwise covered in this section, including but not limited to towing services. 
2.  The license fee for businesses subject to this section shall be graduated according to gross receipts attributable to work or service provided within the city. 
3.  Businesses subject to this section shall remit quarterly reports of their gross receipts attributable to work or service provided within the city along with payment of the respective fee. 
C.  Dance Halls, Etc. Public dance hail, night club, or any place where dancing is permitted. 
D.  Amusement—Circus, Menageries, Tent Shows and Theatricals. 
1.  Circus, carnival or other similar exhibition; each circus or menagerie parade or procession on, over or along any public street or highway of the city, by any person not having a license to exhibit such circus, carnival or other similar exhibit in the city. When the carnival, circus or tent show license tax is paid, no additional license shall be required for shows, exhibitions, rides or devices within the carnival, circus or tent show. 
Carnival Defined. For the purpose set forth in this chapter, "carnival" means a collection of shows, exhibitions, feats of strength, merchandise booths, games of skill, games of chance or wheels of fortune presented or offered upon the streets or vacant property within the city. 
2.  Lecture or traveling theatrical performance under or surrounded or partially enclosed by canvas, such as comedy, spoken drama, opera or concert; any dance, where the public is permitted to dance, not covered in subsection C of this section; performances held in any public hall, club room, assembly hall or theatre, where moveable scenery and theatrical appliances are used, whether or not an admission fee is charged. The holder of a theatre license shall not be required to procure an additional license to conduct, maintain or carry on any theatrical or vaudeville performance when such performance is conducted at any such theatre so licensed. 
3.  Any place to which the public is admitted and an ad mission fee is charged, at which any boxing or wrestling match or exhibition is conducted, presented or carried on. 
4.  Arcade consisting of one general enclosure in which is conducted the business of operating or exhibiting a phonograph, projector scope or any other instrument or machine of like character, or exhibiting, showing or letting the use of any microscope, galvanic battery, weighing machine or similar lung tester, muscle tester, machine of like character, or letting the use of coin machines simulating the playing of soccer, baseball, basketball, boxing and similar games. 
5.  Concession or rides for children, including miniature trains, merry-go-rounds, pony rides, speedway (small electric automobiles), small gasoline automobiles, pig slides, etc. 
6.  Rides other than carnivals for adults or concessions, including carrousel, loop-o-plane, aeroplane, ferris wheel, sky flier, scooter, shop, toonerville, motorcycle ride, globe of death, magic carpet, ride-in-the-dark, or rides or devices of similar character. 
7.  Street musicians. 
E.  Advertising on Vehicles. 
1.  Sound. Operating any vehicle equipped with music or musical device, loudspeaker, or other device for attracting attention. 
2.  Signs. Operating any vehicle for advertising purposes and to which vehicle there are attached signs, placards, billboards or other advertising matter. Each license for advertising on vehicles shall be subject to the following regulations: 
a.  The only sound permitted is music or human speech. 
b.  Sound advertising is permitted only between nine a.m. and sunset. 
c.  The vehicle with the sound device shall not proceed at a speed of less than ten (10) miles per hour nor shall sound be issued while the vehicle is not in motion. 
d.  No sound shall be issued within one hundred (100) yards of a hospital, school, church, funeral parlor and/or funeral home. 
e.  Human speech amplified by the sound device shall not be lewd, indecent or slanderous, nor shall it be specifically addressed to individual pedestrians or motorists as distinguished from the public in general. 
f.  The volume of sound shall be controlled so that it is not audible for a distance in excess of one hundred (100) yards. 
g.  The license fee on display advertising shall not apply to signs painted, rather than affixed, on delivery trucks or other vehicles used by the firms making the display for purposes other than advertising in excess of twelve (12) hours per week. 
h.  The chief of police shall monitor the operation of vehicles with sound devices and shall report to the city manager violations of the above regulations. If the city manager reasonably finds that a licensee has violated the regulations, he or she shall direct the director of finance to refuse the issuance of a new license to the licensee until further order of the city manager and he or she may revoke the license already granted. 
3.  Searchlight. Operating any vehicle equipped with searchlight for attracting attention. 
F.  Advertising, Handbills, Etc. Distributing handbills, advertising throw-aways and other similar types of advertising materials. 
G.  Airplane Rental and Lessons. Airplane rental and flying lessons. 
H.  Auctions and Auctioneers. Auction sales or auctioneer. 
I.  Bankrupt Closeout Sales, Etc. 
1.  Owning, operating, opening, establishing, managing, maintaining, or having charge of any location or place of business of any kind for the sale of any insolvent, bankrupt, fire damage, closeout or other similar goods, wares or merchandise. 
In the event that the business conducting and/or carrying on a forced removal, closing out or similar sale is located within the boundaries of an approved redevelopment project area and is being forced to vacate business location due to eminent domain proceeding the license fee provided for in this section shall be waived. 
Every person managing, conducting and/or carrying on a sale as specified in this chapter shall make a written application to the city director of finance so to do. Such application shall be signed and sworn to by such applicant and shall state all the facts in regard to the contemplated sale, the period of time during which such sale shall be held, together with a statement that no goods, wares or merchandise have been purchased and/or received during the period of thirty (30) days immediately preceding the date of such application for the purpose of adding same to that in stock for sale, the reason for such sale and an inventory of such goods. 
2.  General Provisions. 
a.  The director of finance shall file such application and shall endorse thereon the date such license is granted or refused. 
b.  It is unlawful for any person to make a false statement in such application. 
c.  A license issued under the provisions in this chapter hereof shall be valid only for the inventoried goods. 
d.  A license issued under the provisions in this chapter shall not be transferable. 
e.  It is unlawful for any person managing, conducting, and/or carrying on a sale as specified herein to secure goods other than those enumerated in such inventory for the purpose of selling same at such sale. 
f.  It is unlawful for any person having a license hereunder to add any goods to the inventoried stock, and no goods shall be sold except that included in the original inventory. 
g.  The provisions in this chapter shall not apply to public or court officers or to any person acting under the direction of state or federal courts in the course of their official duties. 
J.  Christmas Trees, Greens or Card Sales. Sale of Christmas trees, holly, berries, cards or other seasonal items, except where business is conducted in connection with another regularly established place of business for which a license has been issued, or is conducted by and solely for the benefit of a charitable or nonprofit organizations. 
K.  Finance companies. 
L.  Junk Dealers or Dealers in Old and/or Used Articles. 
1.  Every person, at a fixed place of business in the city, engaged in the business of carrying on or collecting, buying or selling at either retail or wholesale or otherwise dealing in junk and/or rubbish, waste material, refuse and/or any old rags, sacks, bottles, cans, papers, metals, jewelry, precious metals, rubber, bric-a-brac, cordage, truck or automobile tires, truck or automobile accessories, and truck or automobile parts, and other like articles, whether the same can be sold or otherwise disposed of for the purpose of being treated, repaired or prepared so as to be used again in some other form. 
2.  Every person who does not maintain a fixed place of business in the city, engaged in the business of collecting, buying or otherwise dealing in junk, and/or rubbish, waste material, refuse and/or any old rags, sacks, bottles, cans, papers, metals, jewelry, precious metals, rubber, bric-a-brac, cordage, truck or automobile tires, truck or automobile parts, truck or automobile accessories and other like articles, whether the same can be sold or otherwise disposed of for the purpose of being treated, repaired or prepared so as to be used again in some other form. 
3.  Every person who maintains a fixed place of business in the city for wrecking or salvaging motor vehicles. "Wrecking" means the business of buying or trading in secondhand, used or wrecked motor vehicles, and selling the parts thereof or building motor vehicles from the salvaged parts of such motor vehicles and selling same, or the "wrecking or salvaging" of motor vehicles on a contract basis. 
M.  Pawnbrokers. 
N.  Searchlight. Searchlights not mounted on vehicles. 
O.  Shoe shining. 
P.  Itinerant Merchant. An itinerant merchant under this chapter shall be deemed to mean and include any person or persons, firm or corporation, either principle or agent, employer or employee who engages in a temporary business in the city by selling or offering for sale goods, wares, merchandise, or things or articles of value for a period of not more than one hundred ninety (190) days in any calendar year, and who, for the purpose of carrying on such business, hires, leases or occupies any room, building, structure or stand on any real property or on or adjoining any street or public place in the city. The person, firm or corporation so engaged shall not be relieved from the provisions of this subsection by reason of associating temporarily any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer, or by reason of conducting such temporary business in connection with or as part of any local business, or in the name of any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer. 
1.  Any itinerant merchant who, as a seller of any article, is required to obtain a state vendor's permit, pursuant to the provisions of Revenue and Taxation Code; Section 6066 et seq., shall, prior to the issuance of a permit by the city, produce satisfactory proof of possession of such a state vendor's permit. 
2.  Every sale in the normal course of business of such itinerant merchant within the city shall be recorded or memorialized on sequentially numbered receipts, which shall contain, at a minimum, the following information: 
a.  The name of the seller; 
b.  The dale of sale; 
c.  The price paid; 
d.  A description of the item(s) sold. 
It shall be the duty of the itinerant merchant to retain such records for the period of three years from the date of sale or the period prescribed by law for the retention of records for federal income tax purposes, whichever is longer. 
3.  The city council finds and declares that it would have passed and enacted each subpart of this subsection independently of the others, and if any subpart of this subsection is found unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, it shall have no effect on the remaining subparts. 
Q.  Peddler. "Peddler" shall be defined as any person who sells and makes immediate delivery or offers for sale and immediate delivery any goods, wares, merchandise, service or thing in the possession of the seller, at any place in the city other than at a fixed place of business, but shall not include salesmen or agents for wholesale houses or firms who sell to retail dealers for resale or sell to manufacturers for manufacturing purposes or to bidders for public works or supplies. It shall include the use of a "pushcart," which shall be defined as any wagon, cart or similar wheeled container, not a "vehicle" as defined in the Vehicle Code of the state of California, from which food, beverage, or product is offered for sale to the public. 
The chief of police shall, based upon the information supplied by the finance department, investigate the backgrounds of all applicants. If such investigation by the chief of police reveals that the applicant has been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude or any crime of a nature associated with the type of business for which the application is submitted, he or she shall notify the director of finance, who shall deny the license application. 
R.  Solicitor. "Solicitor" shall be defined as any person who engages in the business of going from house to house, place to place, on or along the streets within the city and/or by telephone selling or taking orders for or offering to sell or take orders for goods, wares, or merchandise or other things of value for future delivery, or for services to be performed in the future. 
1.  All solicitors requiring cash deposits or taking orders for cash on delivery purchases (C.O.D.), or who require a contract of agreement to finance the sale of any goods, services or merchandise for future delivery, or for services to be performed in the future shall furnish to the city a bond in an amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), executed by cash or corporate surety. Such bond shall be conditioned upon the making of final delivery of the goods ordered, or services to be performed, in accordance with the terms of such order or failing therein that the advance payment on such order shall be refunded within sixty (60) days from the contract delivery date. 
2.  Other persons not maintaining a fixed place of business in the city, but who regularly render personal or other services or products either by appointment, call, referral or otherwise from place to place or house to house in the city, are likewise subject to the provisions of subsection a. above. 
3.  Any person aggrieved or damaged by the action of such solicitor shall have the right of action on the bond for recovery of money or damages or both. Such bond shall remain in full force and effect for a period of ninety (90) days after the expiration of such license, unless sooner released by action of the city council. 
4.  All solicitors, while so employed, shall wear upon their person, plainly visible, an identification card containing at a minimum their name and employer. Such cards shall be provided by the solicitor or the solicitor's employer. 
5.  Every person engaged in the business of soliciting shall submit to the department of finance a completed application, supplying such information as the finance department shall require upon the form. Any person failing to comply and submit such requested information shall be denied a soliciting permit. 
6.  The chief of police shall, based upon the information supplied to the finance department, investigate the background of all applicants. If such investigation by the chief of police reveals that the applicant has been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude or any crime of a nature associated with the type of business for which the application is submitted, he or she shall notify the director of finance, who shall deny the license application. 
7.  Any solicitor who claims to be entitled to an exemption from the payment of any license provided for in this chapter upon the grounds that he or she or she is employed by a nonprofit, charitable or fraternal organization shall file a written, notarized affidavit disclosing, upon a form to be provided by the finance department, the minimum necessary information as required upon the form. The finance director, at his or her discretion, may also require further reasonable proof of status of the nonprofit entity. Failure to provide such information or a finding that the applicant is not a nonprofit, charitable or fraternal organization shall constitute grounds for denial of such application. 
S.  Prohibition against soliciting or peddling in public places. After December 31, 1994, it is unlawful for any person or entity to sell or distribute, or to solicit any orders for the sale of any food, goods, items, products, wares or services on any public street, sidewalk, right-of-way, park or building or on any private property without the written consent of the property owner provided that such prohibition shall not apply to the sale or distribution, but not the solicitation of any order for the sale, of the following: 
1.  Any newspaper anywhere within the city; or 
2.  No more than any five items of food or food products accomplished through motorized vehicles provided that they shall not operate on any public street prior to ten am. or after nine p.m. and provided that they shall not locate on private property without the written consent of the property owner. Any such motorized vehicle shall prominently display the owner's name, address, phone number and city business license number. Any such motorized vehicle may not stop or park on any public street or right-of-way except for the sole purpose of consummating a sale but not for the purpose of establishing a permanent or temporary sales location to initiate or solicit sales. A motorized vehicle shall include one trailer hauled by such a motorized vehicle. 
T.  Photographers—Transient. "Transient photographers" shall be defined as any person who solicits to take orders for photographs or photographic work, or selling or giving coupons for photographic work, and requiring a deposit in advance of the final delivery or any such work or services and having no fixed place of business within the city. 
1.  The chief of police shall, based upon the information supplied by the finance department, investigate the applicant's business background and moral character as he or she deems necessary to protect the public welfare. If as a result of such investigation the applicant's character or business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory the chief of police shall notify the director of finance, who shall deny the license application. 
2.  All transient photographers requiring cash deposits or taking orders for cash on delivery purchases (C.O.D), or who require a contract of agreement to finance the sale of photographic work shall furnish to the city a bond in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00), executed by cash or corporate surety. Such bond shall be conditioned upon making final delivery of the finished photographic work, in accordance with the terms of such order, or failing therein, that the advance payment of such order be refunded and conditioned further, that any person aggrieved by this action of any such person soliciting or taking orders for photographic work or selling coupons for photographic work shall have a right of action on the bond for the recovery of money or damages or both. Such bond shall be retained by the city for ninety (90) days after the expiration of the license. If contractual obligations remain outstanding at the conclusion of the ninety (90) day period, the bond shall remain with the city until such obligations have been discharged. 
U.  Radio Broadcasting, Television and/or Soliciting Advertising For. Radio and television broadcasting or soliciting for radio or television broadcasting. 
The conducting or carrying on the business of producing or generation of electromagnetic uses within the city for the purpose of broadcasting by radio transmission or television is hereby declared to be a local business. The business of soliciting advertising within the city for radio or television transmission in intrastate broadcasting is declared to be a local business. 
V.  Fortuneteller, Palmistry Astrologer. 
1.  All persons who conduct, engage in, carry on, participate in or practice fortunetelling, palm reading or astrology shall furnish to the city a surety bond in an amount of fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00). 
2.  Any person aggrieved or damaged by the action of such fortunetellers, palm readers or astrologers shall have the right of action on the bond for recovery of money or damages or both. Such bond shall remain in full force and effect for a period of ninety (90) days after the expiration of such license, unless sooner released by action of the city council. 
W.  Administrative Office. Major businesses within the city that perform essentially administrative functions in connection with sales or services performed or rendered elsewhere shall be subject to an administrative office business tax. 
(Prior code § 13-78)  
Article VI - Exemptions and Exclusions 
 
5.04.390 - Exemptions. 
The following are exempted from the payment of a license tax under this chapter: 
A.  Any nonprofit institution, corporation, organization or association organized and conducted for nonprofit purposes only, when the receipts derived are to be wholly for the benefit of such organization and not in the whole or any part for private gain of any person. This exemption shall not apply to professional promoters employed by nonprofit institutions, corporations, organization or associations. 
B.  Any solicitor engaged in interstate commerce when a license tax casts a burden upon such interstate commerce. 
C.  Any honorably discharged or honorably relieved member of the armed forces of the United States who is physically unable to obtain a livelihood by manual labor, and who is a voter of this state, distributing circulars or hawking, peddling or vending any goods, wares or merchandise owned by him or her, except spirituous, malt, vinous or other intoxicating liquor. 
D.  Any public utility which makes an annual payment to the city under a franchise or similar agreement. 
(Prior code § 13-89)  
5.04.400 - Exclusions. 
Except as may be otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, the terms hereof shall not be deemed or construed to apply to any of the following persons: 
A.  Banks, including national banking associations, to the extent that a city may not levy a license tax upon them under the provisions of Article XIII, Section 27 of the State Constitution. 
B.  Insurance companies and associations to the extent that a city may not levy a license tax upon them under the provisions of Article XIII, Section 28 of the State Constitution. 
C.  Any person whom the city is not authorized to license under any law or constitution of the United States or the state of California. The director of finance may require the filing of a verified statement from any person claiming to be excluded by the provisions of this section, which statement shall set forth all facts upon which the exclusion is claimed. 
(Ord. 891 § 17, 2003: prior code § 13-90)  
5.04.410 - Claims for exemption. 
Any person desiring to claim exemption from the payment of a license tax and to have a free license issued to him or her shall make application therefor upon forms prescribed by the director of finance and shall furnish such information and make such affidavits as may be required. Upon the determination being made that the applicant is entitled to exemption from the payment of license taxes for any reason set forth in this chapter, the director of finance, upon the applicant complying with the provisions of this chapter or any other ordinance of the city which may require a permit for the doing of the particular act proposed to be done, shall issue a free license to such person, which shall show upon its fact that the license tax is exempt. 
(Prior code § 13-91)  
5.04.420 - Revocation of exemption. 
The director of finance may revoke any exempt license granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter upon information that the licensee is not entitled to the exemption as provided in this chapter. In such revocation, the procedure to be followed and right of appeal shall be as provided in Sections 5.04.260 and 5.04.270 in this chapter for determination of disputed tax. 
(Prior code § 13-92)  
Article VII - Miscellaneous Administrative and Enforcement Provisions 
 
5.04.430 - Constitutional apportionment. 
None of the license taxes provided for by this chapter shall be so applied as to occasion an undue burden upon interstate commerce or be violative of the equal protection and due process clauses of the Constitution of the United States and the state of California. In any case where a license tax is believed by a licensee or applicant for a license to place an undue burden upon interstate commerce or be violative of such constitutional clauses, he or she may apply to the director of finance for an adjustment of the tax. Such application may be made before, at or within six months after payment of the prescribed license tax. The applicant shall, by sworn statement and supporting testimony, show this method of business and the gross volume or estimated gross volume of business and such other information as the director of finance may deem necessary in order to determine the extent of any of the such undue burden or violation. The director of finance shall then conduct an investigation and, after having first obtained the written approval of the city attorney, shall fix as the license tax for the applicant an amount that is reasonable and nondiscriminatory, or if the license tax has already been paid, shall order a refund of the amount over and above the license tax so fixed. In fixing the license tax to be charged, the director of finance shall have the power to base the license tax upon a percentage of gross receipts or any other measure which will assure that the license tax assessed shall be uniform with that assessed on business of like nature, so long as the amount assessed does not exceed the license tax as prescribed by this chapter. Should the director of finance determine the gross receipts measure of license tax to be the proper basis, he or she may require the applicant to submit, either at the time of termination of applicant's business in the city or at the end of each three-month period, a sworn statement of the gross receipts and pay the amount of license tax therefor; provided, that no additional license tax during any one calendar year shall be required after the license shall have paid an amount equal to the annual license tax as prescribed in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 13-103)  
5.04.440 - Substitute for other revenue acts. 
Any person required to pay a license tax for transacting and carrying on any business under this chapter shall be relieved from the payment of any license tax for the privilege of doing such business which has been required under any other ordinance of the city, but shall remain subject to the regulatory provisions of such other ordinance. This section shall not apply to inspection, permit fees, admission tax or any tax added upon the consumer or user. 
(Prior code § 13-104)  
5.04.450 - Effect of chapter on past actions and obligations previously accrued. 
Neither the adoption of this chapter, or its superseding of any portion of any other ordinance of the city shall in any manner be construed to affect prosecution for violation of any other ordinance committed prior to the effective date of this chapter, nor be construed as a waiver of any license or any penal provisions applicable to any such violation, nor be construed to affect the facility of any bond or cash deposit required by any ordinance or code section to be posted, filed or deposited, and all rights and obligations thereunto appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Prior code § 13-105)  
5.04.460 - Unexpired licenses issued. 
Any person who on the effective date of this chapter has a valid, unexpired license for any business issued by the city under the provisions of any ordinance heretofore enacted shall receive credit on the amount of the license tax imposed by this chapter for a pro rata of the license tax previously paid based upon the unexpired portion of the period for which such previous license was issued. In the event that the pro rata credit for an unexpired license is greater than the license tax required by this chapter, then and in that event the amount of the license tax under this chapter shall be the amount of the credit for the unexpired license fee or fees paid under each other ordinance or ordinances. 
(Prior code § 13-106)  
5.04.470 - License tax a debit. 
The amount of any license tax and penalty imposed by the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt to the city, and any person carrying on any business without first having procured a license from the city to do so shall be liable to an action in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of the license tax and penalties imposed on such business. 
(Prior code § 13-107)  
5.04.480 - Remedies cumulative. 
All remedies prescribed in this section shall be cumulative and the use of one or more remedies by the city shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing this chapter. 
(Prior code § 13-108)  
5.04.490 - Effect of mistake. 
In no case shall any mistake made by the city in stating the amount of a license tax prevent or prejudice the collection by the city of what shall be actually due from anyone carrying on a business subject to a license tax under this chapter. 
(Prior code § 13-109)  
5.04.500 - Evidence of liability. 
In any action brought under or arising out of any of the provisions of this chapter, or of any ordinance imposing a license tax, the fact that a party thereto represented himself or herself as engaged in any business or calling for the transaction of which a license [is required] shall be conclusive evidence of the liability of such party to pay for a license for such business. 
(Prior code § 13-110)  
5.04.510 - Administration of oaths. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the director of finance, his or her deputies and authorized agents, are authorized to administer oaths. 
(Prior code § 13-111)  
5.04.520 - Enforcement. 
A.  It shall be the duty of the director of finance, his or her deputies, agents, and/or employees, and they and each of them are directed to enforce each and all of the provisions of this chapter. Each department of the city which issues permits for work to be done shall require the production of a valid, unexpired license prior to the issuance of such a permit. The immediately preceding sentence shall not be construed to require any person to obtain a license prior to doing business within the city if such requirement conflicts with the Constitution or applicable statutes of the United States or the state of California. 
The director of finance, in the exercise of the duties imposed upon him or her hereunder and acting through his or her deputies or duly authorized assistants, may examine or cause to be examined all places of business in the city to ascertain whether the provisions of this chapter have been complied with. 
B.  The chief of police and all police officers are appointed inspectors of licenses, to examine all places of business and persons liable to procure a license, to see that such licenses are taken out, and to see that all regulatory provisions of this chapter are enforced. Such officers shall have the right to enter free of charge at any time any place of business for which a license is required by this chapter, to demand the exhibition of such license for the current term by any person engaged or employed in the transaction of such business to ascertain that the required licenses have been procured, and to enforce and perform all of the regulatory provisions of this chapter. 
C.  In the event that an applicant shall violate or cause or permit to be violated any of the provisions set forth in this chapter, or shall conduct or carry on the business in an unlawful manner, or shall cause or permit such business to be so conducted or carried on, it shall be the duty of the director of finance, and the director of finance shall, in addition to the other penalties provided in this chapter, revoke the license or licenses issued for conducting or carrying on such business or businesses. If the license or licenses to conduct or carry on any business specified in this chapter shall be revoked, no license or licenses shall be granted such person to conduct or carry on any business specified in this chapter within six months of the date of such revocation. 
(Prior code § 13-112)  
Chapter 5.05 - LANDSCAPE-RELATED BUSINESSES 
 
5.05.010 - Landscape-related businesses. 
Effective November 1, 2016, as a prerequisite to the issuance or renewal of a business license for any entity providing services or nursery products within the territorial boundaries of the city of Coachella related to or used for landscape installation, maintenance, or design, the applicant shall present proof that at least one employee has, within the twelve (12) months immediately preceding the application, completed a minimum four-hour course developed by the Coachella Valley Association of Governments, the South Coast Air Quality Management District, the Coachella Valley Water District, and local stakeholders, on grass over-seeding alternatives to traditional scalping and landscaping water efficiency. 
Prior to November 1, 2016, said educational prerequisite shall be satisfied by completion of the two-hour course that was in place prior to the addition of the water efficiency segment of the curriculum. 
(Ord. 987 § 3, 2007) 
(Ord. No. 1095, § 2, 9-28-16)  
Chapter 5.08 - AUCTIONS AND AUCTIONEERS 
 
5.08.010 - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter: 
"Auction" means the offering for sale or selling of personal property to the highest bidder; or offering for sale or selling of such property by the method known as "down hill selling." By "down hill selling" is meant the first offering of an article at a higher price and then offering the same at successive lower prices until a bidder is secured. 
"Auctioneer" is a person who offers for sale at an auction sale any personal or real property. 
"Selling at auction" includes a sale in which, instead of the bidders making increasingly higher bids for an article or articles of merchandise, the seller or auctioneer announces a price at which he or she will sell one or more articles of merchandise and then, if no sale occurs, increasingly adds additional articles of merchandise to those originally offered, with or without varying the previously announced price, until a buyer is finally induced to buy the accumulated articles at the price fixed. 
The words "auctioneer" or "auction" shall not include any person making any sale or any sale made by virtue of or pursuant to provisions of any law of the United States or the state of California or pursuant to the provisions of any order made by any court of the United States or the state of California or by virtue of any mortgage or a deed of trust or other lien. The word "person," when used in this chapter, shall include the plural and shall also include "firm" or "corporation." 
(Prior code § 13-125)  
5.08.020 - License to conduct auction. 
No person shall conduct any auction in the city without having first obtained a license, as provided in this chapter, to do so. 
(Prior code § 13-126)  
5.08.030 - Application for license. 
Application for such license shall be made to the finance director and such application shall give the name of the person who shall conduct such auction, the place where such auction is to be conducted, a general description of the goods which it is proposed to sell at such auction, and names of two residents of the city who may be referred to concerning the moral character of such application. 
(Prior code § 13-127)  
5.08.040 - License to act as auctioneer—Fee—Bond. 
A license to act as an auctioneer pursuant to the provisions hereof shall be granted by the finance director upon compliance with Section 5.08.030 hereof and the following condition: The depositing with the finance director of a penal bond in the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), with surety or sureties to be approved by the finance director, conditioned that upon the failure to comply with any of the conditions or provisions set forth in this chapter such auctioneer or his or her sureties will pay any fine which may be imposed upon such auctioneer for such violation; and further conditioned that such auctioneer or his or her sureties will pay to any person aggrieved by any act of such auctioneer in violation of any term or terms hereof any amount which a court of competent jurisdiction may determine that such person is entitled to because of such violation. 
(Prior code § 13-128)  
5.08.050 - License exemptions. 
The provisions of Section 5.08.040 shall not apply to any license now in force authorizing the holder to do business as an auctioneer, but upon the termination of such license the future conduct of such auctioneer shall be governed by such section. All other sections hereof shall apply to all auction sales held or made after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derived. 
(Prior code § 13-129)  
5.08.060 - General requirements—Auctioneers. 
A.  Misrepresentation as to Quality. No auctioneer of personal property shall knowingly or negligently misrepresent the quality of any article offered for sale at any auction and for a violation thereof may be punished as provided in this chapter. 
B.  Substitution of Articles. No auctioneer of personal property who shall offer for sale at public auction any article shall thereafter substitute any article in lieu of that offered after the same has been purchased. 
C.  Misrepresentation as to Ownership. No auctioneer of personal property shall, with intention to induce a person to purchase same, make any false representation or statement as to the ownership, character or quality of or pretended owner of such property. 
D.  Misrepresentation as to Source. No auctioneer shall falsely represent or pretend that any goods, wares or merchandise which are offered for sale at auction are in whole or part a bankrupt, insolvent or damaged stock of goods or goods saved from fire or of any character or history other than the true character and history of the goods. 
E.  General Requirements. Any auctioneer who shall sell or offer for sale at public auction in the city, any stock of merchandise which such auctioneer in any manner or by any means represents as being a whole or part of goods belonging or kept in the business of another shall, before offering such goods for sale at public auction, file with the finance director, ten (10) days before the opening of any auction, a verified inventory of this stock of merchandise, which such verification shall state that the inventory as filed is, in all respects, true and that no goods not thus inventoried will be sold. No goods other than the goods listed in such inventory may be sold at such auction. Such inventory shall be kept by the finance director as a part of his or her records and shall be open for inspection to the public. 
F.  Auctioneer's Record Book. Every auctioneer must keep a record book in which must be entered each sale, the amount paid and date of each sale, which book shall be open at all times for inspection by any member of the police department of the city. 
G.  Auctioneer's Civil Liability. Any person or persons aggrieved or damaged by any act of an auctioneer in the city in violation of or contrary to the provisions hereof shall have an action against such auctioneer and/or his or her bondsmen upon his or her official bond. 
H.  Revocation of License. Upon the violation of any of the terms or conditions set forth in this chapter, the city council may, after hearing, revoke any license granted hereunder. A conviction under subsections A through D of this section, inclusive, hereof shall automatically revoke the license of the person convicted. 
I.  Renewal of Revoked License. No person shall be granted a license hereunder whose license has been revoked during the six months next preceding the date of the filing of such application, except with the consent of the city council. 
(Prior code § 13-130)  
5.08.070 - Jewelry auctions. 
A.  Auctions Restricted. No auction of jewelry shall be held unless the person, firm or corporation offering such stock for sale at public auction has been continuously in business in the city as a retail or wholesale merchant of jewelry for at least one year before the date on which the auction shall open, and only where such merchant is bona fide disposing of his or her stock for the purpose of retiring from business. 
B.  Jewelry Defined. The term "jewelry," as used in this chapter, means diamonds and other precious and semiprecious stones, pearls, cultured pearls, synthetic stones, and any limitations of any of these articles, articles for personal wear and adornment of any character whatsoever commonly and commercially known as "jewelry," watches, clocks, silverware, gold ware, and precious metal ware of the platinum group, and wares plated with any of the precious metals. 
C.  Exceptions. The provisions of subsections A and B of this section shall not apply to judicial sales or sales by executors or administrators, nor to sales by or on behalf of a licensed pawnbroker of unredeemed pledges in the manner provided by law. Provided that, if a person is engaged in a combined jewelry and pawnbroker business, that portion of the business which is a "jewelry business," as distinguished from the business of the pawnbroker, shall be subject to the provisions hereof. 
(Prior code § 13-131)  
5.08.080 - Auction sales—Times and days generally. 
All auctions provided in this chapter shall be held on successive business days when once commenced, and shall not continue for more than thirty (30) days from the commencement of such auction. 
(Prior code § 13-132)  
5.08.090 - Same—Jewelry, clocks, watches, etc.—Times. 
All auction sales of diamonds, watches, clocks, jewelry, silverware, oriental rugs and bric-a-brac must be held between sunrise and sunset, but auctions of all other goods may be held at any time. 
(Prior code § 13-133)  
5.08.100 - Charitable, religious and fraternal auction sales exempt. 
The provisions set forth in this chapter shall have no application to any auction or sale conducted by any charity, church or lodge or other association or corporation not organized for profit. 
(Prior code § 13-134)  
5.08.110 - Certain wholesale and retail sales exempt. 
The provisions set forth in this chapter shall have no application to any auction conducted by a person operating a business of a type described in Sections 5.04.390 and 5.04.400 of this title, or by an individual who is regularly employed in that business by such a person, if all of the following conditions are met: 
A.  The goods which are to be sold at the auction are of the same type or variety of goods which have been sold in the ordinary course of that business; 
B.  The goods which are to be sold at the auction are the property of the auctioneer or the person who is the employer of the auctioneer; 
C.  The auction is to be conducted on the business premises of the owner of the goods where such goods have been regularly sold; 
D.  The goods to be sold are either unused goods, returned goods which had been sold by the same person and were unused at the time of the original sale, or goods which have been traded or exchanged for unused goods; 
E.  The license fees required under Section 5.04.050 have been paid, and the operator of the business has a valid business license at the time of the auction. This section shall not be construed to exempt any person from the requirements of Sections 5.04.170 and 5.04.190 through 5.04.220 of this title. 
(Prior code § 13-135)  
Chapter 5.12 - BINGO 
 
5.12.010 - Terms and conditions—Statutory authority. 
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 326.5 of the Penal Code, bingo games will be permitted within the city under the terms and conditions specified in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 14-45)  
5.12.020 - License—Application. 
An annual bingo license may be granted by the city council to any organization which wishes to conduct bingo games within the city for the sole benefit of such organization, which organization is exempted from the payment of the Bank and Corporation Tax by Sections 23701(a), 23701(b), 23701(d), 23701(e), 23701(f), 23701(g) and 23701(1) of the Revenue and Taxation Code, and by mobilehome park associations and senior citizens organizations and provided that the receipts of such games are used only for charitable purposes. Such applications shall be in writing to the city council and shall be accompanied by the following: 
A.  An annual bingo license fee in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00), one-half of which license fee paid shall be refunded to the organization if the application for license is denied. In addition, a fee of one percent of the monthly gross receipts over five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) shall be an additional fee and shall be collected monthly; 
B.  A statement indicating the purpose and uses for which the proceeds of such bingo games are to be based; 
C.  A report from the departments of building and safety, environmental services and fire of the city stating that inspection of the property has been made and such property meets with the fire and building and safety regulations, and has adequate off-street parking for one car for each two possible participants in the bingo games. 
(Prior code § 14-46)  
5.12.030 - Same—Renewal. 
Licenses for bingo games which have been issued by the city council may be renewed annually upon the following conditions: 
A.  Payment of the annual bingo license fee in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00), one-half of which license fee paid is to be refunded to the organization if an application for a license renewal is denied. In addition, a fee of one percent of the monthly gross receipts of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) shall be an additional fee and shall be collected monthly; 
B.  Submission by the licensee of a verified statement on forms provided by the city indicating the use of the funds which were derived from the games held in the previous year; 
C.  Submission of a certified statement signed by the officer of the organization holding such license for the previous year stating that the bingo games which have been held were operated in conformance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 14-47)  
5.12.040 - Operation of licensed bingo games. 
All bingo games operated under licensing by the city council, as provided in this chapter, shall be held in strict compliance with the following restrictions: 
A.  No minors shall be allowed to participate in any bingo games; 
B.  An organization authorized to conduct bingo games pursuant to Section 5.12.020 shall conduct a bingo game only on property owned or leased by it, or property whose use is donated to the organization for an office or for the performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to require that the property owned or leased by or whose use is donated to the organization be used or leased exclusively by or donated exclusively to such organization; 
C.  All bingo games shall be open to the public, not just to the members of the authorized organization; 
D.  All bingo games shall be operated and staffed only by members of the authorized organization which organized them. Such members shall not receive a profit, wage or salary from any bingo game. Only the organization authorized to conduct a bingo game shall operate such game or participate in the promotion, supervision or any other phase of such game. This section does not preclude the employment of security personnel who are not members of the authorized organization at such bingo game by the organization conducting the game; 
E.  No individual, corporation, partnership or other legal entity, except the organization authorized to conduct a bingo game, shall hold a financial interest in the conduct of such bingo game; 
F.  With respect to organizations exempt from payment of the Bank and Corporation Tax by Section 23701(d) of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all profits derived from bingo games shall be held in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other funds or accounts. Such profits shall be used only for charitable purposes. 
G.  With respect to other organizations authorized to conduct bingo games pursuant to this chapter, all proceeds derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. Proceeds are the receipts of the bingo games conducted by organizations not within subsection F above. Such proceeds shall be used only for charitable purposes, except as follows: 
1.  Such proceeds may be used for prizes. 
2.  A portion of such proceeds, not to exceed twenty (20) percent of the proceeds before the deduction for prizes or two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per month, whichever is less, maybe used for rental of property, overhead, including the purchase of bingo equipment, administrative expenses, security equipment, and security personnel. 
3.  Such proceeds may be used to pay license fees. 
H.  No person shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game unless such person is physically present at the time and place the bingo game is being conducted; 
I.  The total value of prizes awarded during the conduct of any bingo game shall not exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) in cash or in kind, or both, for each separate game which is held, 
J.  As used in this section, "bingo" means a game of chance in which prizes are awarded on the basis of designated numbers or symbols on a card which conforms to numbers or symbols selected at random. Notwithstanding Section 330c of the Penal Code, as used in this chapter, the game of bingo shall include cards having numbers or symbols which are concealed and preprinted in a manner providing for distribution of prizes. The winning cards shall not be known prior to the game by any person participating in the playing or operation of the bingo game. All such preprinted cards shall bear the legend "for sale or use only in a bingo game authorized under California law and pursuant to local ordinance." It is the intention of the council that bingo, as defined in this subsection, applies exclusively to this chapter and shall not be applied in the construction or enforcement of any other provision of law. 
(Ord. 891 § 19, 2003; prior code § 14-48)  
5.12.050 - Penalty for violations—Legal actions. 
A.  No person shall receive or pay for a profit, wage or salary from any bingo game licensed under the provisions of this chapter, and any violation of this prohibition shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), which fine shall be deposited in the general fund of the city. 
B.  A violation of any provision of this chapter, other than subsection A of this section, is a misdemeanor. 
C.  In addition to any other remedy available, the city may bring an action to enjoin any violation or threatened violation of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 14-49)  
Chapter 5.16 - CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISES 
 
5.16.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms have the following meanings: 
The definitions contained in this chapter rely on those contained in the Cable Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, and the Telecommunications Act of 1996 (47 U.S.C. Section 521 et seq.) (the "Cable Act"), as it is from time to time amended and interpreted. Any ambiguity shall be resolved by reference to the federal statutes, regulations and the decisions interpreting the same. 
"Access channel" means any program or signal channel available for nonprofit use by government agencies, educational institutions, community groups, individual members of the public, under terms established by the franchise agreement and city regulation. 
"Applicable law" means all lawfully enacted and applicable federal, state, and city laws, ordinances, codes, rules, regulations, and orders as the same may be amended or adopted from time to time. 
"Basic service" shall, at a minimum, consist of the following: All signals carried in fulfillment of the requirements of Sections 614 [47 U.S.C. 534] and 615 [47 U.S.C. 535] of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended. Each such tier shall also include any public, educational and governmental access programming required by the franchise of the cable system to be provided to subscribers, any signal of any television broadcast station that is provided by the cable operation to any subscribers, except a signal which is secondarily transmitted by a satellite carrier beyond the local service area of such station, and any additional video programming signals the cable operator desires to be added to the basic service. 
"Cable Act" means the Cable Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992 and the Telecommunications Act of 1996 (47 U.S.C. Section 521 et seq.) (the "Cable Act"), as it is from time to time amended and interpreted. 
"Cable service" means: (i) the one-way transmission to subscribers of (a) video programming, or (b) other programming service; and (ii) subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming service. 
"Cable system" means a facility, or any part thereof, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within the city. Such term shall not include: (i) a facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations; (ii) a facility that serves subscribers without using any public right-of-way; (iii) a facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, except that such facility shall be considered a cable system (other than for purposes of Section 621(c) of Title II of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended) [47 USCS Section 541] to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers, unless the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive on-demand services; (iv) any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility systems; and (v) an open video system that complies with Section 653 of Title II of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended. 
"Cable system operator" means any person, group of persons, firm or corporation who either: (1) provides cable service over a cable television system and who, directly or through one or more affiliates, owns a significant interest in such cable system; or (ii) controls or is responsible, through any arrangement, for the management and operation of such cable system. 
"City" means the city of Coachella, organized and existing under the laws of the state of California, and the area within its territorial limits. 
"City council" or "council" means the city council of the city of Coachella, California. 
"Communications Act of 1934" means the legislation passed by Congress in 1934 that established a national telecommunications goal of high quality, universally available telephone service at reasonable cost. The Act also established the Federal Communications Commission (FCC). The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, and the Telecommunications Act of 1996 have all amended the Communications Act of 1934 as newer telecommunications technologies and national policies have evolved. 
"Federal Communications Commission" or "FCC" means that federal agency as presently constituted by the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, or any successor agency, which develops guidelines for the implementation of the Cable Act. 
"Force majeure" means a strike, an act of God, an act of public enemies, orders of any kind of a government of the United States of America or of the state or any of their departments, agencies, and political subdivisions, riots, epidemics, landslides, lightning, earthquakes, fires, hurricanes, tornadoes, volcanic activity, storms, floods, washouts, droughts, civil disturbances, explosions, partial or entire failure of utilities or any other cause or event not reasonably within the control of the disabled party. 
"Franchise" means a nonexclusive authorization granted in accordance with this chapter and exercised in accordance with a franchise agreement to install cables, wires, lines, optical fiber, underground conduit, and other devices necessary and appurtenant to the construction, operation, and maintenance of a cable system along the public rights-of-way within all or a portion of the city to provide cable service. Any such authorization, in whatever form granted, shall not mean or include: (i) any other permit or authorization required for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the city required by the ordinances and laws of the city; (ii) any permit, agreement, franchise for noncable services, or authorization required in connection with operations on public streets or property including, without limitation, permits and agreements for placing devices on or in poles, conduits or other structures, whether owned by the city or a private entity, or for excavating or performing other work in or along public rights-of-way; or (iii) express or implicit authorization to provide cable service to, or install a cable system on, private property without owner consent (except for use of compatible easements pursuant to Section 621 (a)(2) of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. Section 541 (a)(2)). 
"Franchise agreement" means a contract entered into in accordance with the provisions of this chapter between the city and a grantee that sets forth, subject to this chapter, the terms and conditions under which a franchise will be exercised. 
"Franchise area" or "service area" means the area of the city that a grantee is authorized to serve by its franchise agreement. 
"Grantee" means a natural person, partnership, domestic and or foreign corporation or entity, association, joint venture or organization of any kind granted a franchise by the city council under this chapter and its lawful successor, transferee or assign. 
"Grantees" means two or more cable companies that hold legally authorized franchises from the city to provide cable service within the city. 
"Gross receipts" means all receipts, which are received, directly or indirectly, by a grantee from or in connection with the operation of the system to provide cable service including, without limitation: 
1.  Any receipts received from subscribers, including but not limited to receipts for basic service, expanded basic service, other tier services, additional outlets, FM service, commercial service, premium channel service, pay-per-view service and related per-event services, or for the distribution of other cable service over the cable system or the provision of any cable service-related activity in connection with the operation of the cable system. 
2.  Receipts received from subscribers for installation, change in service and reconnection charges and similar fees. 
3.  Receipts received from subscribers for converters, remote controls or other equipment leased or rented to subscribers in connection with the delivery of cable services to such subscribers. 
4.  Receipts received from subscribers for service charges and late fees attributable to delinquent accounts. 
5.  Receipts received from third parties, including advertising revenue, home shopping commissions, guide commissions, leased access payments, and studio and other facilities or equipment rentals. 
6.  Receipts shall include any payment or consideration (including copyright and franchise fees, but excluding any utility users tax or new sales tax imposed by city or the state or federal government) collected for direct payment to a third party. Franchise fees paid to the city are not deemed to be taxes and are not to be deducted from the total gross receipts figure on which franchise fees are paid. 
7.  Receipts of any other person which is derived directly or indirectly from or in connection with the operation of the cable system to the extent that such receipts are derived through a means which has the effect of avoiding the payment of franchise fees to the city that would otherwise be paid as stated in this chapter. 
Gross receipts, as defined in this chapter, shall not include the following: 
8.  Bad debts written off by grantee in the normal course of its business. However, bad debt recoveries shall be included in gross receipts. 
9.  Refunds made to subscribers or other third parties. 
10.  Receipts received as a direct reimbursement of grantee's expense in the operation of any access channels. 
11.  Sales, ad valorem, or other types of "add on" taxes, levies, or fees calculated by gross receipts which grantee might have to pay or collect for federal, state or local government (exclusive of franchise fees provided for in this chapter). 
12.  Receipts received for advertising on grantee's local origination channel (if any) to the extent of grantee's direct costs of operation of grantee's local origination channel. 
13.  Nonoperating receipts such as interest income or gain from sale of an asset. 
14  Receipts received for converter deposits. 
15.  Receipts received from the service extension surcharge authorized under this chapter or any franchise granted hereunder. 
In computing gross receipts from sources other than a grantee's subscribers, including without limitation, receipts derived from the sale of advertising, home shopping services, guide sales, the lease of channel capacity on its cable system, or any other such receipts derived from the operation of the cable system, the amount of such receipts attributable or allocated to grantee in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, for the purpose of determining gross receipts, shall be the aggregate receipts received by grantee from such other sources during the period in question multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which shall be the number of grantee's subscribers in the city as of the last day of such period and the denominator of which shall be the number of subscribers within all areas served by grantee's regional cable system (if any) as of the last day of such period. 
"Normal business hours" means those hours during which most similar businesses in the community are open to serve customers, including some evening hours at least one night per week and/or some weekend hours. 
"Person" means an individual, partnership, association, joint stock company, organization, corporation, or any lawful successor thereto or transferee thereof, but such term does not include the city. 
"Public rights-of-way" means the surface, the air space above the surface, and the area below the surface of any public street, highway, lane, path, alley, sidewalk, boulevard, drive, bridge, tunnel, parkway, waterway, easement, or similar property in which the city now or hereafter holds any property interest, which, consistent with the purposes for which it was dedicated, may be used for the purpose of installing and maintaining a cable system. No reference herein, or in any franchise agreement, to a "public rights-of-way" shall be deemed to be a representation or guarantee by the city that its interest or other right to control the use of such property is sufficient to permit its use for such purposes, and a franchisee shall be deemed to gain only those rights to use such property as are properly in the city's authority and as the city may have the undisputed right and power to give. 
"Service area" means the entire territory defined in a franchise agreement to receive cable service. The city may grant a franchise for all or any defined portion of the city. 
"Subscriber" means any person who legally receives any service delivered over a cable system. 
"Total number of subscribers" means the number of subscribers determined as follows: in the event a single fee is paid for service to a multiple dwelling unit, the number of equivalent subscribers shall be determined by dividing such fee by the then prevailing basic service tier rate and rounding the resulting quotient to the nearest whole number which must then be added to the number of all other subscribers. 
(Prior code § A-2-1)  
5.16.020 - General provisions. 
A.  Scope of City's Authority. The city may grant one or more franchises, and each such franchise shall be awarded in accordance with and subject to the provisions of this chapter. However, no franchise shall be granted on terms or conditions more favorable or less burdensome than those contained in any existing franchise. 
B.  Franchise Required. A franchise is required of any person desiring to construct, operate and maintain a cable system within all or any portion of the city. A franchise may be granted by the city council to any person, whether operating under an existing franchise or not, who or which offers to furnish and provide such cable system under and pursuant to the terms and provisions of this chapter and a franchise agreement acceptable to the city council. The grant of a cable franchise is not an authorization to provide other services except as may otherwise be permitted under applicable state or federal law, nor is it a bar to the imposition of other compensation requirements. 
C.  Rights Reserved to City. The city expressly reserves the following rights: 
1.  To exercise its governmental powers, now or hereafter, to the full extent that such powers may be vested in or granted to the city. 
2.  To adopt and promulgate ordinances as it shall find reasonably necessary in the exercise of its lawful police power. Such power shall include all rights the city may have under 47 U.S.C. § 552 and the right of the city to manage the public rights-of-way and to adopt such lawful regulations of general applicability relating to the management of the public rights-of-way as the city and/or its departments shall provide. Nothing in a franchise agreement shall be deemed to waive the requirements of the various codes and ordinances of the city regarding permits, fees to be paid, or manner of construction. 
The powers of the city may be exercised through a mutually agreed upon amendment of this chapter as well as through enactment of separate ordinances and regulations of general applicability. 
D.  Unlawful Acts. It is unlawful for any person to establish, operate or carry on the business of distributing to any persons in the city any television signals or radio signals by means of a cable system unless a franchise therefor has first been obtained pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and unless such franchise is in full force and effect. 
It is unlawful for any person to make any unauthorized connection, whether physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively, or otherwise, with any part of a franchised cable system within the city for the purpose of enabling himself or herself or others to receive any television signal, radio signal, picture, program or sound, without payment to the owner of the cable system. 
It is unlawful for any person without the consent of grantee, to willfully tamper with, remove or injure any cables, wires or equipment used for distribution of television signals, radio signals, pictures, programs or sound. 
E.  Failure of City to Enforce Compliance. A grantee shall not be excused from complying with any of the provisions of this chapter or the terms and conditions of a franchise agreement by any failure of the city, upon any one or more occasions, to insist upon the grantee's performance or to seek grantee's compliance with any of the provisions of this chapter or terms or conditions of a franchise agreement. 
F.  Franchise Fees. Grantee shall pay to the city five percent of its gross receipts as a franchise fee. 
The franchise fee shall be payable quarterly to the city. Upon request by the city, the grantee shall file a complete statement listing receipts included in the gross receipts during the period for which such quarterly payment is made. Such payment shall be made to the city treasurer not later than sixty (60) days after the end of each calendar quarter. The grantee shall also provide annually within ninety (90) days after the end of the fiscal year a report certified as to accuracy by a certified public accountant, who may be an employee of grantee, verifying each revenue item included in gross revenues and an explanation of the source documents and methodology used in the calculation of each revenue that constitutes gross revenue and gross receipts. 
City may examine all applicable records of the grantee to determine accuracy of amounts payable to city. 
The city shall have right to audit and to recompute any amounts determined to be payable under this chapter; provided, however, that such audit shall take place within thirty-six (36) months following the close of each of the grantee's fiscal years. Any additional undisputed amount due to the city as a result of the audit shall be paid within thirty (30) days following written notice to the grantee by the city. Such notice to the grantee shall include a copy of the audit report. The city will bear the cost of the city audit, provided, however, that if such audit indicates a franchise fee underpayment of five percent or more of the amount due, grantee shall assume all reasonable costs of such audit. 
In the event that grantee does not make the franchise fee payment or an undisputed recomputed amount is not made on or before the applicable dates heretofore specified, following notice by the city to the grantee, interest shall be charged daily from such applicable date at the annual rate equivalent to the then existing prime rate of the largest bank in the city. 
G.  Franchise Term. The term of a franchise shall be for the number of years negotiated in the franchise agreement with the city unless terminated earlier in accordance with this chapter. 
H.  Grantee to be Bound by Terms and Conditions of this Chapter and Franchise Agreement. In case of conflict, franchise agreement supersedes this chapter. 
In the event of a conflict between the franchise agreement and the provisions of this chapter, the provisions of the franchise agreement shall prevail. Failure to provide services as promised in grantee's franchise may be deemed a breach of this chapter to which the provisions of Section 5.16.140 and Section 5.16.150 of this chapter shall apply. 
(Prior code § A-2-2)  
5.16.030 - Requirements for issuing new cable television franchises. 
A.  Application—Non Refundable Fee. An application for a new cable television franchise (not a franchise renewal) shall be submitted to the city council, or its designee, in accordance with the procedures established by the city council. The application shall contain facts and information the city council deems appropriate. Applications shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee of four thousand dollars ($4,000.00), paid to the order of the city, which amount shall be used by the city to offset direct expenses incurred in the franchising and evaluation procedures, including but not limited to staff time and consulting assistance. 
B.  Grantee to Pay Costs of Granting Franchise. An applicant to whom the city council grants a nonexclusive initial franchise, in addition to the nonrefundable fee specified herein above, shall pay to the city, within thirty (30) days of receipt of notice of the amount, an amount set by the city council, or its designee, which shall represent the remaining out-of-pocket costs incurred by the city, in granting the franchise and not defrayed by fees forthcoming from the provisions of Section 5.16.030(A). 
C.  Procedure Required by City to Process an Application and/or Require a Request for Proposals. 
1.  Upon receipt of an application, the city may either: (i) evaluate the application pursuant to subsection (C)(4) of this section, conducting such investigations as it deems necessary; or (ii) issue a request for proposals after conducting a proceeding, if necessary, to identify the future cable related needs and interests of the community. Any such request for proposals shall be provided to the person applying for an initial franchise and made available to any other interested party. The request for proposals may contain a proposed franchise agreement. 
2.  An applicant shall respond to a request for proposals by filing an application with the city within the time directed by the city that contains the information and material set forth in subsection D of this section. The procedures, instructions, and requirements set forth in the request for proposals shall be followed by each applicant. Any applicant that has already filed an application need not refile the same materials with its response to the request for proposals, but must supplement its application to include any additional or different information or material required of the request for proposals. The city or its designee may seek additional information from any applicant and establish deadlines for the submission of such information. 
3.  Notwithstanding the provisions in this section, a person may apply for an initial franchise by submitting an unsolicited application containing the information required in subsection D of this section, and requesting an evaluation of that application pursuant to subsection (C)(4) of this section. Prior to evaluating such an application, the city may conduct such investigations as are necessary to determine whether the application satisfies the standards set forth in subsection (C)(4) of this section. The city may seek additional applications. 
4.  In evaluating an application for a franchise, the city shall consider, among other things, the following factors: 
a.  Whether the applicant has the financial, technical, and legal qualifications to provide cable service; 
b.  Whether the application satisfies any minimum requirements established by the city and is otherwise reasonable to meet the future cable-related needs and interests of the community, taking into account the cost of meeting such needs and interests; 
c.  Whether the applicant will provide adequate public, educational, and governmental access channel capacity, facilities or financial support; 
d.  Whether issuance of a franchise is in the public interest considering the immediate and future effect on the public rights-of-way and private property that would be affected by the cable system, including the extent to which installation or maintenance as planned would require replacement of property or involve disruption of property, public services, or use of the public rights-of-way, the effect of granting a franchise on the ability of an existing franchisee, if any, to meet the cable related needs and interests of the community and the comparative superiority or inferiority of competing applications; and 
e.  What effects a grant of a franchise may have on competition in the delivery of cable service in the city. 
5.  If the city finds that it is in the public interest to issue a franchise after considering the factors set forth above, and subject to the applicant's entry into a franchise agreement, it shall issue a franchise. If the city denies an application for an initial franchise, it will issue a written decision setting forth its reasons for denial. Prior to deciding whether or not to issue a franchise, the city will hold one or more public hearings or implement other procedures under which comments from the public on an application may be received. The city may reject any application that is incomplete or fails to respond to a request for proposals. This chapter is not intended and shall not be interpreted to grant any applicant standing to challenge the denial of its application or the issuance of a franchise to another applicant. 
D.  Application Requirements. Ten (10) copies of the application shall be filed with the city clerk of the city and shall contain such information as the city may require, including but not limited to: 
1.  A general description of the applicant's proposed operation. 
2.  A statement detailing the applicant's business or corporate organization including, but not limited to, the identification of any person, persons, or entity holding a five percent or greater interest in the applicant's business, a statement disclosing five percent or greater interests that the applicant has in any other business, corporation, or partnership, and a statement describing all intracompany relationships of the applicant including parent, subsidiary or affiliated companies. 
3.  A written commitment to timely service and restore all property affected by such service. 
4.  A schedule of proposed charges. 
5.  A statement setting forth the channels to be allocated for public, educational and governmental use as contemplated by 47 U.S.C. § 531 and for leased access as required by 47 U.S.C. § 532, a description of the production facilities and equipment to be made available by the applicant for access, and a statement establishing any additional receipts to be designated for programming or programming assistance for the access channels. 
6.  If the applicant is a corporation, audited financial statements for the five previous fiscal years. If applicant is a partnership, copies of the "U.S. Partnership Return of Income" (IRS Form 1065) for the five previous fiscal years. If applicant is a sole proprietorship, copies of personal financial statements for the five previous fiscal years. 
7.  An estimated five year operations pro forma which shall include the initial and continuing plant investment, annual profit and loss statements detailing income and expenses, annual balance sheets, and annual levels of subscriber penetration. The pro forma shall also state the average return on investment anticipated by the applicant for the five year operations period and shall state the method of computation thereof. Costs anticipated for voluntary services or contributions shall, if presented, be incorporated in the pro forma as required in this chapter, but shall be separately identified in the pro forma. 
8.  A list of existing franchises held by the applicant indicating when the franchises were issued and when the systems were constructed in each respective governmental unit, together with the name and address and phone number of a responsible governmental official knowledgeable of the applicant. 
9.  A statement detailing the applicant's prior operational experience in cable television systems and/or microwave service, including that of its officers, management and any staff to be associated with the proposed operation. 
10.  A general statement of the applicant's ability and intent to incorporate technological improvements and advancements in the cable television system as such improvements or advancements are generally available in the industry. 
11.  A demonstration of the applicant's technical ability to construct and/or operate the proposed cable system, including identification of key personnel and their qualifications. 
12.  A demonstration of the applicant's legal qualifications to construct and/or operate the proposed cable system, including but not limited to a demonstration that the applicant meets the following criteria: 
a.  The applicant must not have had an application for an initial or renewal franchise in the city lawfully denied within the three years preceding the date on which its current application was submitted; 
b.  The applicant must not have had any cable television franchise lawfully revoked by any franchising authority within three years preceding the date on which its current application was submitted; 
c.  The applicant must have the necessary authority under the laws of the state of California to operate a cable system; 
d.  The applicant must have the necessary authority under federal law to hold the franchise and to operate a cable system. An applicant must have, or show that it is qualified to obtain, any necessary federal franchises or waivers required to operate the cable system proposed; 
e.  The applicant shall not have been convicted, at any time during the last ten (10) years preceding the date on which its application was submitted, of any act or omission of such character that the applicant cannot be relied upon to deal truthfully with the city and with the subscribers or to substantially comply with its lawful obligations under applicable law, including obligations under the consumer protection laws and under the laws prohibiting anti-competitive acts, fraud, racketeering, or other similar conduct; 
f.  The applicant shall not have filed materially misleading information in its application or have intentionally withheld information that the applicant is lawfully required to provide; and 
g.  If the city is considering denying a franchise to an applicant for the above listed grounds, the city shall provide an opportunity to the applicant to show to the city any particular circumstances surrounding the matter, the steps taken by the applicant to cure any harms and to prevent their recurrence, the lack of involvement of the applicant's principals, or the remoteness of the matter from the operation of applicant's cable systems. 
13.  Identification of the area in the city to be served by the proposed cable system, including a description of the proposed boundaries of the franchise area. 
14.  If the applicant proposes to provide cable service to an area already served by an existing franchisee, the identification of the area where the overbuild would occur and the ability of the public rights-of-way and other property that would be used by the applicant to accommodate an additional cable system. 
15.  An affidavit or declaration of an authorized officer of the applicant certifying the truth and accuracy of the information in the application, acknowledging the enforceability of application commitments, and certifying that the application meets all requirements provided by federal, state and local law. 
16.  Any other reasonable and applicable information which the city council may request. 
E.  Request for Proposals, Public Comment Periods, Evaluating Applications, Public Hearing. Upon the filing of any franchise application and related documents, all such documents are deemed public records open to inspection by the public during reasonable hours, including specifically the regular business hours of the city clerk. 
Before issuance of a request for proposals, the city shall maintain the proposed request for proposals on the agenda of at least two city council meetings for the purpose of determining any special local needs or interest. Any citizen of the city shall have the right to comment in writing, filed in advance, or orally at any meeting at which the proposed request for proposals is to be considered. 
Following reasonable notice to the public, any franchise application shall be available for inspection for a period of at least twenty (20) days prior to the city council taking action on the application. Any citizen of the city shall have the right to comment in writing, filed in advance, or orally at any meeting at which a franchise application is to be considered. 
Before authorizing the issuance of any such franchise, the city council shall review the applicant's legal, financial and technical qualifications and the adequacy and feasibility of the applicant's qualifications to operate a cable television system within the city based upon information provided to the city council by the applicant and by other sources in writing or at any public hearing or meeting of the city council. In addition, the city council shall conduct a public hearing on the proposed franchise with at least seven days advertised notice prior to such public hearing. 
F.  Awarding a Franchise. After examining all applications submitted pursuant to procedures to be established by the city council designed to assure the legal, financial and technical qualifications of an applicant to provide cable service, the city council is authorized, after a full hearing affording due process, to grant a nonexclusive franchise conveying the right to construct and operate a cable system within the public rights-of-ways of the city. A franchise may be awarded to the applicant which, in the city council's discretion, will best serve the public interest and whose construction and financial plans and arrangements are both feasible and adequate to fulfill the conditions set forth in this chapter and in a franchise agreement. 
No provision in this chapter shall be deemed or construed to require the city council to grant a franchise following receipt of any franchise application. 
No franchise shall be valid until grantee enters into a franchise agreement having terms and conditions acceptable to the city. 
(Prior code § A-2-3)  
5.16.040 - Transfers and assignments. 
A.  City's Right to Purchase Cable System. The city shall have the right to purchase the cable system in accordance with Section 627 of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended. 
B.  Prior Written Consent of City Required Before any Sale, Assignment, or Transfer of a Franchise. A franchise and any rights or obligations of the grantee under the franchise shall not be sold, assigned, or transferred, either in whole or in part, or leased, sublet, in any manner, nor shall title thereto, either legal or equitable, pass to or vest in any person without prior written consent of the city, which consent will not be unreasonably withheld. Such consent shall not be required for a trust, mortgage, or other hypothecation in whole or in part to secure an indebtedness. 
C.  Prior Written Consent of the City Required Before any Transfer of Ownership or Control of Grantee. Ownership or control of grantee shall not be transferred without the prior written consent of the city, which consent will not be unreasonably withheld. 
D.  Grantee to Submit Application Documenting Information Required by the City. A grantee shall promptly notify the city of any action or proposed action requiring consent of the city pursuant to subsections A through K of this section. 
A grantee shall submit to the city an original application (FCC Form 394 or any successor form thereto) and four copies, unless otherwise directed, which application shall fully describe the terms and conditions of the action or proposed action subject to this section and clearly state the basis on which the application should be approved. 
At any time during the review process, the city reserves the right to request additional supporting documentation from a grantee or any other person involved in the action or proposed action, all in accordance with federal law. A grantee shall provide all reasonably requested assistance to the city in connection with any such inquiry and, as appropriate, shall secure the cooperation and assistance of all other persons involved in such action, all in accordance with federal law. 
For any application requiring the city's consent pursuant to subsections A through K in this section, the city shall respond to such application within one hundred twenty (120) days from the date of filing such application and the city's receipt of all additional information required by the city pursuant to this chapter, the grantee's franchise agreement, and applicable law. Such application shall be deemed approved if the city should fail to render a final decision within one hundred twenty (120) days following the grantee's filing of the application and the city's receipt of all information reasonably required to accompany such application under this chapter, grantee's franchise agreement and applicable law. 
E.  Showings Required of Proposed Assignee or Transferee. Assignee or Transferee Must Agree to Conditions Prescribed by City. A proposed assignee or transferee must demonstrate that it possesses the legal, financial and technical qualifications necessary to perform all the terms, conditions and obligations under this chapter and the grantee's franchise agreement for the remaining term thereof, and such reasonable additional obligations required of the assignee or transferee by the city for the specific and limited purpose of assuring the performance by the assignee or transferee of all the terms, conditions and obligations of the franchise agreement. 
F.  Grantee and Assignee or Transferee to Assist City in City's Inquiry of Prospective Controlling Party. Grantee Promptly to Notify City of Any Actual or Prospective Change in Control of Franchise. 
1.  Grantee's Responsibility. A grantee shall assist the city in its inquiry into an assignee's or transferee's qualifications. 
2.  Assignee's or Transferee's Responsibility. In seeking the city's consent to any change in ownership or control of a franchise or of a grantee, assignee or transferee shall have the responsibility to establish the facts, to the satisfaction of the city, that assignee or transferee has all of the legal, financial, and technical qualifications necessary to perform all of the terms, conditions and obligations of the grantee under its franchise agreement for the remaining term thereof. The city may request, and assignee or transferee shall provide, all reasonable financial data relative to the transfer. In addition, assignee or transferee shall provide to the city the terms and conditions of the sale and any other information reasonably related to the assignee's or transferee's acquisition of the grantee's franchise which is needed to clarify the change in ownership. 
G.  Transfer of Control Occurs with Change of Forty-five Percent of Voting Interest or of Person Exercising Management Authority Over Grantee. For purposes of this section, "control" means the ability to exert working control, in whatever manner exercised, over the affairs of a grantee, either directly or indirectly. 
A rebuttable presumption that transfer of control has occurred, including of control in fact (i.e. transfer of de facto control), shall arise upon the acquisition or accumulation by any person, or group of persons, of forty-five (45) percent of the voting interest of a publicly held grantee, or of forty-five (45) percent of the voting interest of a privately held grantee or of the person exercising management authority over such a privately held grantee. 
H.  Transfer or Assignment without Prior Consent Deemed to be Material Breach, and May be Subject to Liquidated Damages. Any transfer or assignment of a franchise or of ownership or control of grantee without the prior consent of the city shall be null and void unless later ratified by the city and shall: (i) be deemed a material breach of a franchise agreement; and (ii) among and/or in addition to other remedies available to the city, be subject to a liquidated damages assessment, on a daily basis, until the transfer or assignment is approved, or if not approved, until the prior ownership, control or other status quo is restored to a condition satisfactory to the city. 
I.  City May Revoke Franchise if Unauthorized Transfer or Assignment Occurs. If the city fails to approve or deny its consent to any such transfer or assignment of a franchise, in accordance with federal law, or of the ownership or control of a grantee and such action has nevertheless been effected, the city may revoke a franchise and terminate a franchise agreement unless control of the grantee or the system is promptly restored to its status prior to such unauthorized action or to a status acceptable to the city. 
J.  Consent of City to Transfer or Assignment shall not Constitute Waiver of City's Rights. The consent or approval of the city council to any transfer or assignment of a franchise or of ownership or control of a franchise shall not constitute a waiver or release of any of the rights of the city unless the city specifically releases or waives such rights. 
K.  Successor Grantee Must Become Signatory to Franchise Agreement. In no event shall an assignment of a franchise or a transfer of ownership or control be approved without the successor grantee becoming a signatory to the existing franchise agreement. 
L.  Grantee Not to Enter Into Any Management Contract if Results in a Change of Control. A grantee shall not enter into any management contract or other arrangement for the management of the system, to the extent that such contract or other arrangement would result in a significant change of operational control of a grantee or the system (as defined in subsection G of this section), without the prior consent of the city. 
M.  No Prior Consent Required for Transfer or Assignment If Under Common Control. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, no such prior consent of the city shall be required for any transfer or assignment to any person controlling, controlled by, or under the same common control as the grantee. 
(Prior code § A-2-4)  
5.16.050 - Liability and indemnification. 
A.  Indemnification of the City. 
1.  The grantee shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify, defend and hold harmless the city and its officials, officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees against any and all claims, suits, causes of action, proceedings and judgments for damage arising out of the operation of the cable television system under a franchise. These damages include, but are not limited to, personal injury property damage, penalties arising out of copyright infringements and antitrust violations and damages arising out of the failure by the grantee to secure consent from the owners, authorized distributors or licensees of programs to be delivered by the grantee's cable television system, whether or not any act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed or prohibited by the franchise. Indemnified expenses include, but are not limited to, all out-of-pocket expenses, such as reasonable attorney fees incurred by city (in the event city determines in good faith that its interests cannot be adequately represented by grantee), and the reasonable value of any services rendered by the city attorney or his or her assistant and by any employee, consultant, or agent of the city. 
2.  In order for the city to assert its rights to be indemnified and held harmless, the city must: 
a.  Promptly notify grantee of any claim or legal proceeding which gives rise to such right; 
b.  Afford grantee the opportunity to participate in and fully control any compromise, settlement, resolution or disposition of such claim or proceeding; and 
c.  Fully cooperate in the defense of such claim and make available to grantee all such information under its control relating thereto. 
B.  Public Liability Insurance. 
1.  A grantee shall maintain throughout the term of the franchise, or any renewal or extension thereof, a general comprehensive liability insurance policy in a company authorized to do business in the state of California naming as an additional insured the city and its officials, officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees in a form satisfactory to the city attorney. 
2.  The general comprehensive liability insurance policy required by this section shall provide for indemnifying, defending and saving harmless the city and its officials, officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees in the following minimum amounts from any and all claims, demands, causes of action, suits, proceedings, damages, liabilities and judgments of every kind by any person whatsoever against liability for: (i) loss or damage for personal injury or death occasioned by the operations of the grantee under any franchise granted by this chapter, with a minimum liability of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for personal injury or death of any one person, and two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) for personal injury or death of any two or more persons in any one occurrence; (ii) property damage occasioned by the operations of the grantee under the franchise granted under this chapter, or alleged to have been so caused or occurred, with a minimum liability of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for property damage to the property of any one person, and two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) for the property damage to the property of two or more persons in any one occurrence; and (iii) copyright infringement occasioned by the operations of the grantee under the franchise granted under this chapter with a minimum of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for the infringement of such copyright. 
C.  Notice of Cancellation or Reduction of Coverage. The insurance policies mentioned above shall state that the policies are extended to cover the liability assumed by the grantee under the terms of any franchise agreement and shall contain the following endorsement. 
"It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy shall not be canceled nor the amount of coverage thereof reduced until thirty (30) days after receipt by the city by registered mail of written notice of such intent to cancel or reduce the coverage." 
D.  Evidence of Insurance Filed with the City. A certificate of insurance, on a form satisfactory to the city attorney, and written evidence of payment of required premiums shall be filed and maintained with the city during the term of this franchise or any renewal thereof. 
E.  No Waiver of Insurance or Performance Bond. Recovery by the city of any amounts under insurance, a performance bond, or otherwise does not limit a grantee's duty to indemnify the city in any way; nor shall such recovery relieve a grantee of its obligations under a franchise, limit the amounts owed to the city, or in any respect prevent the city from exercising any other right or remedy it may have pursuant to this chapter, a franchise agreement, or applicable law. 
(Prior code § A-2-5)  
5.16.060 - Cable system construction. 
A.  Map and Plan to be Provided. Grantee shall submit to the city a construction or reconstruction plan not less than thirty (30) days prior to the date grantee intends to commence construction or reconstruction of the cable system. The plan shall also include a map of the entire service area and shall clearly delineate the following: 
1.  Areas within the service area where the cable system will be available to subscribers, including a time schedule of construction or reconstruction for each year that construction or reconstruction is proposed. 
2.  Areas within the service area where the cable system cannot reasonably be extended due to lack of present or planned development or other similar reasons, with the areas and the reasons for not serving them clearly identified on the map. 
B.  Delay in Cable System Construction or Reconstruction Requires Consent by City Council. Any delay in the cable system construction or reconstruction beyond the times and dates specified in the franchise agreement shall require application to the city and consent of the city council after receiving recommendation from the city manager. Any delay beyond the construction or reconstruction timetable set forth in the franchise agreement, unless approved by the city council, will be considered a violation of the franchise for which the provisions of Sections 5.16.130 and 5.16.140 shall apply. However, nothing in this section shall prevent a grantee from constructing or reconstructing the cable system earlier than planned. 
C.  Cable System Construction and Operation to be Consistent with City Requirements; the City to Observe Annual Proof of Performance Tests—The City May Conduct Independent Tests at Cost of Grantee. Grantee shall construct, install, operate and maintain its cable system in a manner such that it operates at all times consistent with generally applicable laws, ordinances, and construction standards of the city, and the rules and regulations of the Federal Communications Commission. In addition, a grantee shall provide the city, upon request, with the opportunity to observe the conduct of, and receive a written report of the results of, grantee's annual proof of performance tests. The city may, at any time following written notice to the grantee and affording the grantee with a reasonable opportunity to be present, conduct independent measurements of the system. 
D.  Additional Specifications Standby Power, National, State and Local Codes. Grantee shall construct, install and maintain the cable system in an orderly and professional manner, using due diligence and materials of good and durable quality. All cables and wires shall be installed, where reasonably possible, parallel with and in the same manner as electric and telephone lines. Multiple cable configurations shall be arranged in parallel and bundled with due respect for engineering considerations. Underground installations shall be in conformance with applicable law. 
A grantee shall maintain equipment capable of providing standby power to be engaged automatically in the event of a power failure for twenty-four (24) hours at the headend. 
A grantee shall at all times comply with applicable sections of the following laws, codes, regulations, and standards, as from time to time amended and revised, and all generally applicable rules and regulations now in effect or hereinafter adopted by the city: 
1.  National Electrical Safety Code (ANSI) most recently adopted; 
2.  National Electrical Code (National Bureau of Fire Underwriters); 
3.  Rules and regulations of the Federal Communications Commission; 
4.  Building Code, as adopted by the city; 
5.  Subdivision regulations, as adopted by the city; and 
6.  Road Standards, as adopted by the city. 
In any event, the grantee shall not endanger or interfere with the safety of persons or property in the franchise area or other areas where a grantee may have equipment located. 
E.  Access to Grantee's Trenches by Other Utilities. Grantee shall cooperate in the planning, locating and construction of its cable system in utility joint trenches or common duct banks with other telecommunications providers. The city will provide advance notice to any grantee when it plans to open a trench and each grantee shall provide notice to the city when it plans to open a trench. The grantee and the city will offer to make space available to the other on negotiated terms and conditions. 
F.  If City Determines Any Part of Facilities are Harmful to Health and Safety of Any Person, Grantee Shall Promptly Correct. If, at any time, it is determined by the city, or any other agency or authority of competent jurisdiction, that any part of the cable system is endangering the public, including, without limitation, missing vault or pedestal covers, temporary drop cables that cross walkways, driveways or other areas, and low cables, riser problems and other violations of state or local laws that are harmful to the health or safety of any person, a grantee shall correct all such conditions, at its own costs and expense, within twenty-four (24) hours of receipt of notice from the city, or any other agency or authority of competent jurisdiction. Until such conditions are corrected, grantee shall post suitable warnings to ensure that the health and safety of persons possibly affected is ensured. 
G.  Grantee to Maintain System in Conformance with FCC Signal Leakage Rules. A grantee shall construct, operate, and maintain the cable system in conformance with FCC signal leakage requirements, as provided in 47 C.F.R. 76 subpart K, to prevent interference with the transmission or reception of over-the-air broadcast signals. 
H.  Grantee to Take All Necessary Steps to Prevent Accidents. A grantee shall, at its own cost and expense, take all necessary efforts to prevent accidents at its work sites, including the placing and maintenance of proper guards, fences, barricades, and security personnel and, at night, suitable and sufficient lighting. 
I.  Notice of Cable Construction/Repair to Subscribers. Grantee will use its best efforts to notify residents on affected streets of pending construction or major repairs, including any which require street or sidewalk trenching, at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to commencement of such work. Notification shall be made by providing an appropriate notice at or to the residence by such means as door hanger notice, first-class mail, or telephone contact. In the event of a system extension or rebuild possibly affecting general system reception, a grantee shall notify all of its subscribers, by any reasonable written means at least fourteen (14) days prior to commencement of such work, stating the scope and duration of the proposed extension or rebuild and the anticipated impacts. 
(Prior code § A-2-6)  
5.16.070 - Regulations pertaining to use of city streets and public rights-of-way. 
A.  City's Right to Use Poles Owned by Grantee. The city shall have the right to install and maintain, on terms and conditions mutually agreed to by the parties, upon any poles, pole fixtures and wire owned by a grantee. 
B.  All Grantee's Poles to be Installed Only at Locations Approved by the City. Any poles of a grantee to be constructed or installed in streets shall be so constructed or installed only at such locations and in such manner as shall be approved in writing by the city, in the exercise of reasonable discretion. The grantee shall make no paving cuts or curb cuts unless absolutely necessary, but only after written permission has been given by the city. 
C.  During Construction, Reconstruction or Maintenance of Cable System, Grantee Shall Not Obstruct Public Ways Without Prior Consent of Authorities. In connection with the construction, reconstruction, operation, maintenance, repair, or removal of the cable system, a grantee shall give due regard to the aesthetics of the franchise areas and shall not obstruct the public ways, streets, railways, passenger travel, or other traffic to, from or within the city, without prior consent of the appropriate city authorities. In addition: 
1.  All transmission and distribution structures, lines, and equipment erected by a grantee within the city shall be so located as to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin any streets or public way. 
2.  In case of any disturbance of any public way, street, easement, paved area or other property, a grantee at its own cost and expense and in a manner and time period approved by the city, shall replace and restore such public rights-of-way in as good condition as before the work involving such disturbance was done. 
D.  Permits Required to be Obtained Prior to Any Physical Work Being Performed in City's Streets. A grantee or its authorized contractors must obtain any generally applicable permits from the city prior to any physical work being performed in the city's streets or on city-owned property. All work shall be done in accordance with the city's generally applicable specifications and must comply with all applicable law. 
E.  Grantee to Prepare Detailed Maps of System Prior to Issuance of Permission for Construction or Reconstruction. A grantee shall cause maps of the relevant portion of the cable system showing materials of construction and power supply locations to be filed with the city prior to the issuance of any required permit for construction or reconstruction. 
F.  Upon Undergrounding of Utility Lines, Grantee Shall Concurrently Place Lines Underground in Conduits at Depth in Accordance with Applicable Law. Trunk, feeder and drop cable may be constructed overhead where poles now exist and electrical or telephone lines or both are now overhead. However, where electrical and telephone lines are now underground, all trunk, feeder and drop cable shall be constructed underground at such depths and locations as shall be required by applicable law applicable to cable television systems. Whenever and wherever electrical lines and telephone lines are moved from overhead to underground placement in an area, all cable system facilities and plant in that area shall be similarly and concurrently moved underground by the grantee at the grantee's sole cost and expense at such depths and locations as shall be required by applicable law. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the event any utility is compensated by the city for moving or relocating its facilities, then in such case the grantee shall be similarly compensated. 
G.  Grantee May Be Required to Move Its Facilities to Accommodate Changes in Public Improvements. A grantee shall, from time to time, protect, support, temporarily dislocate, or temporarily or permanently, as may be required, remove or relocate, without expense to the city or any other governmental entity, the cable system, if and when made necessary by any lawful change of grade, alignment, or width of any public street by the city or any other governmental entity, or made necessary by any other public improvement or alteration in, under, on, upon or about any public street or other public property, whether such public improvement or alteration is at the instance of the city or another governmental entity, and whether such improvement or alteration is for a governmental or proprietary function, or made necessary by traffic conditions, public safety, street vacation or any other public project or purpose of the city or any other governmental entity. The decision of the community development director under this section, absent review by the city council, shall be final and binding on a grantee. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, in the event any utility is compensated by the city for moving or relocating it's facilities, then in such case the grantee shall be similarly compensated. 
H.  Grantee Shall Obtain Prior Approval Before Altering any Municipal Facility—Alterations to be at Cost of Grantee. In connection with the construction, operation, maintenance, repair, or removal of the cable system, a grantee shall, at its own cost and expense, protect any and all existing structures belonging to the city. A grantee shall obtain the prior approval of the city before altering any water main, sewage or drainage system, or any other municipal structure in any public way or street, because of the presence of the cable system in the public ways or streets. Any such alteration shall be made by a grantee, at its sole cost and expense, and in a manner reasonably prescribed by the city. A grantee shall also be liable, at its own cost and expense, to replace or repair and restore to as close to its prior condition as is reasonably possible and in a manner reasonably specified by the city, any public way, street or any municipal structure involved in the construction of the cable system that may become disturbed or damaged as a result of any work thereon performed by or on behalf of the grantee. 
I.  Grantee Shall Temporarily Move Its Wires to Permit Moving of Buildings. Grantee shall, at the request of any person holding a moving permit issued by the city, temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of buildings. The expense of such temporary removal or raising or lowering of wires shall be paid to the grantee by the person requesting the same, and grantee shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. Grantee shall be given not less then seven days notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes. 
J.  Grantee Shall Repair and Restore Damage to City Facilities and Shall Maintain Restoration. In the event that a grantee during construction, installation, inspection or repair of its cable system causes damage to pavement, sidewalks, driveways, landscaping or other property, the grantee or the authorized agent shall, at its own expense and in a manner approved by the city, replace and restore such places to the same condition which existed before such work was commenced. 
K.  Failure by Grantee to Complete Restoration Work in Any Street Can Result in City Causing Work to be Done at Expense of Grantee. Upon failure of the grantee to complete any restoration to be done in any street or other public place, within ten (10) days following due notice and to the reasonable satisfaction of the city, the city may, at its option, cause such work to be done and a grantee shall pay to the city the cost thereof in the itemized amounts reported by the city to the grantee, within thirty (30) days after receipt of such itemized report. In the alternative, at the city's option, the city may demand of grantee the estimated cost of such work as estimated by the city, and such shall be paid by grantee to city within thirty (30) days of such demand, thereafter, upon award of any contract or contracts for such work, grantee shall pay to city within thirty (30) days of demand any additional amount necessary to provide for cost of such work. Upon completion of such work, grantee shall pay to city or city shall refund to grantee such sums so that the total received and retained by city shall equal the cost of such work. 
L.  City May Remove Grantee's Facilities as May be Required During Emergencies. The city reserves the right to remove any portion of a grantee's equipment and facilities as may be required in any emergency as determined by the city without liability for interruption of cable service and the city shall not be obligated to restore cable service or to pay the costs of expenses of restoring cable service. 
M.  Cost of Tree Trimming is to be at Expense of Grantee—City has Option to Decide Whether City or Grantee Does the Trimming. A grantee shall notify the city regarding the need to trim trees upon and overhanging streets of the city so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires and cables of the grantee. At the option of the city, such tree trimming may be done by the city at the expense of the grantee, or by the grantee under the city's supervision and direction at the expense of the grantee. When authorized, such trimming shall be limited to the area required for clear cable passage and shall not include major structural branches which materially alter the appearance and natural growth habits of the tree. If such trimming is not performed by the city, the grantee shall be responsible for any and all damages to any tree as a result of trimming, or to the land surrounding any tree, whether such tree is trimmed or removed, or for damage to property or person caused by such trimming and removal of any tree. 
N.  Grantee Shall Remove Cable System from Any Public Street Following Termination or Expiration of Franchise. In the event that the use of a part of the cable system is discontinued for any reason for a continuous period of twelve (12) months, or in the event such cable system or property has been installed in any street or public place without complying with the requirements of the franchise, or the franchise has been terminated, canceled or has expired without renewal, a grantee shall promptly, at its own expense, and upon being given ten (10) days' written notice from the city, remove from the streets or public places all such property and poles of such cable system other than any which the city may permit to be abandoned in place. In the event of such removal, a grantee shall promptly restore the street or other area from which such property has been removed to a condition which existed before such work was commenced. 
O.  Grantee's Property May be Considered Abandoned Six Months After Termination or Expiration of Franchise. Any property of a grantee remaining in place six months after the termination or denial of any renewal (and the exhaustion of all appeals) of a franchise shall be, at the option of the city council, considered permanently abandoned. The city may extend such time not to exceed an additional thirty (30) days. 
P.  Abandonment in Place shall be Done at Direction of Department of Community Development—Ownership of Property Shall be Transferred to City. Any property of a grantee permitted to be abandoned in place shall be abandoned in such a manner as the city shall prescribe. Upon permanent abandonment of the property of a grantee in place, the grantee shall submit to the city an instrument in writing, to be approved by the city attorney transferring to the city the ownership of such property. If such an instrument is not received within six months of the abandonment, the property shall automatically become the property of the city. 
(Prior code § A-2-7)  
5.16.080 - System operation. 
A.  Type and Scope of System. A grantee shall install and maintain the system as proposed and agreed upon in the franchise agreement. 
B.  Basic Service. Each grantee of a cable system shall provide its subscribers a separately available basic service. 
C.  Access Channels. A grantee shall provide and maintain the number and type of access channels as are set forth in the franchise agreement. 
D.  Grantee to Maintain an Office or Service Center in City Limits or in Neighboring Community. A grantee shall maintain a business office or service center within the city limits or in a neighboring community, which shall be open during normal business hours, and staffed and operated to respond to customers by providing at least the following services: (i) to accept payments and resolve billing difficulties; (ii) to give out and exchange or accept return converters; (iii) to schedule and conduct service or technician calls; (iv) to answer subscriber inquiries; and (v) to resolve complaints subscribers shall be promptly notified of any change of address of such office or of telephone number(s). Grantee shall also prepare a promotional notice to familiarize residents with the location of such office, the services available, and the complaint procedures. This notice is to be given to each new subscriber upon installation of service, and is to be distributed at least once per year to all subscribers. 
E.  Repair and Maintenance Crew to be Maintained that is Capable of Responding to Subscriber Complaints. Grantee shall maintain sufficient repair and maintenance crews capable of responding to subscriber complaints or requests for service in accordance with customer service standards described in Section 5.16.090. 
F.  Outage Log to be Maintained Showing Details of Service Failures. A grantee shall maintain an outage log showing the date, approximate time, location, duration, approximate number of subscribers affected, type and probable cause of all headend, trunk, or distribution line service failures due to causes other than routine testing or maintenance. A copy of such log showing the outages shall be made available for review by the city. 
G.  Planned Service Interruption. A grantee may intentionally interrupt service on the cable system only for good cause and for the shortest time possible. 
H.  The City Can Require Testing of Cable System and Report on System Performance. When there have been repeated complaints made or when there exists other evidence which, in the judgment of the city, casts doubt on the reliability or quality of cable service, the city shall have the right and authority to compel a grantee to test, analyze, and report on the performance of the cable system. Such report shall be delivered to the city no later than fourteen (14) days after the city formally notifies the grantee to test, analyze, and report, and shall include the following information: (i) the nature of the complaints which precipitated the special test(s); (ii) which cable system component(s) was/were tested; (iii) the equipment used in such testing; (iv) the procedure(s) employed in such testing; (v) the results of such test(s); and (vi) the method(s) in which such complaints were resolved. 
I.  Required Tests may be Done by Independent Qualified Engineer at Cost of Grantee. If the technical problems continue to persist following system testing by grantee as provided in subsection H of this section above, the grantee has failed to provide city with a plan to cure, and the technical problems are within grantee's control, the city may require that additional testing and analysis be conducted by the grantee but supervised by an independent, qualified engineer selected by the city. The engineer shall sign all records of special tests and forward to the city manager such records with a report interpreting the results of the tests and recommending actions to be taken by the grantee and the city. 
The reasonable costs of such tests shall be paid for by the grantee within thirty (30) days after the city submits the engineer's invoice to the grantee. 
(Prior code § A-2-8)  
5.16.090 - Customer service standards. 
A.  Exceptions. Nothing in this chapter is intended to prevent or prohibit the following: 
1.  The city and a grantee from agreeing to customer service requirements that exceed the standards set forth in this chapter; 
2.  The city from enacting or enforcing any consumer protection law of general applicability; or 
3.  The establishment, with the concurrence of the grantee, of any ordinance or regulation concerning customer service that imposes customer service requirements that exceed or address matters not addressed by the standards set forth in this chapter. 
B.  Customer Service Standards. A grantee is subject to the following customer service standards which are to be certified quarterly by the grantee to the city upon request: 
1.  The grantee shall maintain local, toll-free, or collect call telephone access lines which shall be available to subscribers twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven days a week, including holidays. Trained company representatives shall be available to respond to customer telephone inquiries during normal business hours. 
2.  When a trained company representative is not required, the telephone access lines shall be answered by a trained, qualified answering service or an automated response system. A trained company representative shall respond to inquiries received by the service or automated response system no later than the next business day. 
3.  Under normal operating conditions, telephone answer time by a company representative, including wait time, shall not exceed thirty (30) seconds when the connection is made. If the call needs to be transferred, transfer time shall not exceed an additional thirty (30) seconds. These standards shall be met no less than ninety (90) percent of the time under normal operating conditions measured on a quarterly basis. 
4.  Under normal operating conditions, the customer shall receive a busy signal less than three percent of the time measured on a quarterly basis. 
5.  Customer service center and/or bill payment locations shall be open at least during normal business hours and shall be conveniently located. A customer service center and/or a bill payment location shall be in the city or neighboring community. 
6.  A grantee shall keep an emergency system maintenance and repair staff capable of responding to and repairing cable system malfunctions or interruptions on a twenty-four (24) hour basis under normal operating conditions. 
7.  Under normal operating conditions, each of the following standards shall be met no less than ninety-five (95) percent of the time measured on a quarterly basis. 
a.  Standard installations shall be completed within seven business days after an order has been placed. "Standard" installations are those that are located up to one hundred fifty (150) feet from the existing distribution system. Drop wires in underground service areas that are temporarily placed above ground shall be buried within ten (10) days of the date and time of the temporary installation, except in those situations where weather conditions make trenching impractical, or by customer request. 
b.  Excluding conditions beyond the control of the grantee, the grantee shall begin working on "service interruptions" promptly and in no event later than twenty-four (24) hours after the interruption becomes known to the grantee. The grantee must begin action to correct other service problems no later than the next business day after notification of a service problem. 
c.  The "appointment window" alternatives for installations, service calls, and other installation activities shall be either a specific time or, at maximum, a four hour time block during normal business hours. (The grantee may schedule service calls and other installation activities outside of normal business hours for the express convenience of the customer.) 
D.  A grantee shall not cancel an appointment with a customer after the close of business on the business day prior to the scheduled appointment. If a grantee representative is running late for an appointment with a customer and will not be able to keep the appointment as scheduled, the customer shall be contacted. The appointment shall be rescheduled, as necessary, at a time which is convenient for the customer. 
8.  The grantee shall provide written information on each of the following areas at the time of installation of service, at least annually to all subscribers, and at any time upon request: 
a.  Products and services offered; 
b.  Prices and options for programming services and conditions of subscription to programming and other services, including credit and/or rebate for system outages; 
c.  Parental control features; 
d.  Installation and service maintenance policies; 
e.  Instructions on how to use the cable services; 
f.  Channel positions of programming carried on the system; and 
g.  Billing and complaint procedures, including the business address and telephone number of the grantee and of the city. 
9.  Between the time a new customer is signed up for service and the time at which service is installed, the customer shall be afforded a right of recission. 
10.  Customers shall be notified of any changes in rates, programming services, or channel positions as soon as possible through announcements on the cable system and in writing. Notice must be given to subscribers a minimum of thirty (30) days in advance of such changes if the change is within the control of the cable operator. In addition, the grantee shall notify subscribers thirty (30) days in advance of any significant changes in other information required by the preceding subsection. 
11.  Bills shall be clear, concise and understandable. Except as may be provided for in the franchise agreement, bills shall be fully itemized with itemizations including, but not limited to, basic and premium service charges and equipment charges. Bills shall clearly delineate all activity during the billing period, including operational charges, rebates, and credits. In case of a billing dispute, a grantee must respond to a written complaint from a subscriber within thirty (30) days. 
12.  Upon request, grantee shall provide a subscriber with a credit or rebate for a verified service outage lasting four hours or more that has been caused by a failure of the cable system. System failures caused by conditions which were not the fault of or under the control of the grantee (see subsection (A)(2) of this section) are not subject to a rebate or credit by grantee. 
13.  Refund checks shall be issued promptly, but not later than the customer's next billing cycle following resolution of the request or thirty (30) days, whichever is earlier, and provided all equipment supplied by grantee has been returned in reasonable condition. 
14.  Credits shall be issued no later than the customer's next billing cycle following the determination that a credit is warranted. 
(Prior code § A-2-9)  
5.16.100 - Reports and records of cable television operation. 
A.  Annual Financial Reports. During the term of a franchise, upon request but in no event more than once annually, the grantee shall file with the city two copies of: 
1.  A gross receipts statement for the calendar year applicable to the cable system serving the city; and 
2.  An operational report including the following information, specific to the city: number of homes passed, number of cable plant miles and number of basic subscribers. 
These reports shall be certified as being correct by a responsible party of the grantee and there shall be submitted along with them such other information reasonably related to the required reports as the city shall request. 
B.  Reports on System Performance. A grantee shall submit to the city, upon request, a reasonable, statistical summary of the operations of the cable system. Such information shall include, but not be limited to: (i) the number of dwelling units passed; (ii) the number of basic service subscribers; (iii) the number of cable plant miles in construction or completed; (iv) a summary of subscribers complaints by type of complaint showing compliance data; (v) a summary of system outages and "down time"; (vi) telephone call response time and delayed and abandoned calls; and (vii) a summary of service calls made during the previous quarter. Grantee shall not be required to furnish such information in other than such form and detail as is done by the grantee in the normal course of its business. 
C.  Maps Showing Location of Equipment Installed. The grantee shall make available at its office for city review, updated as-built current maps or sets of maps drawn to scale showing all cable system equipment installed and in place in streets, public rights-of-way and other public places of the city, which are identified by typical cable symbols used in the cable television industry. The grantee shall be willing to interpret these cable symbols upon request by the city. 
D.  Public Availability of Reports. Such reports, as required under this chapter, shall be available to the public in the office of the city clerk, during its normal business hours. 
E.  Correspondence. The grantee shall, upon request, file with the city a copy of each petition, application, report and communication pertaining to the operations of the cable television system in the city that are transmitted by the grantee to, or received by the grantee from, any federal, state or other regulatory commissions, agencies or regarding the local cable system operations in the city. 
F.  City's Access to Records. The city shall have access during normal business hours to all grantee's records required to be maintained by this chapter or any franchise agreement where necessary to ascertain the grantee's compliance with this chapter or any franchise agreement. 
(Prior code § A-2-10)  
5.16.110 - Rate regulation. 
A.  City Reserves Right to Regulate Rates. The city reserves the right to regulate the grantee's rates for cable service to the fullest extent permitted by applicable law. 
B.  Current Rate Schedule to be Filed with City—Thirty Days Notice Required Prior to Rate Change. A grantee, for informational purposes, shall provide the city with a complete schedule of all current basic service and enhanced service rates and charges, including pay T.V. and pay per view rates and charges, and shall give thirty (30) days, prior written notice from the date of mailing to the city and to all affected subscribers of any pricing changes or additional charges, excluding temporary marketing and sales discounts or offers. 
C.  Grantee to Furnish Service to Each Person in Franchise Area Making Request for Service. Grantee shall furnish and maintain cable service to each person within the franchise area who makes a bona fide request to receive such service that is based upon the requirements of this chapter and the franchise. Nothing in a franchise agreement shall limit the right of the grantee to deny service to any person who/which has a negative credit service history with the grantee, which may include nonpayment of bills, theft or damage to the grantee's equipment, or who/which has threatened or assaulted employees of the grantee in the course of their employment. 
D.  Basic service Charges Must be Applied on Nondiscriminatory Basis. To the extent required by applicable state or federal law, all charges for basic service must be applied on a nondiscriminatory basis. A grantee may, however, conduct promotional campaigns in which rates are discounted or waived, may offer bulk rate discounts for multiple unit dwellings, hotels, motels, and similar institutions, or may reduce such charges for competitive purposes. 
E.  City Adopts Rate Regulation Procedures Consistent with FCC Rules. The city adopts by reference herein all rules of the Federal Communications Commission set forth in Subpart N (Cable Rate Regulation) of Part 76 (Cable Television Service) of Subchapter C of Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations, as amended, regarding the regulation of cable television rates for basic service and associated equipment. 
After a grantee has submitted for review its existing rates for the basic service and associated equipment costs or a proposed increase in these rates, the city clerk shall publish a public notice of the rates and costs giving interested parties, including the grantee, a reasonable opportunity to file written comments which shall be available in the office of the city clerk for public inspection and copying during its normal business hours. 
The city adopts by reference procedures set forth in 47 CFR Sec. 0.459 regarding confidential business information submitted by the grantee in a rate regulation proceeding. 
A grantee which willfully or repeatedly fails to comply with a rate regulation or refund order directed specifically at the grantee shall be subject to a monetary forfeiture as set forth in a franchise agreement. 
In the event of a conflict between this chapter and a franchise agreement, the provisions of the franchise agreement shall prevail. 
(Prior code § A-2-11)  
5.16.120 - Franchise renewal process. 
The franchise renewal process of the city shall be in accordance with Section 626 [47 U.S.C. 546] of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, and with all other applicable state and federal laws. 
(Prior code § A-2-12)  
5.16.130 - Letter of credit or performance bond. 
A.  Grantee is Required to File an Irrevocable Letter of Credit or Obtain a Performance Bond for Initial Franchise. Within thirty (30) days after the effective date of an initial franchise, grantee shall deposit with the city an irrevocable letter of credit or obtain a performance bond in the amount set forth in the franchise agreement and issued by a local federally insured commercial lending or bonding institution that has been approved by the city. The form and substance of such letter of credit and performance bond shall be subject to approval by the city attorney. The letter of credit or the performance bond shall be used to assure: (i) the faithful performance by the grantee of all provisions of the franchise agreement and this chapter and other ordinances of the city; (ii) compliance with all orders, permits and directions of the city manager or any agency, commission, board, department, division or office of the city having jurisdiction over any aspect of the grantee's performance under a franchise and this chapter; and (iii) the payment by the grantee of any penalties, liquidated damages, claims, liens, franchise fees, taxes or other fees due to the city which arise by reason of the construction, operation or maintenance of the cable system, including cost of removal of any property of the grantee. 
The letter of credit or the performance bond may be drawn or called upon by the city by presentation of a draft on sight at the lending institution, accompanied by a written certificate signed by the city manager certifying that the grantee has failed to comply with the franchise agreement and/or this chapter, stating the nature of the noncompliance, and stating the amount being drawn or called. Examples of the nature of the noncompliance for drawing upon the letter of credit or calling upon the performance bond include, but are not limited to, the following: 
1.  Failure of the grantee to pay to the city any undisputed franchise fees, taxes, liens or other generally applicable fees after ten (10) days written notice of delinquency. 
2.  Failure of the grantee to pay to the city after ten (10) days written notice any amounts due and owing by reason of the indemnity provisions of Section 5.16.050. 
3.  Failure of the grantee to pay to the city any liquidated damages due and owing pursuant to a franchise agreement. 
4.  Failure to make any payment required by a franchise agreement within the time fixed therein. 
5.  Failure to pay to the city within ten (10) days after receipt of written notice, any damages claims, costs or expenses which the city has been compelled to pay or incur by the reason of any material act or default by the grantee. 
6.  Failure to comply within ten (10) working days after receipt of written notice from the city, with any material provisions of a franchise agreement or this chapter which the city reasonably determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount from the letter of credit, performance bond or other instrument. 
In the event of such noncompliance, the city may order the withdrawal of the appropriate amount of liquidated damages, penalties, fees or otherwise from the letter of credit, performance bond or other instrument for payment to the city, provided that, prior to each such withdrawal: (i) the grantee shall be afforded an opportunity to cure any of such failures within thirty (30) days after written notice from the city that the withdrawal is being made; or (ii) if such cure cannot be reasonably accomplished within such thirty (30) days, then the grantee shall have a reasonable time to cure, provided that the grantee commences such cure within such thirty (30) days and diligently pursues such cure to completion. 
B.  Letter of Credit or Performance Bond shall be Replenished to Original Amount Following Any Draw Down. Grantee shall structure the letter of credit or performance bond in such a manner so that if the city at any time draws upon the letter of credit or performance bond, the amount of available credit or bond shall automatically increase to the extent necessary to replenish that portion of the available credit or bond exhausted by the honoring of the draft. The intent of this subsection is to make available to the city at all times a letter of credit or performance bond in the amount specified in the franchise agreement. 
C.  The City's Rights with Respect to Letter of Credit or Performance Bond are in Addition to Other Rights. The rights reserved to the city with respect to the letter of credit or performance bond are in addition to all other rights of the city, whether reserved by a franchise agreement or authorized by law, and no action or proceeding against a letter of credit or performance bond shall affect any other right the city may have. 
(Prior code § A-2-13)  
5.16.140 - Liquidated damages. 
A.  Parties Shall Agree to Specific Liquidated Damages to be Paid by Grantee for Certain Delays or Nonperformance. A grantee's failure to comply with any timing or performance requirements set forth in a franchise agreement will result in damage to the city, the amount of which will be impracticable to ascertain. Therefore, the city and the grantee shall negotiate the amount of liquidated damages and the procedure for the imposition of such damages in a franchise agreement. 
(Prior code § A-2-14)  
5.16.150 - Forfeiture and termination. 
A.  Franchise May be Terminated for Material Breach of Terms and Conditions. In addition to all other rights and powers retained by the city, the city reserves the right to terminate a franchise and all rights and privileges of the grantee in the event of a material breach of this chapter or a franchise agreement. A material breach by a grantee means the following: 
1.  Violation of any material provision of this chapter or the franchise agreement or any material rule, order, regulation or determination of the city made pursuant to a franchise. 
2.  Attempt to evade any material provision of this chapter or a franchise agreement or practice any fraud or deceit upon the city of the subscribers of the cable system. 
3.  Failure to complete cable system construction, reconstruction or cable system extension as provided under a franchise agreement. 
4.  Failure to maintain insurance, bonds and letters of credit as required by the city. 
5.  Failure to restore cable service after forty-eight (48) consecutive hours of interrupted cable service, except when there is just cause or when approval of such interruption is obtained from the city manager. 
6.  Abandonment of the system, in whole or in material part, without the prior written consent of the city. 
7.  Any intentional material misrepresentation made by or on behalf of a grantee in its proposal to obtain a franchise or in connection with the negotiation or renegotiation of, or with any amendment or other modification to a franchise agreement, to the extent that any such misrepresentation was relied upon by the city. 
8.  There is made an assignment for the benefit of creditors or any appointment of a receiver or trustee to take over the business of the grantee, whether in a receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy assignment for the benefit of creditors, or other action or proceeding, unless the conditions set forth in subsections (F)(1) and (2) of this section are fulfilled. 
B.  Procedures Outlined Leading to Possible Termination of Franchise. The city shall make a written demand that a grantee comply with any provision, rule, order, or determination under or pursuant to this chapter or a franchise agreement. If the violation breach, failure, refusal or neglect by a grantee continues for a period of thirty (30) days following such written demand without written proof that the corrective action has been taken or is being actively and expeditiously pursued, the city shall place the issue of termination of a franchise before the city council. The city shall cause to be served upon grantee, at least twenty (20) days prior to the date of such city council meeting, a written notice of intent to request such termination and the time and place of the meeting. Public notice shall be given of the meeting and the issue which the city council is to consider. 
C.  City Council Shall Hear and Consider Issues and Determine if a Violation has Occurred. The city council shall hear and consider the issue and shall hear any person interested therein, and shall determine, whether or not any violation by a grantee has occurred. 
D.  City Council May Declare Franchise Terminated if Compliance Does Not Occur Within Specified Period. If the city council shall determine the violation by a grantee was the fault of the grantee and within the grantee's control, the city council, may, by resolution, declare that the franchise of the grantee be terminated, unless there is compliance within such time period as the city council may fix. 
E.  Franchise May Cease and Terminate One Hundred Twenty Days After Appointment of Receivers. Any franchise granted shall, at the option of city, cease and terminate on one hundred twenty (120) days after the appointment of a receiver or receivers or trustee or trustees to take over and conduct the business of grantee whether in a receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy, or other action or proceeding unless such receivership or trusteeship shall have vacated prior to the expiration of such one hundred twenty (120) days, or unless: 
1.  Such receivers or trustees shall have within one hundred twenty (120) days, after their election or appointment, fully complied with all the terms and provisions of this chapter and a franchise granted pursuant hereto, and the receivers or trustees within such one hundred twenty (120) days shall have remedied all defaults under the franchise; and, 
2.  Such receivers or trustees shall have within one hundred twenty (120) days executed an agreement duly approved by the court having jurisdiction, whereby such receivers or trustees assume and agree to be bound by each and every term, provision, and limitation of the franchise agreement. 
F.  Procedure if a Foreclosure Occurs. In the case of foreclosure or other involuntary sale of the plant, property, and equipment of grantee, or any part thereof, city may serve notice of termination upon grantee and to the purchaser at such sale, in which event the franchise and rights and privileges of grantee shall cease and terminate thirty (30) days after service of such notice unless: 
1.  City has approved the transfer of the franchise, as and in the manner provided for in this chapter; and 
2.  Such successful purchaser shall have covenanted and agreed with city to assume and be bound by all the terms and conditions of the franchise agreement. 
(Prior code § A-2-15)  
5.16.160 - Waivers. 
A.  Any provision of this chapter may be waived for good cause shown, at the sole discretion of the city, by resolution of the city council. 
B.  A grantee may submit a written request for a waiver to the city council at any time during the franchise term. Such request for a waiver, at the sole discretion of the city council, may be set for a public hearing, and a decision shall be made within one hundred twenty (120) days following the submission. Procedures for the modification of franchise obligations shall be in compliance with Section 625 [47 U.S.C. 545] of Title VI, Communication Act of 1934, as amended. 
C.  The city council may authorize the economic, technical, or legal evaluation of such waiver request. 
D.  This section is enacted solely for the convenience and benefit of the grantor and shall not be construed in such a manner as to create any right or entitlement for the grantee. 
(Prior code § A-2-16)  
5.16.170 - Sundry provisions. 
A.  Every direction, notice or order by the city to be served upon a grantee shall be delivered or sent by registered mail to the office responsible for the local cable system. Every notice served upon the city shall be delivered or sent by first class mail to the city manager, city of Coachella, California. 
B.  All provisions of this chapter shall apply to a grantee, its successors, and assignees, as may be approved by city council in accordance with this chapter. 
C.  The rights granted by this chapter are subject to all franchises and permits heretofore or hereafter granted by the city council to use the streets of the city by other public utility or public service corporations. It is not intended by the grant of a franchise to abridge the exercise of the police power heretofore or hereafter granted to the city by the state. The grant of franchise is subject to all generally applicable ordinances and resolutions adopted by the city council of the city as the same now exist or may be hereafter lawfully amended, revised or codified, in the lawful exercise of any other power granted to the city. 
D.  Specific mention of the materiality of any of the provisions herein is not intended to be exclusive of any others for the purpose of determining whether any failure of compliance hereunder is material and substantial. 
E.  If any particular section of this chapter, or the particular application thereof, shall be held invalid, the remaining provisions, and their application, shall not be affected thereby. 
F.  A grantee, upon its acceptance of a franchise, shall be bound by the provisions of this chapter, and all matters agreed upon in a franchise agreement subject to applicable state/federal law. 
G.  The rights and remedies reserved to the city by this chapter are cumulative and shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other rights or remedies which the city may have with respect to the subject matter of this chapter. A waiver of any right or remedy by a party at one time shall not affect the exercise of such right or remedy or any other right or other remedy by such party at any other time. The failure of the city to take any action in the event of a material breach by the grantee shall not be construed or otherwise be deemed to constitute a waiver of the right of the city to take such action at any other time in the event that such material breach has not been cured, or with respect to any other material breach by the grantee. 
H.  In the event that, after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, any court, agency, commission, legislative body, or other authority of competent jurisdiction: (i) declares the chapter invalid, in whole or in part; or (ii) requires the grantee either to: (a) perform any act which is inconsistent with any provision of this chapter; or (b) cease performing any act required by any provision of this chapter, and the grantee intends to exercise its rights pursuant to such declaration, the grantee shall so notify the city of such declaration or requirement. 
I.  The headings contained in this chapter are to facilitate reference only, do not form a part of this chapter, and shall not in any way affect the construction of interpretation hereof. 
(Prior code § A-2-17)  
5.16.180 - Establishing criminal and civil penalties and cumulative remedies. 
A.  Criminal Violations. 
1.  Infraction Violations. A violation of Sections 5.16.020(B) and (D), 5.16.040(B) through (D) and (F)(1), 5.16.050(B), 5.16.060(C) through (I), 5.16.070(B) through (K) and (N), 5.16.080(A) through (I), 5.16.090(B), 5.16.100(A), (B), (E) and (F), 5.16.110(B) through (D) and 5.16.130(A) of this chapter by any person responsible for committing, causing or maintaining such violation shall constitute an infraction violation, punishable by either: (a) a fine in an amount not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first violation; (b) a fine in an amount not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second violation of the same provision within a twelve (12) month period; and (c) a fine in an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the third violation within a twelve (12) month period commencing upon the date of the first violation. 
2.  Misdemeanor Violations. A fourth violation and subsequent violations of the same provision within a twelve (12) month period shall be deemed a misdemeanor, which shall be punishable by a fine in an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or the maximum amount otherwise permitted by federal and state law, and/or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months or the maximum amount otherwise permitted by federal and state law. 
B.  Civil Fines. 
1.  Infraction Violations. Any person convicted of an infraction under this chapter shall, for each separate violation of this chapter, be subject to: (a) a fine in an amount not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for a first conviction of an offense; (b) a fine in an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a second conviction of the same offense within a twelve (12) month period of the date of the first offense; and (c) a fine in an amount not to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for the third conviction of the same offense within a twelve (12) month period of the date of the first offense. The fine for a fourth and subsequent convictions of the same offense within a twelve (12) month period of the date of the first offense shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or the maximum otherwise permitted by federal and state law. 
2.  Misdemeanor Violations. Any person convicted of a misdemeanor under this chapter shall, for each separate violation of this chapter, be subject to: (a) a fine in an amount not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for a first conviction of an offense; (b) a fine in an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a second conviction of the same offense within a twelve (12) month period of the date of the first offense; and (c) a fine in an amount not to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for the third conviction of the same offense within a twelve (12) month period of the date of the first offense. The fine for a fourth and subsequent convictions of the same offense within a twelve (12) month period of the date of the first offense shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or the maximum amount otherwise permitted by federal and state law. 
C.  Other Penalties. 
1.  Notwithstanding the Section 5.16.180(A) and (B), in accordance with the provisions set forth in Section 53056 of the California Government Code, where a grantee fails to distribute to subscribers the annual notice required by Section 53055.1 of the California Government Code, a grantee shall be subject to a penalty not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each year in which the notice is not distributed to all subscribers. 
D.  Cumulative Remedies. The remedies set forth in this chapter shall be cumulative and in addition to any and all other remedies, civil, equitable or criminal, afforded to the city under applicable law. 
(Prior code § A-2-18)  
5.16.190 - Posting. 
The city clerk shall within fifteen (15) days after the passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter, cause it to be posted in at least the three public places designated by resolution of the city council; shall certify to the adoption and posting of the ordinance codified in this chapter, and shall cause this chapter and its certification, together with proof of posting, to be entered in the book of ordinances of this city. 
(Prior code § A-2-21)  
Chapter 5.20 - CARD CLUBS, CARD SCHOOLS AND GAMING ENTERPRISES 
 
5.20.010 - Legislative purpose. 
The voters of the city enact this chapter to accomplish the following purposes: 
A.  The residents of the city are in need of employment; 
B.  The residents of the city are in need of more police and fire services; 
C.  The residents of the city are in need of recreational facilities and activities for their families; 
D.  The residents of the city desire the right to compete for legal gaming business with other cities of the Coachella Valley and with the Indian Tribes of the Coachella Valley; 
E.  The city is in need of additional revenue because the state legislature has required it to implement various duties and programs without providing the funding; and 
F.  The residents of the city desire to establish minimum requirements, not inconsistent with state law, for the licensing, regulations and taxation of legal gaming in the city which the city council may not repeal. 
(Prior code § 4-70)  
5.20.020 - Expenditure of gaming revenue. 
The revenue derived by the city from any card club, card school or gaming enterprise licensed under this chapter may be expended by the city for any lawful purpose as determined by the city council provided that a substantial portion of those revenues shall be expended as follows: 
A.  Twenty-five (25) percent of the total gaming revenue received by the city shall be expended for recreational equipment, facilities and services for the residents of the city as determined by the city council; and 
B.  Twenty-five (25) percent of the total gaming revenue received by the city shall be expended for police and fire equipment, facilities and services for the residents of the city as determined by the city council. 
(Prior code § 4-71)  
5.20.030 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the words and phrases hereinafter set forth shall have the following meanings ascribed to them unless the context clearly requires to the contrary: 
"Applicant" means any person who files an application seeking to be approved by the city council to manage, operate or own an interest in a card club, card school or gaming enterprise. 
"Card club or gaming enterprise" means any business establishment in the city where legal gambling as defined in this section is conducted and licensed under the provisions of this chapter and shall also include any related business activities incidental to legal gambling such as food and beverage service, entertainment and valet services. 
"Card school" means a place conducted, maintained or operated for the purpose of giving instructions in the playing of any game not prohibited hereunder. No gambling or other forms of betting, except simulated betting solely for the purposes of instruction or training, may be conducted at a card school. 
"Card table" means a table at which legal games are conducted and does not mean a table which is used solely for instructional purpose or for other nongaming purposes such as eating, drinking or socializing. A card table shall also include tables used for instructional purposes in which a fee or any other monetary value is required for and/or derived from the use thereof. 
"Chief financial officer" means the officer appointed by the city council to access, audit and investigate the financial affairs and records of any licensee and report same to the city council. The council may appoint any person or entity which it deems qualified for this purpose. 
"Chief of police" means the police chief of the city police department. 
"City" or "Coachella" means the city. 
"City attorney" means the city attorney of the city. 
"City council" or "council" means the city council of the city. 
"City manager" means the city manager of the city. 
"Commence" means and includes commence, begin, initiate, start, open and/or establish. 
"Conduct" means and includes conduct, transact, maintain, prosecute, practice, manage, operate and/or carry on. 
"Conviction" means a plea or verdict of guilty or a conviction following a plea of nolo contendere. 
"Employee" means every person, either as agent, employee, or otherwise of the manager, operator or owner of any gaming enterprise. 
"Game" or "games" means any game played for gambling purposes, including any form of poker or bingo, which is not prohibited under state law or any ordinance of the city, whether or not such game involves the use of cards. 
"Gaming commission" means that certain five-member body which regulates and oversees the operation of gaming enterprises licensed under this chapter. The city council may, by resolution, choose to act as the gaming commission. In lieu thereof, the city council may appoint the members of the gaming commission and provide, by resolution, the terms and duties thereof. 
"Gross revenues" means any and all revenues derived from the playing of legal games including seat use or rental fees, membership fees and house take on wagering, but not derived from nongaming activities such as food and beverage sales, the portion of tournament entry fees allocated for prizes, parking fees or valet fees. 
"Legal gambling" or "legal gaming" means any game played for currency, check, credit or any other thing of value which is not prohibited and made unlawful by Chapter 9 (commencing with Section 319) or Chapter 10 (commencing with Section 330) of Title 9 of Part 1 of the Penal Code or any ordinance of the city. 
"License" means a license issued pursuant to this chapter allowing for the operation of a card club, card school or gaming enterprise either by a resolution or license agreement of the city council. 
"Licensee" means any person or entity, including an owner or point holder of such an entity, who has been licensed or has a license agreement under this chapter by the city council. 
"License agreement" means an agreement between a licensee and the city pursuant to this chapter permitting the operation of a card club, card school or gaming enterprise with the terms and conditions recommended by the city attorney and adopted by the city council. 
"Owner" or "pointholder" means any person owning any interest, whether legal, equitable or otherwise, in a card club, card school or gaming enterprise in the city. 
"Purport to commence" and "purport to conduct" means and includes any action which indicates, suggests, holds out, or represents that any person is, would be, or appears to be conducting or in a position to conduct any business referred to in this chapter within the city in a manner including: 
1.  By means of sign, advertisement, or advertising matter, whether in, upon or about any premises or otherwise; 
2.  By the appearance or arrangement of any premises; or 
3.  By acts or statements of any persons, or by the agents, servants, or employees of any person. 
"Quarter" means calendar quarter. 
"Unit" means any device used for gaming or gambling. 
"Work permit" means the permit issued by the chief of police permitting the employment of any person to be employed in a gaming enterprise. 
(Prior code § 4-72)  
5.20.040 - Licenses required. 
It is unlawful for any person to commence or conduct, or purport to commence or conduct, within the city any activity, business, enterprise or undertaking in any location or place for playing any game, or operating a card school, where a fee, commission, or compensation is, directly or indirectly, accepted, charged or received from any person playing, or participating in the playing, of any game unless and until such person applies for and is granting a license or license agreement under this chapter by the city council. A license must be applied for and granted for each card club, gaming enterprise or card school. 
(Prior code § 4-73)  
5.20.050 - License application. 
Any person desiring to manage, operate or own a card club, card school or gaming enterprise in the city shall first submit a written application to conduct such an enterprise as required by this chapter. The applicant shall attest under penalty of perjury that all information provided in the written application is true and correct. In addition, the applicant shall acknowledge that, in order for the written application to be considered complete, the city may require the applicant to provide all information relevant to the management, operation or ownership of such an enterprise including, but not limited to, the following: 
A.  The date of the application; 
B.  The true name of each applicant including all names used by each applicant; 
C.  The legal status of the applicant if other than a natural person such as an association, corporation, joint venture, limited liability company or partnership; 
D.  If the applicant is an individual, the residence and business address of such applicant for the prior ten (10) years; 
E.  If the applicant is other than a natural person, the name, residence, and business address of each of the point holders of the association, corporation, joint venture, limited liability company or partnership; 
F.  The proposed location of the business for which the license is sought; 
G.  The proposed hours of operations, games to be played and wagering limits; 
H.  The number of tables or units to be utilized; 
I.  A description of other business proposed to be conducted; 
J.  A description of the building proposed for such use; 
K.  A statement that such building will conform to all the laws of the city, county and state for the proposed occupancies; 
L.  An acknowledgment signed by the applicant that the application shall be considered by the council only after the applicant has been investigated by the city manager, the chief of police department, any other law enforcement agency having jurisdiction and the director of community development, in consultation with the city attorney, and their reports prepared and submitted to the city council for consideration; 
M.  An acknowledgment signed by the applicant that any gaming enterprise licensed under this chapter shall require the applicant to manage and operate the gaming enterprise in conformity with the laws and regulations of the city and state applicable thereto, and that any violation of any such laws or regulations shall subject any such license or license agreement to immediate suspension or revocation; 
N.  A statement that the applicant has read the provisions of this chapter, understands them and agrees to abide by them; 
O.  A full and complete financial statement of the applicant, whether the applicant is an individual, association, corporation, limited liability company or partnership, and a full and complete financial statement of each point holder regarding the amount and sources of the funding for the construction and operation of the gaming enterprise; provided that the financial statement shall be a confidential qualified document and shall not be open to public inspection but shall be available only to those city officials having jurisdiction over the licensing, regulation and taxation of the gaming enterprise under this chapter including the members of the city council, city manager, city attorney, chief of police and chief financial officer. All financial information required by this subsection and any regulation adopted by the city council shall be reported on a standardized financial statement form filed with the chief financial officer. Such financial statement shall be renewed annually and report any and all changes of financial information; and 
P.  The council shall not consider any application for any license contemplating less than a minimum of twenty-five (25) tables or units for the playing of legal games. 
(Prior code § 4-74)  
5.20.060 - Investigations and reports. 
The issuance of a license or license agreement by the city council is subject to its approval of the investigations of the applicant and application hereunder. By filing an application for a license or license agreement, the applicant acknowledges and agrees that the applicant, its owners, directors, officers, partners, managers and key employees shall be subject to investigation as follows: 
A.  The city manager, chief of police and director of community, in consultation with the city attorney, shall diligently make a full and complete investigation of the applicant, its owners, directors, officers, partners, managers and key employees. 
B.  A full and complete investigation shall be made of the building and location where the applicant proposes to conduct such business or activity. 
C.  Concurrently with the filing of the application, the applicant, its owners, directors, officers, partners, managers and key employees shall be fingerprinted by the Coachella police department upon the payment of the usual fees therefore. It shall be the responsibility and duty of the chief of police to establish the necessary procedures to administer this requirement. 
D.  All applicants, including owners, directors, officers, partners, managers and key employees shall execute an "authorization to obtain records" form to be provided by the Coachella police department which will include a hold harmless and waiver of responsibility clause as to any city employee or officer conducting the investigation and reporting thereon. 
E.  The applicant shall agree to provide the Coachella police department with a copy of an adequate security plan which must receive the approval of the police chief. The Coachella police department or any law enforcement agency having jurisdiction shall make such investigations with reasonable promptness and shall report to the city council with reference thereto in due time, and shall make investigations with reasonable promptness as to all matters within its jurisdiction concerning the public health, welfare and safety as may be concerned with such license. 
(Prior code § 4-75)  
5.20.070 - Issuance or denial of license or license agreement. 
The city council may, in its sole discretion, conditionally grant or deny any application to conduct, manage, operate or own any card club, card school or gaming enterprise in the city, or any application to transfer any license or license agreement previously issued. However, the city council shall not be required to issue any license or license agreement, or permit any transfer of any license or license agreement. In making such a determination, the city council may consider any relevant factor including, without limitation, any of the following factors: 
A.  If the proposed business or activity to be operated is in violation of any city or state law or regulation; 
B.  If any game for which a license is applied for, or is being played at the site, is unlawful; 
C.  If a license is not available where the city council has, by resolution, limited the number of licenses or license agreements to be issued in the city; 
D.  If the applicant, its owners, directors, officers, partners, managers and key employees has been or is convicted of, or pleads nolo contendere, to any crime punishable as a felony or a crime of violence, any crime involving fraud, gambling, loan sharking, bookmaking, theft, bunco, moral turpitude, evasion of taxes, or any other offense indicating a lack of business integrity or business honesty, whether committed in California or elsewhere and whether denominated a felony or a misdemeanor notwithstanding the time since the conviction; 
E.  If the applicant fails to hold a valid registration from the attorney general of the state or any other state license, permit or registration which may be required by state law; 
F.  If the applicant, its owners, directors, officers, partners, managers and key employees having any financial or equitable interest in the "gaming enterprise" is identified by any law enforcement agency, legislative body or crime commission as a member of, or an associate of, organized criminal elements; 
G.  If the applicant, or any of the applicant's agents or employees, makes any false statement in the application or as to any other information requested or presented as part of the application process; 
H.  If the applicant fails to satisfy the city council regarding the source and sufficiency of the funds to be invested in the proposed gaming enterprise; 
I.  If the applicant has been found unsuitable to operate a gaming enterprise or hold any gaming license in another jurisdiction without regard to whether disciplinary action was taken or whether the facts were sufficient to justify the refusal to grant such a license; 
J.  If the applicant is a person whose ownership of, or presence in, a licensed gaming enterprise, is found by the city council, on the basis of the facts and evidence before it, to constitute a threat to the public health, safety, morals, good order and general welfare of the residents of the city; 
K.  If the granting of a license to the applicant would tend to reflect or discredit the city or the gaming industry in the city; 
L.  If the applicant does not have the financial capability or business experience or capability to conduct, manage or operate a gaming enterprise in a manner which would adequately protect the residents of the city, the city, the patrons of the gaming enterprise or the gaming industry; 
M.  If the source of any of the funds to be invested in the gaming enterprise cannot be verified as belonging to or lawfully acquired by the applicant or its owners, directors, officers, partners, managers and key employees; 
N.  If the applicant is presently under any criminal investigation, indictment or charge for any of the crimes described above; 
O.  If the applicant makes or causes to be made any statement in any application, document or statement provided to any city official in connection with the application for a license or license agreement, or a transfer of same, or any other related transaction or document which was false or misleading in any material respect at the time and under the circumstances it was made; 
P.  If the applicant lacks a satisfactory record of business competence, ethics or integrity in the area of gaming management; 
Q.  If there is a lack of evidence of adequate funds to pay potential current obligations and, in addition, to provide adequate working capital to finance the construction or operation of the proposed gaming enterprise; 
R.  If any person named in the application when summoned by the city council fails to appear and testify before it at such item and place as it may designate; 
S.  If the applicant fails to submit an adequate security plan; and 
T.  If the applicant fails to provide an adequate demonstration of ability to develop, operate and manage a gaming enterprise or related facility. 
(Prior code § 4-76)  
5.20.080 - Fees and deposits. 
A.  Applicants and licensees shall pay the following fees to the city: 
1.  An application fee to be determined by the city council but not less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), as a nonrefundable payment for the costs of the investigations required by this chapter payable upon filing of the application. 
2.  A one-time issuance fee in a sum to be determined by the city council for each license payable within thirty (30) days from the approval date of a license or license agreement hereunder. Failure to pay such issuance fee within such thirty-day period shall render the license or license agreement void and invalid without any further action by the city. 
3.  A license fee based upon the total monthly gross revenue of the gaming enterprise in a percentage to be determined by the city council, but not less than two percent nor more than ten (10) percent of the total monthly gross revenue of the gaming enterprise, payable on the tenth day of each month following the commencement of operations of the licensed gaming enterprise. 
4.  A community fee to charitable, nonprofit organization(s) offering services to the residents of the city as approved by the city council which may be a fixed quarterly amount or an amount which shall be greater than one-tenth of one percent but not greater than one-half of one percent of the total monthly gross revenue of the gaming enterprise payable on the tenth day of each quarter following the commencement of operations of the licensed gaming enterprise. In the event that such fee is not paid by the licensee, the amount of such fee shall be due and payable to the city. 
5.  The city council may, however, limit the total amount of fees imposed during any fiscal year under this section. 
B.  The application fee required by this subsection shall be adjusted effective July 1, 1997, and annually thereafter on July 1st of each succeeding year, in a percentage amount equal to the change in the consumer price index during the preceding twelve (12) month period for the Metropolitan Los Angeles-Anaheim-Riverside Area as published by the United States Bureau of Labor Statistics. 
C.  A security deposit in a sum to be determined by the city council, but not less than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00), for each license payable within sixty (60) days from the approval date of a license or license agreement as stated in this chapter. Failure to make such security deposit within such sixty-day period shall render the licensee's license or license agreement void and invalid, and any such license or license agreement shall be null and void without any further action necessary by the city. Such security deposit shall be made to insure licensee's payment of the monthly and gross revenue fees due to the city. Such security deposit shall be refunded in the event that the license is deemed invalid provided the licensee has not conducted any business or generated any income from the gaming enterprise so licensed. 
D.  Applicant shall place the security deposit in an interest bearing escrow account for the benefit of the city at a financial institution selected by the chief financial officer. Prior to making such deposit, the mayor, city attorney, licensee and financial institution shall execute appropriate escrow instructions approved by the city attorney. All interest earned on such deposit shall be credited to such account. If a licensee becomes delinquent in the payment of fees due to the city pursuant to this chapter, the chief financial officer, after twenty-four (24) hours' written notice to the licensee, shall withdraw the amount due the city from such account and deposit same into the appropriate city account which shall become the property of the city. If the security deposit falls below the required amount, the licensee shall replenish it within five calendar days. Failure to maintain the required security deposit shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of the licensee's license or license agreement. 
E.  If the licensee has managed, operated or owned a gaming enterprise for twenty-four (24) consecutive months and the licensee has paid all fees to the city during such period, the city council may eliminate or reduce the licensee's obligation to maintain a security deposit. However, the city council shall require the licensee to reestablish a security deposit if the licensee subsequently becomes delinquent or defaults in the payment of any fee due the city. 
(Prior code § 4-77)  
5.20.090 - Contents of license or license agreement. 
Any license or license agreement for any gaming enterprise issued by the city council shall contain all the provisions required by this chapter and those conditions necessary to operate the gaming enterprise so licensed including the following provisions: 
A.  The name, address and identification information of the licensee; 
B.  The term of the license or license agreement; 
C.  The obligation to construct or acquire a facility in which to operate the gaming enterprise and to operate the gaming enterprise at such facility; 
D.  The number of tables or units which may be operated at the gaming enterprise facility; 
E.  The hours of operation of the gaming enterprise facility; 
F.  The games which may be played at the gaming enterprise facility; 
G.  The wagering limits on the games which may be played at the gaining enterprise facility; 
H.  The right, if any, to serve food and alcoholic beverages, or to provide entertainment and valet parking at the gaming enterprise facility; 
I.  The right, if any, to operate a card school at the gaming enterprise facility or at another facility; 
J.  The amount of the issuance fee, monthly license fee, gross revenue license fee, community fee and security deposit to be paid by the licensee; 
K.  The financial reporting obligations and procedures of the licensee; 
L.  The employment obligations of the licensee; and 
M.  The conditions imposed on the licensee. 
(Prior code § 4-78)  
5.20.100 - License conditions. 
The license or license agreement granted as stated in this chapter shall be conditioned upon licensee's compliance with the following requirements: 
A.  Licensee shall construct and operate any gaming enterprise or card school only in the entertainment zone located at Dillon Road near the I-10 Freeway. 
B.  Licensee shall comply with the city's zoning ordinances and all conditions imposed by the city's planning commission for the site of each gaming enterprise or card school. 
C.  Licensee shall obtain a city business license. 
D.  Licensee shall comply with all provisions of this chapter, amendments and all regulations adopted by the city council to implement this chapter or state law. 
E.  Licensee shall comply with this code applicable to the operation or location of each card club, card school or gaming enterprise. 
F.  Licensee shall pay all fees and deposit all sums required by this chapter. 
G.  Licensee, its owners, directors, officers, partners, managers and key employees shall submit to annual background investigations pursuant to a schedule and a fee structure established by the city council. 
H.  Any and all other conditions reasonably necessary to implement the purposes and provisions of this chapter as determined by the city council. 
(Prior code § 4-79)  
5.20.110 - License expiration and transfer. 
A.  Any license or license agreement issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be and remain valid until its term expires, it is surrendered by the applicant, deemed null and void by operation of the provisions of this chapter, license or license agreement under which it was created, or suspended or revoked by the city council as provided in this section. Except as provided in the license or license agreement, in the event of expiration, surrender, suspension or revocation, no license deposit or fee, or any portion thereof, shall be refunded. 
B.  Any license or license agreement, and all rights of the licensee thereunder, shall expire and be revoked by operation of law if the licensee fails to commence operation of a card club, card school or gaming enterprise within one year of the date of issuance of the license or license agreement. 
C.  Licensees shall not transfer or assign any license or license agreement without the prior written consent of city council. All requests for transfer or assignment shall constitute a request for an original license and require a new application and investigation. 
(Prior code § 4-80)  
5.20.120 - Employment obligations. 
The licensee shall implement the following employment practices with respect to the hiring of its employees: 
A.  Design and implement a plan to recruit, train and hire residents of the city for employment at the gaming enterprise and card school. 
B.  Grant first hiring considerations to the residents of Coachella assuming similar qualifications. 
C.  Target the hiring of twenty-five (25) percent of the employees of the gaming enterprise from residents of the city. 
D.  Make good faith efforts to contract with companies, laborers and vendors based in the city to construct and supply the gaming enterprise and card school. 
E.  Provide a progress report on or before July 1st of each year to the city council describing its efforts to comply with its obligation to seek out and award jobs and contracts to persons or firms who reside in or are located in the city. 
(Prior code § 4-81)  
5.20.130 - Financial controls. 
The city council and the chief financial officer shall have the right to review and approve the accounting procedures of each licensee before and after such accounting procedures are put into effect and such procedures shall be a condition of the issuance of any license or license agreement issued under this chapter. In addition, the city council and the chief financial officer shall require the implementation of procedures and security measures necessary to ascertain, count and report all revenues derived from gaming by each card club, card school or gaming enterprise. The city shall have the right to place city employees or officers in each card club, card school or gaming enterprise to observe and verify the counting of all revenues derived from gaming at each card club, card school or gaming enterprise before such revenues are counted and removed by the licensee. 
(Prior code § 4-82)  
5.20.140 - Statement of revenues. 
The licensee shall file with the chief financial officer before the tenth day of each calendar month a reporting form approved by the city council, under penalty of perjury, showing the true and correct amount of gross revenues derived from all operations licensed or permitted pursuant to this chapter for the preceding calendar month. Such statement shall be accompanied by the payment of the correct amount of license fee due and owing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Such sums correctly reflecting the monthly fees payable for the preceding month shall be accepted by the chief financial officer subject to the right to access and audit the licensee's financial records and to the correctness of the figures contained in such statement and the amounts payable to the city pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. Such statement shall report all sums contributed to any charitable institutions or nonprofit organization. If the tenth day of the month falls on a holiday, the report will be due on the next business day. The city council, in the exercise of sound discretion, may grant an extension of time for any payment due under this chapter, for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days. The late payment shall bear interest payable to the city at the current Bank of America prime rate plus two percent. 
(Prior code § 4-83)  
5.20.150 - Audit of financial records. 
All of licensee's financial books, records, and accounts of the gaming enterprise shall be audited at the end of the licensee's calendar year by a certified public accountant (CPA) selected by the chief financial officer. The audit shall examine the licensee's gross venues and financial records and procedures and any other financial information, procedure or record requested by the city council, chief financial officer or city attorney. The cost of this annual audit shall be paid by the licensee. Any information obtained pursuant to the provisions of this chapter or any statement filed by the licensee shall be deemed confidential in character and shall not be subject to public inspection except in connection with the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. Any inaccuracy found in the revenues reported by licensee to the city shall be adjusted. If such audit discloses that the licensee's gross revenues were under reported, the licensee shall pay all additional amounts due forthwith together with interest thereon at the current Bank of America prime rate plus two percent. Any failure or refusal by the licensee to pay any amounts when due, or to submit any report as required within the time so designated, or to produce or permit inspection of any financial information, procedure or record of the licensee shall be and constitute full and sufficient grounds for the immediate suspension or revocation of the license or license agreement. 
(Prior code § 4-84)  
5.20.160 - Employee information. 
A.  The licensee shall keep on file with the Coachella police department, and on the gaming enterprise facility as to each employee of the gaming enterprise, a comprehensive employee list containing the following current information: 
1.  Residence address for the past five years; 
2.  Current occupation or employment; 
3.  Employment during the past five years; 
4.  Physical characteristics, including age, date of birth, height, weight, and color of hair and eyes; 
5.  Driver's license and social security number; 
6.  A history of all convictions for any felony or misdemeanor offenses, other than the nonmoving traffic violations, and of violations of any municipal codes or ordinances involving gaming within the past ten (10) years; and 
7.  A current full face photo. 
B.  Each such employee at all times, while acting within the scope of his/her employment, shall carry upon his or her person a work permit authorizing employment in a card club, card school or gaming enterprise approved by the chief of police. In addition, each employee, with the exception of those specifically exempted by the Coachella chief of police or designees, shall wear in a prominently visible place upon his or her person an identification badge bearing the name and identification number of the employee. All employees must, upon demand of a Coachella police officer, identify themselves. 
C.  In addition, to the foregoing provisions, any person employed by the gaming enterprise, prior to commencing employment, shall submit to fingerprinting at a location designated by the chief of police. Any processing fee as set from time to time by the responsible party or entity, shall be paid by the gaming enterprise. The fingerprinting will result in a background investigation to be conducted by the Coachella police department. 
(Prior code § 4-85)  
5.20.170 - Exclusion of persons. 
A licensee may, and shall upon order of the chief of police, exclude or eject from the facility of a card club, card school or gaming enterprise any person who has been engaged in or been convicted of bookmaking, cheating, illegal gambling, loan sharking, prostitution and the sale of controlled substances or stolen property. 
(Prior code § 4-86)  
5.20.180 - Rules and regulations. 
The city council shall have the right to adopt, by resolution, such rules and regulations which shall be reasonable and necessary to regulate the operations of any licensed gaming enterprise and the violation of any such rules and regulations shall constitute grounds for the suspension or revocation of any license or license agreement issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. The following rules and regulations are established and promulgated with reference to gaming enterprises and all licensees shall abide by and observe each and all of the following rules: 
A.  Rule 1. Entertainment. The licensee agrees that all requests for entertainment in a licensed gaming enterprise shall be submitted to the city manager and chief of police for review and approval and must comply with all existing city codes or regulations. All requests shall state with specificity the type of entertainment desired, the hours for such entertainment, and any other information requested by the chief of police. The city manager and the chief of police's decision to approve, approve with conditions, or deny shall be subject to ratification by the city council. The city manager and/or city council may suspend, revoke, or recondition such permit at any time. 
B.  Rule 2. Alcoholic Beverages. 
1.  Alcoholic beverages may be sold, dispensed, consumed, or permitted in licensed gaming enterprises in accordance with applicable state and local laws and regulations. 
2.  No on-duty employee of a gaming enterprise shall consume alcoholic beverages. 
3.  No complimentary or reduced price alcoholic beverages shall be offered by the gaming enterprise. 
4.  The licensee or other person in charge or control of any game or card game operating shall not permit any person to play in any game at any time while such person appears to be, or is, under the influence of any alcoholic beverage or controlled substance. 
5.  The licensee or other person in charge or control of any card game or premises where card games are operating under any license issued pursuant to the provisions of this agreement shall not permit any person to enter the premises while such person appears to be, or in the opinion of the licensee or duly authorized agents or employees, is under the influence of an alcoholic beverage or controlled substance. 
6.  In addition to any other penalties for violation of this rule it is the specific intent of the city council that any violation of this rule as it relates to the serving of alcoholic beverages in gaming enterprises shall be grounds for the immediate suspension and/or revocation of any license or license agreement. 
C.  Rule 3. Inspections. All gaming enterprises, books and records of a gaming enterprise, and card schools shall be open for inspection during all hours to the chief of police, the city manager, city's chief financial officer or their duly authorized representatives, without a search warrant. 
D.  Rule 4. Hours of Operation. Hours of operation shall be imposed by the city council for the protection of the public welfare. 
E.  Rule 5. Age Limitation. The licensee shall not permit or allow any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years to play in a game licensed hereunder at any time. 
F.  Rule 6. Credit and Check Cashing. The giving of credit or lending of anything of value to a patron and the cashing of checks of patrons shall be permitted only if the licensee's written check cashing and credit policies are posted at the cashier's window. Licensee further agrees to adhere to all federal regulations restricting cash transactions, including, but not limited to those provisions set forth in 31 USC Section 5311 et seq. 
G.  Rule 7. Tournaments. Notwithstanding the foregoing rules, tournaments shall be permitted provided that the time, place and special rules, including minimum and maximum bets for such tournament play, are first submitted to and approved by the city manager or designee. 
H.  Rule 8. Cheating. All persons caught cheating in the establishment shall be reported to the Coachella police department and the licensee shall cooperate fully in the prosecution of all persons who are criminally charged with cheating in the licensed establishment. Cheating devices shall be confiscated and shall not be returned to the person or persons using or bringing such devices on the premises. 
I.  Rule 9. Subletting. The licensee agrees and acknowledges that it is unlawful for any person as an operator, agent, and/or employee of any duly licensed gaming enterprise to assign, arrange for, or in any other manner sublet, directly or indirectly, with or without consideration, to any person not having a valid unrevoked license to conduct card games from that specific gaming enterprise location. It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to conduct any game permitted by law as provided pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, in a duly licensed gaming enterprise not having a valid unrevoked license to conduct such game or games. It shall also be grounds for the revocation or suspension of any license issued to any gaining enterprise to permit the farming out, assigning, subcontracting, or subletting of any game lawfully permitted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
J.  Rule 10. Posting of Prices Required. The licensee agrees that all membership fees, playing fees or charges as well as price of refreshments and food offered shall be posted conspicuously in all rooms of the gaming enterprise and card school. 
(Prior code § 4-87)  
5.20.190 - Gaming commission. 
In the event that any license or license agreement is issued under this chapter, the city council may create a gaming commission for the purpose of overseeing the licensee's compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the license or license agreement. The gaming commission may conduct any investigations which it deems necessary to assure such compliance. For that purpose, the gaming commission shall have access to the premises of the card club, card school or gaming enterprise, the employees and the books and records thereof. The gaming commission shall be composed of five persons, three of which shall be residents of the city; including any member of the city council. The members of the gaming commission shall receive a stipend for their services and reimbursement of their expenses provided that such stipend and expenses shall be paid solely from gaming revenues including any fee which the city council may impose on a licensee to pay for the cost of the affairs of the gaming commission. 
(Prior code § 4-88)  
5.20.200 - Grounds for suspension, revocation or invalidation. 
Any license or license agreement issued pursuant to this chapter may be invalidated, suspended or revoked if the city council finds that any of the following conditions exist: 
A.  The licensee or any agent or employee thereof, has violated, or allowed or caused the violation of, any provision of this chapter. 
B.  The licensee or any agent or employee thereof, has violated, or allowed or caused the violation of, any term or condition of the license or license agreement issued by the city council under this chapter. 
C.  The licensee or any agent or employee thereof, has made, or allowed or caused to be made, any fraudulent or misleading statement as to a material fact submitted in an application form, or about any other information presented or requested as part of the application process. 
D.  The licensee has ceased or substantially ceased to do business during any thirty (30) days out in any twelve-month period. 
(Prior code § 4-89)  
5.20.210 - Procedure on suspension—Revocation or invalidation. 
A.  Whenever the city council, city manager, the chief of police, the chief financial officer or the city attorney has information that a ground for suspension, revocation or invalidation exists, the same may be investigated further or set for hearing before the city council. The city manager shall give written notice to the licensee of the circumstances constituting sufficient grounds and the time and place of the hearing before the city council not less than five days in advance of the date set by for such hearing. 
B.  At the time set for such hearings, the city council shall hear the evidence supporting the grounds for suspension, revocation or invalidation. Thereafter the city council shall permit the licensee, and any other interested person, to present such evidence as may be relevant to dispute or support the existence of such grounds. The city council may continue the hearing. 
C.  The city council shall, at its discretion, cause to be issued and served any subpoenas as it may direct in accordance with the provisions of the laws of the state relating thereto requiring the attendance of any person whom the city council deems in its discretion to be a necessary and proper party to testify as to any material matter concerning any licensee or any of its agents, officers, employees, partners, pointholders or shareholders. 
D.  If, based upon the evidence presented, the city council finds the existence of grounds for suspension, revocation or invalidation, the city council may suspend or revoke the license or license agreement or, in the alternative, the city council [may] impose such conditions as it may determine including the imposition of a fine. If it finds that such facts are not present, it shall dismiss the proceedings. The decision of the city council shall be final and conclusive. 
(Prior code § 4-90)  
5.20.220 - Divestment. 
A.  The licensee shall agree, as a condition of the issuance of any license or license agreement, that any person(s) having any interest whatsoever or at all in the ownership of a gaming enterprise, whether legal or equitable, or as trustor or trustee, or of whatsoever kind or character shall divest himself or herself of such ownership interest within one hundred twenty (120) days after service of a notice of divestiture is served on such person by the chief of police upon such person's final conviction of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or a felony. A plea or verdict of guilty, or conviction following a plea or nolo contendere to a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or a felony shall be deemed to be a final conviction within the meaning of this section, and shall constitute the final action pursuant to which notice of divestiture shall be served if the conviction is affirmed. Within thirty (30) days after the service of a notice of divestiture, the person or persons subject to such notice may request in writing a hearing before the city council to appeal the notice and request a waiver of the divestiture requirement or a transfer to a trustee. 
B.  A hearing shall be scheduled before the city council within thirty (30) days after the receipt of the written request. Upon the conclusion of the hearing, the city council may order a divestiture or relieve the person from a divestiture, permit a transfer to a trustee or impose a lesser penalty if the city council finds substantial circumstances in mitigation and finds that the public safety and welfare can be protected by an order other than divestiture. In making such a determination, the city council may consider the following factors: 
1.  The type, nature and extent of the point holder's interest, including the involvement, if any, in the operations of the gaming enterprise; 
2.  The nature, time, and seriousness of the offense; 
3.  The circumstances surrounding the conviction; 
4.  The age of the person at the time of the conviction; 
5.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation or efforts at rehabilitation; 
6.  Contributing social and environmental conditions; 
7.  The record of the proceedings leading to the conviction; 
8.  The financial stability of the point holder, including his or her personal history, reputation for habits and traits of character and moral background; and 
9.  Such other factors deemed relevant by the council in determining the status of the point holder. 
C.  The decision of the council shall be final and conclusive. 
D.  No person required to divest a gaming enterprise related interest pursuant to an order of divestiture shall transfer the same to his or her spouse, child, sibling, parent or to his or her spouse's child, sibling or parent. 
E.  Failure to comply with a notice of divestiture shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable by a fine or imprisonment for one year. Each day of noncompliance shall constitute a separate offense. In addition, the city attorney may bring an action to enforce compliance. 
(Prior code § 4-92)  
5.20.230 - Indemnity and insurance. 
A.  The licensee shall defend and indemnify and hold the city, its officers and employees, harmless from and against all liability damages, including any injury or death, noncompliance with public bidding laws asserted to be applicable to any work performed by the licensee, attorney's fees and costs which may be caused by any of licensee's activities under this chapter, whether such activities or performance thereof was caused by licensee, its agents, employees or contractors, and whether such damage shall accrue or be discovered before or after the commencement of the operation of the licensee's gaming enterprise. 
B.  The licensee shall obtain and, at all times during the term of any license or license agreement issued under this chapter, maintain in force a comprehensive bodily injury liability and property damage insurance policy in the minimum amount of three million dollars ($3,000,000.00) combined single limit per occurrence. The policy shall name as an additional insured, the city, and their officers and employees, while acting within the scope of their duty against all claims, suits, or other actions of any nature brought for or account of any deaths, injuries, damage or loss, arising out of or in connection with the construction of the gaming enterprise facility and the operations of any gaining enterprise licensed under this chapter. 
(Prior code § 4-93)  
5.20.240 - Defense of legal challenge. 
In the event of any legal action instituted by a third party or other governmental entity or official challenging the validity or the issuance of any license or license agreement under this chapter, the licensee, as a condition of the issuance of same, shall defend the city in any such action or pay the city to defend such action as determined by the city attorney. 
(Prior code § 4-94)  
5.20.250 - Unlawful acts. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to play, or to permit the playing, of any game described in this chapter at any place within the city except at a place operated under a license or license agreement issued under this chapter. 
B.  It is unlawful for any licensee, or any agent or employee of any licensee, to provide any beverage, food, service or other gratuity to any employee of the city. 
C.  It is unlawful for any licensee, or any agent or employee of any licensee, to allow any of the following activities at any facility licensed in this section: 
1.  Any person to wager any amount in excess of the posted wagering limit for the table or unit at which the person is then playing; 
2.  Any illegal gambling, act of cheating or act of prostitution by any person; or 
3.  Any playing of any game by any employee of the licensee while that employee is on duty. 
D.  It is unlawful for any licensee, or any agent or employee of any licensee, to derive any revenue from games other than from specified periodic fee, per hand fee or other approved fee or from any other enterprise except as approved by the city council. 
E.  The violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment in the county jail not to exceed one year. Each day in which a violation occurs shall be deemed to be a separate violation. 
(Ord. 891 § 21, 2003; prior code § 4-95)  
5.20.260 - Interpretation, implementation and amendment. 
This chapter shall be construed to effectuate the purposes for which it was adopted. To that end, the city council shall implement the purposes and provisions of this chapter and may adopt any and all regulations, by ordinance or resolution, reasonably necessary for those purposes. However, this chapter shall not be repealed except by a vote of the people of the city although the city council may amend this chapter to implement its purposes and provisions and to comply with any requirement which may be imposed by the state pertaining to gaming without a further vote of the people. 
(Prior code § 4-96)  
Chapter 5.24 - ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS WHERE ALCOHOL IS SERVED 
 
5.24.010 - Legislative findings. 
The city council finds and declares that business establishments which offer alcoholic beverages and entertainment affect the quality of life and the moral character of the community and produce detrimental impacts on the patrons and employees of such establishments and on the neighborhoods surrounding them. Such detrimental impacts include activities which endanger the physical safety of patrons, employees and neighbors, encourage disorderly conduct, generate excessive noise and traffic especially during opening and closing hours of operation. The licensing and regulation of such entertainment establishments by this chapter is intended to protect and promote the public aesthetics, health, morals, peace and safety and to defray the cost thereof. 
(Prior code § 4-30)  
5.24.020 - Definitions. 
Words not defined herein shall be given their common and ordinary meanings. The word "shall" is mandatory and the word "may" is permissive. For the purposes of this chapter the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein: 
"City" means the city of Coachella and its territorial limits. 
"Community organization" means any organization based in the city which does not operate for profit and which dedicates itself to the betterment of the residents of the city. 
"Entertainment" means any artistic, athletic, dramatic, musical or theatrical activity, performance or presentation by any person and/or any animal designed to attract, amuse or entertain any person. 
"Entertainment establishment" means any establishment within the city where alcoholic beverages are offered for consumption together with dancing by its patrons or entertainment for its patrons, whether separately or simultaneously, for profit or otherwise. 
"Entity" means any corporation, joint venture, partnership, trust or any other business form as opposed to a natural person. 
"Permittee" means any person to whom a permit to operate an entertainment establishment has been issued. 
"Person" means any natural person. 
"Strolling musician" means any person who plays a musical instrument or sings songs for hire by any patron or customer of a business establishment but who has no contract to perform and is not paid any consideration by the business establishment at which such musician performs. 
(Prior code § 4-31)  
5.24.030 - Permit—Required—Exceptions. 
A.  No person or entity shall allow, establish, conduct, maintain or operate any entertainment establishment within the city without an entertainment permit pursuant to this chapter except a community organization as specified in subsection D in this section. 
B.  An entertainment permit shall only be issued to a person and shall not be transferable by the person to whom it is issued. Any such transfer shall automatically void the permit. 
C.  Any violation of this section by any person or entity shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
D.  The city manager may grant a limited permit to a community organization to conduct events wherein liquor is furnished together with entertainment and/or dancing, provided that a community organization shall not receive such a limited permit for more than two consecutive days nor more than six days within any calendar year. The city manager may condition the limited permit pursuant to Section 5.24.080. 
E.  No strolling musician as defined in Section 5.24.020 shall be required to obtain an entertainment permit for his or her performances within the city. 
(Prior code § 4-32)  
5.24.040 - Same—Application—Fee. 
A.  Any person seeking a permit to operate an entertainment establishment within the city shall prepare and submit a written application therefor to the city manager. Such application shall be submitted on the form prepared by the city manager pursuant to this chapter which shall request all of the following information: 
1.  The applicant's current name and any former name used within the prior ten (10) years; 
2.  The applicant's date of birth, place of birth, driver's license number and social security number; 
3.  The applicant's residential and business addresses for the prior ten (10) years; 
4.  The applicant's experience in the management or operation of any business including the identity and location of any entertainment establishment managed, operated or owned; 
5.  The location of the premises for which the applicant seeks a permit to conduct an entertainment establishment and the identity of the owner of such premises; 
6.  The type and number of the applicant's liquor license or the type of liquor license sought by the applicant and a copy of the application therefore; 
7.  The applicant's complete criminal history, if any, including the violation of any licensing statutes or ordinances for any business previously conducted by the applicant; 
8.  The applicant's photograph taken within ten (10) days of the application and the applicant's fingerprints; 
9.  A statement from applicant's physician verifying that applicant is free of any infectious, contagious or communicable disease and that the applicant is not abusing alcohol or any drug; 
10.  Any other information reasonably necessary to accomplish the purposes of this chapter and to evaluate the qualifications, credibility and moral character of the applicant; 
11.  The same information for any and all persons who will, or actually do, manage the entertainment establishment in the case that the applicant will, or does, not actually manage the entertainment establishment on a continuous basis. This section requires a permittee to submit such information to the city manager for each manager subsequent to the issuance of any permit as stated in this chapter; 
12.  The applicant shall show proof of completion of a course approved by the alcohol beverage control board on the laws and procedures pertaining to service of liquor. 
B.  The applicant shall verify the accuracy, completeness and truthfulness of the information submitted on the application under penalty of perjury. 
C.  The applicant shall deposit the sum of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) toward the investigation and processing of the application. The applicant shall reimburse the city for the actual costs of processing the application and conducting the investigation. The applicant shall pay such costs as a condition of submitting the application for an entertainment permit and no permit granted by the city council shall become valid unless and until such costs are paid by the permittee. 
(Prior code § 4-33)  
5.24.050 - Same—Investigation of applicant. 
A.  The city manager, or the city manager's designee, shall conduct an investigation of the applicant and submit a report thereon to the city council within sixty (60) days of the submission of an application for an entertainment permit unless the investigation cannot be completed within such period in which case the city manager shall notify the city council of the anticipated time for the completion of the investigation and the submission of the report. The report shall evaluate the following factors: 
1.  The accuracy, completeness and truthfulness of the information contained in the application; 
2.  The adequacy of the location and the building for the proposed entertainment establishment; 
3.  The applicant's history, if any, of violations of criminal or regulatory violations; 
4.  The applicant's prior business experience as it relates to the management or operation of any entertainment establishment, cabaret, nightclub or similar business; 
5.  The applicant's compliance with other applicable laws, ordinances and regulations; and 
6.  Recommend the imposition of reasonable conditions on the permit in furtherance of the purposes, regulations and requirements of this chapter. 
B.  Prior to submitting the report to the city council, the city manager shall determine the city's total actual costs to conduct the investigation and request applicant to pay any unpaid amount to the city. Likewise, the city shall refund any excess of applicant's deposit or other funds. 
(Prior code § 4-34)  
5.24.060 - Same—Public hearing. 
A.  At the next regular meeting of the city council following submission of the city manager's report on an application for an entertainment permit, the city council shall convene a public hearing on the permit application. Any public hearing conducted under this code may be continued from time to time. 
B.  At any public hearing pursuant to this chapter, the city council shall hear the applicant, permittee, or any interested person. The mayor may preclude the introduction of any irrelevant evidence and may restrict any person's oral presentation to ten (10) minutes. However, the city council shall receive any person's written statement. 
C.  In the event that a member of the city council has obtained evidence outside of the hearing, such member shall recite such information into the record. Thereafter, the applicant or any interested person may rebut such information and shall be entitled to a continuance for that purpose. However, no person may examine a member of the city council. 
D.  Any action to grant an entertainment permit shall require a majority vote of the city council. In the absence of such a majority vote, an application for an entertainment permit shall be denied automatically. Any such vote shall be taken by a roll call of the members of the city council. 
E.  Notice of a public hearing on an application for an entertainment permit shall be given in the following ways: 
1.  Notice of the hearing shall be mailed or delivered at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing to the applicant(s) or a duly authorized agent. 
2.  Notice of the hearing shall be mailed and delivered at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing to all owners of real property as shown on the last equalized assessment roll within three hundred (300) feet of the proposed location of the entertainment establishment for which an entertainment permit is sought. In lieu of utilizing the assessment roll, the planning director may utilize records of the county assessor or tax collector which contain more recent information than the assessment roll. If the number of owners to whom notice will be mailed or delivered pursuant to this paragraph is greater than one thousand (1,000), the planning director may provide notice by placing a display advertisement of at least one eighth page in at least one newspaper of general circulation within the city at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. The cost of providing such notice shall be included in the costs reimbursable to the city by the applicant. 
(Prior code § 4-35)  
5.24.070 - Same—Authority to grant or deny. 
A.  The city council may grant, conditionally grant or deny an entertainment permit to any person to conduct an entertainment establishment within the city. The city council shall deny an entertainment permit to any person if it makes any of the following findings: 
1.  Any of the information in the application is not accurate, complete and truthful. 
2.  The applicant has violated, or the proposed entertainment establishment would violate, any law, ordinance or regulation related to the applicant's fitness to manage or operate an entertainment establishment. 
3.  The applicant does not possess the requisite moral character to comply with the requirements of this chapter, or any reasonable conditions imposed on the permit, or other applicable laws, ordinances or regulations. 
4.  The applicant does not possess the requisite moral character to manage and operate an entertainment establishment within the city in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. 
5.  The applicant does not have sufficient financial resources, or experience, or experienced employees to manage or operate an entertainment establishment within the city in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. 
B.  The city council shall retain jurisdiction to review the permit's compliance with this chapter, and the conditions of the entertainment permit including but not limited to the right to add, delete or modify any condition of the entertainment permit based upon the circumstances in existence at the time of such proposed review. Each entertainment permit granted pursuant to this chapter is automatically conditioned by the review provisions of this section. No action shall be taken under this section unless the city council finds that such action is necessary to protect the public aesthetics, morals, health, peace, safety or welfare, or that such action is necessary to permit reasonable operation under the entertainment permit previously granted. 
C.  The city council or the city manager may institute a review hearing of any entertainment permit provided that a written statement containing the factual basis of the proposed modification has been prepared and delivered to the permittee together with notice of the time, date, and place of the review hearing at least twenty (20) days prior to the review hearing. The provisions of Section 5.24.060 shall apply except that any action to add, delete or modify any condition of an entertainment permit shall require a majority vote of the city council. 
(Prior code § 4-36)  
5.24.080 - Same—Authority to condition. 
A.  If the city council elects to grant an entertainment permit, it may impose any condition on the permit that reasonably furthers the purposes, regulations and requirements of this chapter or other applicable laws, ordinances and regulations including but not limited to the following: 
1.  The days and hours during which the entertainment establishment may operate; 
2.  The total number of persons including employees and entertainers who are allowed in the entertainment establishment during its operation; 
3.  The necessary traffic control measures including the number of parking spaces required for the entertainment establishment; 
4.  The necessary noise control measures required in the entertainment establishment; 
5.  The measures for the security or safety of the patrons, employees, neighbors and general public of the entertainment establishment including the number of security personnel which may be altered by the chief of police; and 
6.  The placement and utilization of hand-held metal detectors at each entrance to the entertainment establishment for the purpose of ascertaining and removal of weapons from each and every person entering the entertainment establishment to the satisfaction of the chief of police. Any existing permittee shall have until April 30, 1992 in which to comply with this requirement. 
B.  An entertainment permit shall be valid for an initial period of one year which shall automatically expire unless the permittee shall apply for a renewal pursuant to the procedures for an original permit. Upon an application for renewal, the city council may grant, conditionally grant or deny the renewal of the entertainment permit pursuant to this chapter. The city council may renew an entertainment permit for a period up to three years which shall automatically expire unless the permittee shall apply for a renewal pursuant to the procedures for an original permit. 
C.  Each and every entertainment permit issued by the city council shall be, and is, conditioned by the requirement to implement and maintain a system by which the permittee separately identifies each and every adult in the entertainment establishment so as to distinguish each adult from any and all minors within the entertainment establishment. At a minimum, such system of adult identification shall require the permittee to place a bracelet and a stamp with fluorescent ink on either hand of each adult in the entertainment establishment. In addition, the chief of police is hereby authorized to require other methods and procedures to be implemented and maintained by any permittee to assure compliance with the requirement that each adult remain separately identified from any minor in the entertainment establishment. Any existing permittee shall have until March 28, 1992 in which to comply with this requirement. 
(Prior code § 4-37)  
5.24.090 - Prohibited and unlawful activities. 
A.  The following activities at or related to an entertainment establishment are unlawful and punishable as misdemeanors: 
1.  No person shall admit, allow to remain or harbor, in an entertainment establishment, any intoxicated person, any disorderly person as defined in Penal Code section 415, any person who interferes with the conduct, operation or use of an entertainment establishment or any person who violates any condition of any permit or any provision of this chapter. 
2.  No person shall falsely represent the age of the person or the age of any other person for the purpose of gaining entry to, or to remain, in an entertainment establishment nor for the purpose of gaining employment in an entertainment establishment. 
3.  No person shall compensate any employee of an entertainment establishment at a rate determined by a percentage of moneys received or sales made nor shall any person license any employee of an entertainment establishment to be so compensated. 
4.  No customer, guest or patron of an entertainment establishment shall enter an entertainment establishment with any container containing any alcoholic beverage nor shall any employee of an entertainment establishment knowingly permit any person to enter or remain in the entertainment establishment with any such container. 
5.  No employee or concessionaire of a permittee shall dance or drink, while on duty for the permittee, with any customer, guest or patron of any entertainment establishment. 
6.  No employee of an entertainment establishment may leave the entertainment establishment during any period of employment with any customer, guest or patron of the entertainment establishment. 
7.  The failure of any permittee to implement and maintain a system to separately identify all adults from all minors in the entertainment establishment as required by Section 5.24.080. 
B.  The following activities at or related to an entertainment establishment are provided and shall constitute the basis for suspension or revocation of an entertainment permit: 
1.  No person shall admit or allow to remain any entertainment at an entertainment establishment except for that hired by the person to whom a permit for such entertainment establishment has been issued. 
2.  No person shall allow, conduct, maintain or operate any entertainment establishment in violation of any city ordinance or any entertainment permit. 
3.  No entertainment establishments shall be open to the public between the hours of two a.m. and six a.m. 
4.  No dancing or entertainment shall be permitted prior to eight p.m. nor after one-thirty a.m. 
5.  No permittee shall fail to implement and maintain a system to separately identify all adults from all minors in the entertainment establishment as required by Section 5.24.080. 
(Prior code § 4-38)  
5.24.100 - Permit revocation proceedings. 
A.  In the event that a permittee appears to have violated or failed to comply with any provision of this chapter or any condition of the entertainment permit, the city manager shall request a hearing before the city council to suspend or revoke the permittee's entertainment permit. The city manager shall submit a written report to the city council and the permittee containing information and proposed findings to support suspension or revocation of the permit. 
B.  The hearing shall be held within thirty (30) days after the date of filing the city manager's report. The city manager shall notify the permittee of the date and time of the hearing, at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing. At the hearing, the permittee may appear and produce any evidence on the subject. Likewise, any interested party may appear and introduce evidence on the subject. 
C.  If the city council finds that the permittee has violated, or failed to comply with, any provision of this chapter or any condition of the entertainment permit, the city council may suspend or revoke the entertainment permit. Within thirty (30) days following the conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall render its decision on the proposed suspension or revocation. The decision shall contain findings supporting its action on the entertainment permit. 
D.  The provisions of Section 5.24.060 of this chapter shall apply to suspension and revocation hearings except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 4-39)  
Chapter 5.28 - FORTUNE TELLING AND SIMILAR BUSINESSES 
 
5.28.010 - Psychic activities—Permit required. 
A.  No person shall practice or solicit, advertise or purport to practice, as a business or for any consideration, fee, donation, gratuity, reward or compensation, any art or calling which seeks or purports to predict or foretell future events or the fate or future acts or fortunes of any nation, business, group of persons or individuals, or which attempts or promises to bring about, cause, result in or influence the achievement or performance of some personal or economic objective, by analysis of parts, products or personal characteristics of a person, or by analysis of any animate or inanimate object including, but not limited to, celestial body, crystal ball, tea leaves, or playing of cards, or through the exercise of any purported psychic, mediumistic, prophetic, occult, clairvoyant, or supernatural power, without first obtaining a permit as called for in this section. 
B.  Any person, group or entity desiring to obtain a permit called for under this section shall, not less than fourteen (14) days before the date of commencement of any activity referred to in the preceding subsection, file with the city, an application on a form furnished by the city, and signed by the applicant, providing the following information: 
1.  The name of the person or organization applying for the permit; 
2.  The name, address, telephone number, driver's license number and social security number of the person who will conduct the activity referred to in the preceding subsection; 
3.  The street address where the activity will be held; 
4.  The date(s) and times when such activities referred to in preceding subsection A of this section will be conducted; 
5.  Whether the applicant or any person who will conduct the activities referred to in preceding subsection A of this section has ever been convicted of: 
a.  Obtaining money or property by fraudulent game or trick in violation of Penal Code Section 332, 
b.  Robbery, 
c.  Fraud, 
d.  Theft, or 
e.  Embezzlement. 
C.  The applicant shall pay to the city a reasonable fee not to exceed twenty five dollars ($25.00), payable to the city, to pay the cost to process the permit. 
D.  The city shall issue the permit called for in this section, to the applicant, within fourteen (14) days of receipt of a properly completed application and filing fee, unless the applicant or the person who will conduct the activities referred to in this section has been convicted of any of the offenses listed in subsection (B)(5) of this section. 
E.  The permit granted to the applicant shall provide that the permittee agrees not to conduct the activities called for in the permit in any residential zone and further shall provide that the permittee shall comply with all the zoning regulations, ordinances, and laws of the city. 
F.  No person, group or entity shall by pretensions to fortunetelling, trick, or other means whatever, fraudulently obtain from another person money or property of any description and such activity shall constitute a violation of this section, in addition to being a violation of California Penal Code Section 332. 
(Prior code § 14-5)  
Chapter 5.32 - HANDBILL DISTRIBUTORS 
 
5.32.010 - Necessity declared—Purposes. 
To protect the people against the nuisance of and incident to the promiscuous distribution of handbills and circulars, particularly commercial handbills, as defined in this chapter, with the resulting detriment and danger to public health and safety, the public interest, convenience and necessity require the regulation thereof and to that end the purposes of this chapter are specifically declared to be as follows: 
A.  To protect the people against the unlawful activities or operations of dissolute persons of criminal habits and tendencies, representing themselves as solicitors, canvassers or handbill distributors, by requiring the registration of all such solicitors, canvassers or handbill distributors, together with the names of their employers, and by regulating the business of handbill and advertising distribution. 
B.  To protect local residents against trespassing by solicitors, canvassers or handbill distributors upon the private property of such residents if they have given reasonable notice that they do not wish to be solicited by such persons or do not desire to receive handbills or advertising matter. 
C.  To protect the people against the health and safety menace and the expense incident to the littering of the streets and public places by the promiscuous and uncontrolled distribution of advertising matter and commercial handbills. 
D.  To preserve to the people their constitutional right to receive and disseminate information not restricted under the ordinary rules of decency and good morals and public order, by distinguishing between the nuisance created by the promiscuous distribution of advertising and commercial circulars and the right to deliver non-commercial handbills to all who are willing to receive the same. 
(Prior code § 3-17)  
5.32.020 - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
"Billposter" means and includes any person engaging in the business for hire of posting, fastening, nailing, or otherwise affixing any written, painted or printed matter of any kind, or other form or reproduction thereof, (hereinafter called "sign"), containing a message or information of any kind whatsoever, to any outdoor billboard, or to or upon any bridge, fence, pole, post, sidewalk, tree, or to or upon the exterior of any other structure except that terms of this definition shall not apply to nor include any such sign mounted on, fastened to, or suspended from the outside of any building or other structure, in accordance with and authorized by any provisions of an ordinance or statute, either for any public convenience or use, or regulating the construction or use of so-called outdoor display signs, whether such display signs are illuminated or not. 
"Commercial handbill" means and includes any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet, or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter or literature: 
1.  Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity, or thing; 
2.  Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial establishment, or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or indirectly promoting the interests thereof by sales; 
3.  Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition, or event of any kind, for which an admission fee is charged for the purpose of private gain or profit; but the terms of this clause shall not apply where an admission fee is charged or a collection is taken up for the purpose of defraying the expenses incident to such meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition, or event of any kind, when either of the same is held, given or takes place in connection with the dissemination of information which is not restricted under the ordinary rules of decency, good morals, public peace, safety and good order; provided, that nothing contained in this clause shall be deemed to authorize the holding, giving or taking place of any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition, or event of any kind, without a license, where such license is or may be required by any law of this state, or under any ordinance of this city; 
4.  Which, while containing reading matter other than advertising matter, is predominantly and essentially an advertisement, and is distributed or circulated for advertising purposes, or for the private benefit and gain of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor; or 
5.  Which is not covered by the definition of "sign" in this section. 
"Generally" means words singular in form may include the plural, any words plural in form may include the singular; and words in the masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter genders. 
"Handbill distributor" means and includes any person engaging or engaged in the business for hire or gain of distributing commercial or noncommercial handbills, other than newspapers distributed to subscribers thereof, and any person receiving compensation directly or indirectly for the distribution of such handbills. 
"Newspaper" means and includes any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general law, any newspaper duly entered with the Post Office Department of the United States, in accordance with federal statute or regulation, and any newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by general law; and, in addition thereto, means and include any periodical or current magazine regularly published with not less than four issues per year, and sold to the public. 
"Noncommercial handbill" means and includes any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, paper booklet, or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter or literature not included in the aforesaid definitions of a sign, or a commercial handbill, or a newspaper. 
"Private premises" means and includes any dwelling, house, building, or other structure designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling house, building, or other structure. 
"Public place" means and includes any and all streets, boulevards, avenues, lanes, alleys, or other public ways, and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, plazas, grounds and buildings. 
(Prior code § 3-18)  
5.32.030 - Compliance required. 
It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business of a billposter for hire or as a handbill distributor for hire, or for any person to distribute commercial or noncommercial handbills, without first complying with the terms of this chapter and all other relevant laws and regulations; provided, however, that nothing contained in this chapter shall apply to any person advertising his or her business or activity upon his or her own premises, if such business or activity is regularly established at a definite location in such city, and also if a license has been obtained therefor, if such license is required under the terms of any applicable law or ordinance. 
(Prior code § 3-19)  
5.32.040 - Mail—Newspapers exempted. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to apply to the distribution of mail by the United States, nor to newspapers as defined in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 3-20)  
5.32.050 - License required. 
Any person desiring to engage, as principal, either in the . business of a billposter for hire, or in the business of distributing commercial or noncommercial handbills for hire, shall make application to and receive from the director of finance, or other officer empowered to issue the same, who shall act whenever the director of finance is herein referred to, a license in the manner and for the period prescribed by the terms of this chapter and by all relevant provisions of this code. 
(Prior code § 3-21)  
5.32.060 - Application for license. 
The applicant for a license required by this chapter shall make written application to the director of finance upon a form or forms provided for such purpose by the director of finance. Such form shall contain, among other things that may be required, the name, the business address, and a brief description of the nature of the business to be conducted by the applicant, the probable number of agents and employees so to be engaged, together with a request for a license for the period for which the applicant seeks to engage in such business. 
(Prior code § 3-22)  
5.32.070 - License revocation. 
Without excluding other just grounds for revocation, the city council, or official so empowered by law, may revoke any license obtained under an application containing a false or fraudulent statement knowingly made by the applicant with intent to obtain a license by means of false or fraudulent representations, or for violation of this chapter, or any other grounds specified by law. 
(Prior code § 3-23)  
5.32.080 - License not transferable. 
No license issued under this chapter shall be transferable. 
(Prior code § 3-24)  
5.32.090 - Employees not required to be licensed. 
Persons acting for licensees, as agents or employees, in the posting or distributing of any such signs or handbills, shall not be required to obtain a license, but each such person shall comply with each and all of the other provisions hereof and be subject thereto. 
(Prior code § 3-25)  
5.32.100 - Posting prohibited in certain places and on certain things. 
No person shall post, stick, stamp, paint or otherwise fix, or cause the same to be done by any person, any notice, placard, bill, card, poster, advertisement or other paper or device calculated to attract the attention of the public, to or upon any sidewalk, crosswalk, curb or curbstone, flagstone, or any other portion or part of any public way or public place, or any lamppost, electric light, telegraph, telephone pole, or railway structure, hydrant, shade tree or tree-box, or upon the piers, columns, trusses, girders, railings, gates or other parts of any public bridge or viaduct, or other public structure or building, or upon any pole, box or fixture of the fire alarm or police telegraph system, except such as may be authorized or required by the laws of the United States, or state, and the ordinances of the city. 
(Prior code § 3-26)  
5.32.110 - Placing handbills in and on vehicles. 
It is unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any handbill in or upon any automobile or other vehicle. 
(Ord. 891 § 23, 2003: prior code § 3-28)  
5.32.120 - Placing handbills on uninhabited or vacant premises. 
It is unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any private premises which are temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant. 
(Prior code § 3-29)  
5.32.130 - Distributing handbills on posted property. 
It is unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any commercial or noncommercial handbill upon any premises, if requested by anyone thereon not to do so, or if there is placed on such premises in a conspicuous position near the entrance thereof, a sign bearing the words: "No Trespassing," "No Peddlers or Agents," "No Advertisement," or any similar notice, indicating in any manner that the occupants of such premises do not desire to be molested or to have their right of privacy disturbed, or to have any such handbills left upon such premises. 
(Prior code § 3-30)  
5.32.140 - Manner of distributing handbills on inhabited private premises. 
No person shall distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any private premises which are inhabited, except by handing or transmitting any such handbill directly to the owner, occupant, or any other person then present in or upon such private premises; provided, however, that in case of inhabited private premises which are not posted as provided in this chapter, the distributor, unless requested by anyone upon such premises not to do so, may place or deposit any such handbill in or upon such inhabited private premises, if such handbill is so placed or deposited as to secure or prevent such handbill from being blown or drifted about such premises or elsewhere, except that mailboxes may not be so used when prohibited by federal postal laws or regulations. 
(Prior code § 3-31)  
5.32.150 - Permitting prohibited advertising on premises. 
It is unlawful for the owner, lessee, occupant or agent of premises to permit any person to post, affix or otherwise attach to any building, structure or fixture located upon such premises, whether such fixture is natural or artificial, any poster or handbill containing any matter prohibited by the terms of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 3-32)  
5.32.160 - Objectionable advertisements prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person to post, to hand out, distribute or transmit any sign, or any commercial or noncommercial handbill: 
Which may reasonably tend to incite riot or other public disorder, or which advocates disloyalty to or the overthrow of the government of the United States or of this state by means of any artifice, scheme, or violence, or which urges any unlawful conduct, or encourages or tends to encourage a breach of the public peace or good order to the community. 
(Ord. 891 § 24, 2003; prior code § 3-33)  
5.32.170 - Other ordinances not affected. 
This chapter shall not be deemed to repeal, amend or modify any ordinance ever ordained, either prohibiting, regulating or licensing canvassers, hawkers, peddlers, transient merchants, or any person, using the public streets or places for any private business or enterprise, or for commercial sales, not covered in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 3-34)  
Chapter 5.34 - ICE CREAM TRUCKS 
 
5.34.010 - Purpose and intent. 
The city council of Coachella expressly finds that motor vehicles engaged in vending ice cream and similar food items in residential neighborhoods can increase the danger to children, and it is necessary that these vehicles are clearly seen and noticed by motorists and pedestrians to protect public safety as provided by the California Legislature in the California Vehicle Code Section 22456 also known as the Destiny Nicole Stout Memorial Act. It is the purpose and intent of the city council, in enacting this chapter, to provide responsible companies and individuals who engage in the operation of ice cream trucks with clear and concise regulations to prevent safety, traffic and health hazards, as well as to preserve the peace, safety and welfare of the community. 
(Ord. No. 1028, § 1, 6-8-11)  
5.34.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
(a)  "Ice cream" shall include ice milk, popsicles, paletas, ice cream bars, frozen yogurt, confections, and chilled desserts of any kind. 
(b)  "Ice cream truck" shall mean any vehicle, as defined in the California Vehicle Code, that is engaged in the curbside vending or sale of frozen or refrigerated desserts, confections, or novelties commonly known as ice cream including, but not limited to, ice milk, popsicles, sherbets, frozen yogurt, frozen dessert products and confections of any kind, or prepackaged candies, prepackaged snack foods, or soft drinks. 
(c)  "Ice cream vending business" shall mean a business consisting of sales from a motor vehicle upon a city street to the public of ice cream bars, popsicles, paletas, and similar frozen food items and which items make up the majority of the sales or inventory of the business. 
(d)  "Ice cream vendor" shall mean any person, as defined in this chapter, who: 
(1)  Conducts or permits or causes the operation of ice cream trucks; 
(2)  Owns, operates, controls, manages or leases ice cream trucks; or 
(3)  Contracts with persons to drive and vend from ice cream trucks. 
(e)  "Operator" shall mean any person who drives, operates or vends from an ice cream truck and shall include the driver and assistant on each ice cream truck. 
(f)  "Operator's permit" shall mean the permit issued to any person who drives or operates an ice cream truck, vends, sells, or assists in selling products from an ice cream truck. 
(g)  "Owner" shall mean a person who owns an ice cream vending business. 
(h)  "Person" shall mean any natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, or stockholder and includes, but is not limited to, owners, operators, drivers, lessors, and lessees of ice cream trucks. 
(i)  "Safety inspection sticker" shall mean a sticker affixed to an ice cream truck evidencing that it has been inspected by the California Highway Patrol and found to be in safe operating condition. 
(j)  "Vend" or "vending" shall mean offering frozen dessert products of any kind for sale from a motor vehicle on a street, alley, highway or public place within the City of Coachella and includes the movement or standing of an ice cream truck for the purpose of searching for, obtaining or soliciting retail sales of frozen dessert products. 
(k)  "Vendor's permit" shall mean a permit issued by the City of Coachella authorizing the holder thereof to engage in the business of ice cream vending. 
(Ord. No. 1028, § 1, 6-8-11)  
5.34.030 - Permit required. 
(a)  No person shall operate or cause the operation of an ice cream truck in the City of Coachella without a vendor's permit issued pursuant to the provisions in this chapter and any other license or permit required under any other chapter of this code for each and every ice cream truck. 
(b)  No person shall drive or vend from any vehicle defined as an ice cream truck in the City of Coachella without an operator's permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1028, § 1, 6-8-11)  
5.34.040 - Permit term and renewal. 
The term of vendor and operator permits, unless sooner suspended or revoked, shall be for a period of one year. Upon the expiration of such term, the permittee may renew the permit for an additional one-year term by submitting new applications in conformance with Sections 5.34.050 and 5.34.060. 
(Ord. No. 1028, § 1, 6-8-11)  
5.34.050 - Application for ice cream vendor permit; contents; required fee. 
(a)  Any person desiring to obtain a permit to operate or cause the operation of one or more ice cream trucks shall submit an application to the City of Coachella's Finance Director or his or her designated representative. Prior to or upon submitting such application, a nonrefundable fee, as established by resolution of the city council, shall be paid to the department of finance to defray, in part, the cost of the investigation and report required by this chapter. The department of finance shall issue a receipt showing that such application fee has been paid. The receipt, or a copy thereof, shall be supplied to the finance director or his or her designated representative at the time such application is filed. Permit issuance fees required under this chapter shall be in addition to any license, permit or fee required under any other chapter of this code. This permit does not replace the standard business license that is required of all businesses in the City of Coachella. 
(b)  The filing of an application for a permit or the payment of an application fee shall not authorize the applicant to operate or manage an ice cream truck until such permit has been granted or renewed. 
(c)  Each applicant for a permit to conduct business as an ice cream vendor shall furnish the following information: 
(1)  The present or proposed address from which the business is to be conducted. 
(2)  The full true name under which the business will be conducted. 
(3)  The full true name and any other names used by the applicant. 
(4)  The present residence and business addresses and telephone numbers of the applicant. 
(5)  A description of the merchandise that the ice cream truck(s) will vend. 
(6)  The number of vehicles to be owned, operated, or controlled by the applicant and the makes, body styles, years, serial and engine numbers, state license plate numbers, names and addresses of the registered and/or legal owners of each vehicle, and the vehicle storage address(es) pursuant to Section 5.34.110, subsection (d), of this chapter. 
(7)  A description of the logo, color scheme, insignia, and any other distinguishing characteristics of applicant's vehicles. 
(8)  A policy of insurance in the manner and form required by this chapter from a responsible, solvent insurance carrier authorized to issue public liability and property damage insurance in the State of California. 
(9)  The full true names and residence addresses of all persons employed or intended to be employed or with whom the applicant has contracted or intends to contract as drivers, operators or attendants. 
(10)  Certification from a state-certified commercial vehicle inspector evidencing that each and every ice cream truck to be owned, operated, or controlled by the applicant has, within two months prior to the date the application is received by the finance director or his or her designated representative, passed a safety inspection and is eligible for the issuance of a safety inspection sticker. 
(11)  The applicant, if an individual; or each of the directors, officers, or stockholders holding more than five percent of the stock of the corporation; or each of the partners, including limited partners, or profit interest holders, managers or other persons principally in charge of the operation of the existing or proposed business of vending from ice cream trucks, shall also furnish the following information: 
(i)  California driver's license or identification number of the above-described natural persons. 
(ii)  Date of birth of the above described natural persons. 
(iii)  The permit history of the above described natural persons for the three-year period immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application, including whether such person, if previously operating in this or any other city, county, state or territory, has ever had any similar license, permit, or franchise revoked or suspended, and if so, the circumstances of such suspension or revocation. 
(iv)  All criminal convictions suffered by the above-described natural persons, including ordinance violations, but excepting minor traffic offenses (any traffic offense designated as a felony shall not be construed as a minor traffic offense), stating the date, place, nature and sentence of each such conviction. 
(12)  The applicant, if other than an individual, shall also furnish the following information: 
(i)  Each business address of the applicant for the three-year period immediately preceding the date of the application and the inclusive dates of each such business. 
(ii)  The nature of the business or firm for the three-year period immediately preceding the date of the application. 
(iii)  The permit history of the applicant for the three-year period immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application, including whether such applicant, if previously operating in this or any other city, county, state or territory, has ever had any similar license, permit, or franchise revoked or suspended, and if so, the circumstances of such suspension or revocation. 
(iv)  All criminal convictions suffered by the applicant including ordinance violations, stating the date, place, nature and sentence of each such convictions. 
(13)  Such other identification and/or information as the finance director or his or her designated representative may require in order to discover the truth of the matters required to be set forth in the application. 
(d)  The applicant, if a natural person or, if the applicant is a partnership or corporation, the designed responsible managing officer, shall personally appear at the office of the finance director or his or her designated representative, and produce proof that the required application fee has been paid and shall present the application containing the information and supporting documentation required by subsection (c) of this section. 
(e)  When any change occurs regarding the written information required by subsection (c) of this section prior to or after issuance of a permit, the applicant shall give written notification of such change to the finance director or his or her designated representative within two weeks after such change. 
(Ord. No. 1028, § 1, 6-8-11; Ord. No. 1036, § 1, 1-11-12)  
5.34.060 - Application for operator's permit; contents; required fee. 
(a)  Any person desiring to obtain a permit to operate or cause the operation of one or more ice cream trucks shall make application to the City of Coachella's Finance Director or his or her designated representative. Prior to or upon submitting such application, a nonrefundable fee, as established by resolution of the city council, shall be paid to the department of finance to defray, in part, the cost of the investigation and report required by this chapter. The department of finance shall issue a receipt showing that such application fee has been paid. The receipt, or a copy thereof, shall be supplied to the finance director or his or her designated representative at the time such application is filed. Permit issuance fees required under this chapter shall be in addition to any license, permit or fee required under any other chapter of this code. 
(b)  The filing of an application for a permit or the payment of an application fee shall not authorize the applicant to operate or manage an ice cream truck until such permit has been granted or renewed. 
(c)  Each applicant for an operator's permit shall furnish the following information: 
(1)  The present or proposed address from which the business is to be conducted. 
(2)  The full true name under which the business will be conducted. 
(3)  The full true name and any other names used by the applicant. 
(4)  The present residence address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(5)  California driver's license number of the applicant. 
(6)  Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age. 
(7)  The applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair, and date of birth. 
(8)  Two photographs of the applicant, at least two inches by two inches in size, taken within the six-month period immediately preceding the date of the application. 
(9)  The business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for the three-year period immediately preceding the date of the application. 
(10)  The permit history of the applicant for the three-year (3) period immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application, including whether such applicant, if previously operating in this or any other city, county, state or territory, has ever had any similar license, permit, or franchise revoked or suspended, and if so, the circumstances of such suspension or revocation. 
(11)  All criminal convictions suffered by the applicant, including ordinance violations, and traffic offenses. 
(12)  Acceptable written proof that the applicant is insured under a policy of insurance in the manner and form required by this chapter from a responsible, solvent insurance carrier authorized to issue public liability and property damage insurance in the State of California. 
(d)  The applicant shall personally appear at the office of the finance director or his or her designated representative, and produce proof that the required application fee has been paid and shall present the application containing the information and supporting documentation required by subsection (c) of this section. 
(e)  When any change occurs regarding the written information required by subsection (c) of this section prior to or after issuance of a permit, the applicant shall give written notification of such change to the finance director or his or her designated representative within two weeks after such change. 
(f)  If the applicant is an individual who intends to own, operate and drive his or her own ice cream truck, it is not necessary to pay a separate fee for the operator's permit application. 
(Ord. No. 1028, § 1, 6-8-11)  
5.34.070 - Investigation of applications. 
The finance director or his or her designated representative shall have a reasonable period of time in which to investigate the application and background of the applicant for a vendor's permit or an operator's permit. Such investigation shall include, but not be limited to, a department of justice criminal background check via finger printing (e.g., live scan). 
(Ord. No. 1028, § 1, 6-8-11)  
5.34.080 - Issuance of permit. 
The finance director or his or her representative, shall, within thirty (30) days after the date of the filing of the application, grant the vendor's permit or operator's permit only if he or she finds that all of the following requirements have been met: 
(a)  The required fees have been paid. 
(b)  The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation of fact in the application. 
(d)  The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of the application. 
(e)  (1)  The applicant if an individual, or any of the directors, officers or stockholders holding more than five percent of the stock of the corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, or profit interest holders, managers or other persons principally in charge of the operation of the existing or proposed business of vending from an ice cream truck or a natural person employed or contracted with to be an operator, has not been convicted or pleaded nolo contendere or guilty within five years prior to his or her application for a permit to a misdemeanor or felony crime of moral turpitude or drug-related misdemeanor or felony crime, including, but not limited to: 
(i)  The sale of a controlled substance specified in California Health and Safety Code §§ 11054 through 11058. 
(ii)  The sale, distribution or display of harmful or obscene matter; indecent exposure. 
(iii)  Selling or disposing of lottery tickets. 
(iv)  Permitting gambling, pool selling or bookmaking. 
(v)  In the case of applications for an operator's permit, alcohol or drug-related traffic offenses. 
(2)  Any applicant that has been convicted or pleaded nolo contendere or guilty to a crime committed against a minor may permanently be precluded from obtaining a vendor's permit or operator's permit. The finance director or his or her designated representative in consultation with the chief of police shall have the authority to make such determination. 
(3)  The finance director or his or her designated representative is specifically authorized to obtain state summary criminal history record information as provided for in California Penal Code § 11105. Any complaint for the above-listed charges pending before a court of law shall cause the application to be considered pending until adjudication of the complaint. 
(Ord. No. 1028, § 1, 6-8-11)  
5.34.090 - Denial of permit. 
(a)  If the finance director or his or her designated representative, finds that all of the requirements set forth in section 5.34.080 have not been met, he or she shall deny the application for vendor's or operator's permit. In the event the application for the permit is denied by the finance director or his or her designated representative, written notice of such denial shall be given to the applicant specifying the ground or grounds of such denial. Notice of denial of the application for the permit shall be deemed to have been served if it in fact is personally served on the applicant or when deposited in the United States mail with postage prepaid and addressed to the applicant at his or her residence address as set forth in the application for the permit. 
(b)  Any applicant whose application for an ice cream vendor's or operator's permit has been denied by the finance director or his or her designated representative, may appeal the decision in accordance with the following appeal process requirements: 
(1)  All appeals shall be in writing and shall contain the following information: 
(i)  Name(s) of the person filing the appeal ("appellants"); 
(ii)  A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the relief sought and the reasons why the permit should be issued; and 
(iii)  The signatures of all parties named as appellants and their mailing addresses. 
(2)  A filing fee in an amount as established from time to time by city council resolution must be paid to the city at or prior to the time of the filing of the appeal. 
(3)  Any appeal filed that fails to provide all of the information required by this section and the appropriate filing fee shall be deemed incomplete. 
(4)  A complete and proper appeal of the denial of a permit application shall be filed with the city clerk within ten (10) calendar days of service of the letter denying the application or within ten (10) calendar days of any other action that is the subject of appeal. After receiving the written appeal, the city clerk shall schedule a public hearing before the city council at a regularly scheduled city council meeting that is held within thirty (30) [days] of the filing of appeal. If there are no regularly scheduled meetings within thirty (30) [days] of the filing of the appeal, the city clerk shall schedule the public hearing before the city council at the next regularly scheduled city council meeting for which there is sufficient time to have the matter properly noticed. The decision of the city council shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 1028, § 1, 6-8-11)  
5.34.100 - Revocation of permit. 
(a)  Any vendor's or operator's permit may be suspended or revoked by the finance director or his or her designated representative for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Falsehood of any information supplied by the permittee upon which issuance of the permit was based. 
(2)  Failure of the permittee to notify the finance director or his or her designated representative within two weeks of any change occurring subsequent to the issuance of the permit in the information supplied by the permittee upon which issuance of the permit was based. 
(3)  Failure of the permittee, or of any employees or subcontractors of the permittee, to comply with the regulations set forth in Sections 5.34.120 through 5.34.170, inclusive. 
(4)  Violation by the permittee, or any employee, subcontractor or independent contractor of the permittee, of any state law or municipal ordinance while in the course of conducting vending operations from an ice cream truck pursuant to the permit. 
(5)  Conviction of, or plea of guilty or nolo contendere by the permittee of any offense set forth in Section 5.34.080, subsection (e). 
(b)  No such suspension or revocation shall become effective until the permit holder has been notified in writing of the right of such permit holder to appeal the suspension or revocation pursuant to the provisions of Section 5.43.090 of this code. Notification to the permit holder shall be made either by personal delivery or by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the permit holder at such permit holder's residence address as set forth on the application for the permit. If a timely appeal is filed, the suspension or revocation shall be stayed and shall become effective only upon decision of the city council. Otherwise, the suspension or revocation shall become effective after the timely appeal period has expired. 
(c)  When proper taking into consideration the circumstances and gravity of the actions leading to a potential suspension or revocation, a warning will be provided before a permit is revoked or suspended under this section. 
(d)  No person whose permit is revoked shall be eligible to apply for a new permit for a period of one year following such revocation. 
(Ord. No. 1028, § 1, 6-8-11)  
5.34.110 - Ice cream truck regulations. 
(a)  Each ice cream truck shall have a current and valid County of Riverside health inspection sticker affixed to the lower right side of the windshield and a current and valid City of Coachella inspection sticker, which shall also include a numerical reference number, affixed to the rear of the ice cream truck and shall be maintained in good standing. 
(b)  Each individual who drives, operates or vends from an ice cream truck shall have on his or her person a current, valid California driver's license, which he or she shall make available for inspection by law enforcement officials upon request. 
(c)  Each operator's permit holder shall be issued an identification card which will also serve as the operator's permit. The identification card shall contain information provided pursuant to Section 5.34.060, subsection (c), of this chapter. The permit holder shall wear or carry such card in a visible position upon his or her person at all times while vending from an ice cream truck, and shall produce the same for inspection upon request. Each permit holder shall immediately surrender to the finance director or his or her designated representative any operator's permit issued by the City of Coachella upon the suspension, revocation or expiration of such permit or upon leaving employment as an ice cream truck operator. 
(Ord. No. 1028, § 1, 6-8-11)  
5.34.120 - Prohibited conduct. 
(a)  No person shall vend from an ice cream truck that is stopped, parked, or standing on any public street, alley or highway: 
(1)  Within three hundred (300) feet of any school or religious institution during the hours these schools or institutions are in session (and thirty (30) minutes before and after these schools or institutions are in session). 
(2)  In the parking lot of any park, playground or recreational facility. 
(3)  When the posted speed limit on the public street, alley, or highway is greater than twenty-five (25) miles per hour. 
(4)  When the ice cream truck is parked in violation of any other provision of this code, including, but not limited to, Section 10.08.040(f), or the California Vehicle Code. 
(5)  When any part of the ice cream truck is open to prospective customers other than on the side of the vehicle next to the right side of the street, alley, or highway. 
(6)  When the ice cream truck is not stopped, parked or standing on the right side of the street, alley or highway. 
(7)  When the prospective customer is standing or sitting in another vehicle. 
(8)  When the prospective customer is located in that portion of the street, alley or highway which is open to vehicular traffic. 
(b)  No person shall back an ice cream truck to make or attempt a sale. 
(c)  No minor shall ride in or on an ice cream truck. 
(d)  No more than two individuals shall be in a vending ice cream truck. 
(e)  Ice cream trucks shall stop and vend only at the request of a customer. Absent an actual customer, ice cream trucks shall not stop and vend. 
(Ord. No. 1028, § 1, 6-8-11)  
5.34.130 - Insurance provisions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own, lease, drive, operate or cause or permit to be driven or operated any ice cream truck in the city unless such person has submitted with his or her application for permit a motor vehicle liability insurance policy, a policy covering each ice cream truck, issued by a solvent corporation holding a certificate of authority to do insurance business in the State of California, which policy shall conform in all respects to the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  The required motor vehicle liability policy shall insure the owner, driver, and any other person using or responsible for the use of any ice cream truck with the consent, expressed or implied, of such owner, driver or person, against loss from the liability imposed upon such owner, driver or person by law for injury to, or death of, any person, or damage to property arising out of the maintenance, operation or ownership of any ice cream truck in an amount of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00), combined single limit, no aggregate. 
(c)  Every insurance policy and every certificate of motor vehicle liability insurance filed within the city pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall contain the following endorsements: 
(1)  It is hereby understood and agreed that notwithstanding expressions consistent with or contrary thereto in this policy contained, the policy is expressly issued to cover a motor vehicle regulated by the provisions of Section 5.04.180(M) of the Coachella Municipal Code. This policy shall inure to, and be for the benefit and protection of anyone who shall sustain any damages or injury, or to the heirs, personal representatives, administrators, executors or assigns of any such person who may be so damaged or injured or suffer death, by reason of the operation of the motor vehicle or from the defective condition thereof. Liability under this policy shall in no manner be abrogated or abated by the death or dissolution of the tortfeasor or the insured. 
(2)  There is continuing liability up to the full amount of the policy, notwithstanding any action or recovery thereon. 
(3)  No cancellation or reduction in coverage of this policy for any reason whatsoever shall become effective until the expiration of thirty (30) days after written notice of such cancellation or reduction in coverage shall have been given to the finance director or his or her designated representative of the city. Said period of thirty (30) days to commence running from the date said notice is actually received in the office of the finance director or his or her designated representative. 
(Ord. No. 1028, § 1, 6-8-11)  
5.34.140 - Inspection of ice cream trucks. 
(a)  Each ice cream truck for which a permit or renewal is sought shall be inspected by the California Highway Patrol to insure that the vehicle can be safely operated. 
(b)  In addition to other equipment required by law, each ice cream truck shall be equipped with the following: 
(1)  A convex mirror mounted so that the occupant of the driver's seat can see the area in front of the truck which is obscured by the vehicle's hood. 
(2)  A back-up alarm audible for a distance of at least one hundred (100) feet. 
(Ord. No. 1028, § 1, 6-8-11)  
5.34.150 - Required signs and lettering. 
(a)  There shall be displayed at all times, while engaged in vending in a residential area, with signs mounted on both the front and the rear legible from a distance of one hundred (100) feet under daylight conditions, in a conspicuous place warning signs or lettering which incorporate the words, "WARNING" "CHILDREN CROSSING" and "CAUTION" "THIS VEHICLE MAKES FREQUENT STOPS". Each sign shall be at least twelve (12) inches high by forty-eight (48) inches wide, with letters of a dark color and at least four inches in height, a one-inch wide solid border, and a sharply contrasting background. 
(b)  There shall be displayed in a conspicuous place on both the right and left side of the ice cream truck lettering permanently affixed showing the name of the company or operator of the ice cream truck and the business address and telephone number of the owner or operator. The lettering shall not be less than four inches in height, and shall be in contrast to the color of the background upon which they are placed. 
(c)  No other lettering, numbering, price lists, signs or insignia shall be displayed on the right and left side of the ice cream truck so as to interfere with the visibility of the lettering required in subsection (a). 
(Ord. No. 1028, § 1, 6-8-11)  
5.34.160 - Applicability of regulations to existing business. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all persons and businesses described herein whether the herein described activities were established before or after the effective date of the ordinance enacting this chapter into law. All such persons and businesses shall have thirty (30) days from said effective date to file a completed application for vendors' or operators' permits with the finance director or his or her designated representative. 
(Ord. No. 1028, § 1, 6-8-11)  
5.34.170 - Nuisance. 
Any ice cream truck that is operated contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance and the city attorney may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings, for the abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law, and may take such other steps and may apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating an ice cream truck contrary to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1028, § 1, 6-8-11)  
5.34.180 - Place of operation. 
(a)  Sales from ice cream trucks shall be limited to streets that have a speed limit of twenty-five (25) miles or less per hour, pursuant to California Vehicle Code § 22455(b), California Vehicle Code § 22455(e)(1). 
(b)  Ice cream vendors may sell ice cream from their ice cream trucks in areas stated above in subsection (a) as long as the street, alley or highway is not within one hundred (100) feet of an intersection with an opposing street that has a posted speed limit greater than twenty-five (25) miles per hour. 
(c)  Ice cream vendors may sell ice cream from their ice cream trucks in areas stated above in subsections (a) and (b) as long as the vendor has an unobstructed view for two hundred (200) feet in both directions along the street and of any traffic on the street. 
(d)  No ice cream truck and/or vendor shall stop to vend from an ice cream truck within one hundred (100) feet of another ice cream truck that has already stopped to vend. 
(e)  No sale shall be made while an ice cream truck is parked within seventy-five (75) feet of any intersection with any public street or streets as measured along the traveled way. 
(f)  Pursuant to California Vehicle Code § 22455(b), no sale shall be made while an ice cream truck is parked by a school, religious institution, park, playground or recreational facility as provided for in section 5.34.120. 
(Ord. No. 1028, § 1, 6-8-11)  
5.34.190 - Hours of operation. 
Sales from ice cream trucks shall be limited to the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. between November 1 and March 31 of each year, and 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. between April 1 and October 31 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 1028, § 1, 6-8-11)  
5.34.200 - Noise restrictions. 
(a)  No person shall use, play, or employ any sound, outcry, amplifier, loudspeaker, or any other instrument or device for the production of sound from an ice cream truck when the ice cream truck is stationary. 
(b)  No person shall use, play or employ any sound, outcry, simplifier, loudspeaker, or any other instrument or device for the production of sound from an ice cream truck before or after the hours of operation set forth in section 5.34.190 of this chapter. 
(c)  No person shall use, play, or employ any sound, outcry, amplifier, loudspeaker, or any other instrument or device for the production of sound employed on an ice cream truck in such a manner as to create a disturbance of the peace. 
(Ord. No. 1028, § 1, 6-8-11)  
5.34.210 - Food restrictions. 
A person vending from an ice cream truck may only sell or offer for sale prepackaged food items and may not offer for sale any other items. 
(Ord. No. 1028, § 1, 6-8-11)  
5.34.220 - Trash receptacle. 
No ice cream truck may be used to vend on any public street, alley, or highway in the city unless it has an adequate trash receptacle of at least one cubic foot in size. Furthermore, the receptacle shall be emptied regularly so as to prevent the harborage of any vermin in the truck. 
(Ord. No. 1028, § 1, 6-8-11)  
Chapter 5.36 - MASSAGE THERAPY BUSINESSES 
 
5.36.010 - Purpose and intent. 
A.  The purpose of this chapter is to: (1) insure the protection of the public's health and safety and the personal safety of massage therapist through the establishment of certain licensing standards pertaining to massage therapy business activities within the city; (2) to provide for the consistent regulation and reciprocal permitting of massage therapy business activities throughout the Coachella Valley; and (3) to recognize massage therapy as a legitimate business occupation and health enhancement service. 
B.  Nothing in this chapter is intended to permit any use, conduct, and/or activity which violates any federal, state or local law or regulation. 
(Ord. 861 § 1 (part), 2001)  
5.36.020 - General definitions. 
A.  The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall, for the purposes of this chapter, have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
"Applicant" means the individual seeking a permit pursuant to this chapter. 
"Certified copy" means a copy of a document that is certified by the issuer as being a true and accurate copy of the original document or a similar document bearing an original signature of the issuer. 
"Certified statement" means a written assertion, claim or declaration bearing the original signature of the issuer. 
"City" means the city of Coachella. 
"City manager" means the city manager of the city of Coachella. 
"Communicable disease" means tuberculosis, or any disease which may be transmitted from a massage therapist to a patron through normal physical contact during the performance of any massage service as permitted under this chapter. 
"Complete application" means an application which provides all of the requisite information required to be provided by an applicant pursuant to this chapter and is accompanied by the requisite application deposit fees. 
"Director" means the director of community development. 
"Disqualifying conduct" means any of the following when occurring within five years of any application made pursuant to this chapter: (a) pandering as set forth in California Penal Code Section 266, subdivision (i); (b) keeping or residing in a house of ill-fame as set forth in California Penal Code Section 315; (c) keeping a house for the purpose of assignation or prostitution, or other disorderly house as set forth in California Penal Code Section 316; (d) prevailing upon a person to visit a place of illegal gambling or prostitution as set forth in California Penal Code Section 318; (e) lewd conduct as set forth in California Penal Code Section 647, subdivision (a); (f) prostitution activities as set forth in California Penal Code Section 647, subdivision (b); (g) any offense committed in any other state which, if committed or attempted in this state, would have been punishable as one or more of the offenses set forth in California Penal Code Sections 266(i), 315, 316, 318, or 647, subdivisions (a) or (b); (h) any felony offense involving the sale of any controlled substance specified in California Health and Safety Code Sections 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057, or 11058; (i) any offense committed in any other state which, if committed or attempted in this state, would have been punishable as a felony offense involving the sale of a controlled substance specified in California Health and Safety Code Sections 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057, or 11058; (j) any misdemeanor or felony offense which relates directly to the practice of massage therapy, whether as a massage therapy establishment owner or operator, or as a massage therapist; or (k) any felony the commission of which occurred on the premises of a massage therapy establishment. 
"Employee" means a person who works for any permittee, regardless of whether or not such person is paid a salary, wage or other compensation by the permittee. 
"Establishment" means any of the following: (a) the opening or commencement of a massage therapy related business as a new business or as an accessory use to an existing business; (b) the conversion of an existing business, whether or not it is a massage therapy business, to any other type of massage therapy business as defined in this chapter; (c) the relocation of any massage therapy business to any other location; or (d) the substantial enlargement of an existing massage therapy business. 
"Filing date of application" means the date on which the city determines that a complete application has been submitted to the city by the applicant. 
"Full nudity or semi-nudity" means any of the following: (a) the appearance or display of an anus, male or female genital, pubic region, or a female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and/or (b) a state of undress which less than completely and opaquely covers an anus, male or female genital, pubic region or a female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola. 
"Massage" or "massage therapy" means any method of pressure on, or friction against, or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating, or stimulating the external parts of the human body, excluding any specified anatomical area other than the gluteal region, with the hands or with the aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliances, with or without supplementary aids such as creams, ointments, or other similar preparations commonly used in the practice of massage, under such circumstances that it is reasonably expected that the person to whom the treatment is provided or some third person on his or her behalf will pay money or give any other consideration or any gratuity therefor. 
"Massage therapy establishment" means any establishment having a source of income or compensation derived from the practice of massage and which has a fixed place of business that has been issued a massage therapy establishment permit pursuant to this chapter. 
"Massage therapist" means an individual who has obtained a permit as required by this chapter to engage in the practice of massage for compensation, whether in a massage establishment as an employee or independent contractor or on an outcall massage therapy basis. 
"Off-premises massage" means a massage performed at a location that is not a massage therapy establishment for which a permit to operate as a massage therapy establishment has been granted by the city. 
"On-site manager" means the person who supervises, directs or manages the employees including, but not limited to, all massage therapists performing massage therapy services at a massage therapy establishment. 
"Operator" means any of the following: (a) the owner; (b) the permit holder; (c) custodian; (d) manager; or (e) person in charge of any massage therapy establishment. 
"Outcall massage therapist" means any individual who engages in or performs massages for consideration at an "off-premises" location (as that term is defined herein) and who has been granted a valid massage therapist permit with an off-premises endorsement. 
"Patron" means any person who receives a massage in exchange for any form of consideration including, but not limited to, the payment of money. 
"Permit" means a massage therapy permit as required by this chapter which is a written license to engage in the practice of massage for compensation, whether as a massage therapy establishment, a massage therapist permit, or a personal massage therapist authorized to perform massage therapy as an employee or independent contractor at a massage therapy establishment. 
"Permittee" means the person in whose name a permit to operate or perform certain massage therapy business activities has been issued pursuant to this chapter whether for the operation of a massage therapy establishment or an outcall massage therapy service or as a personal massage therapist. 
"Person" means any of the following: (a) an individual; (b) a proprietorship; (c) a partnership; (d) a corporation; (e) an association; or (f) any other legal entity. 
"Personal massage therapist" means any person who is permitted under this chapter to perform massage activities as an employee of a massage therapy establishment or an independent contractor at a massage therapy establishment. 
"Physician's certificate" means a certified statement from a physician licensed to practice medicine in the United States that provides that the applicant has, within sixty (60) days prior to the filing date of the application, been examined by such physician and it has been determined that the applicant is free of any communicable disease as defined in this chapter. 
"Police chief" means the chief of police of the city of Coachella. 
"Reciprocal permit" means a permit issued by the city based solely on the fact that applicant holds a valid massage therapist permit issued by another city pursuant to the Coachella Valley model massage ordinance. 
"Reception area " means the area of a massage therapy establishment where patrons or other persons enter the business and are greeted and/or received by the operator, personal massage therapist and/or other employee of such business, or otherwise check in for their massage therapy sessions. 
"Recognized school of massage" means any school or educational institution licensed or approved by the state in which it is located, whose purpose it is to upgrade the professionalism of massage therapists and which teaches the theory, ethics, practice, profession or work of massage and which requires a resident course of study before the student shall be furnished with a diploma or a certificate of graduation from such school or institution of learning following the successful completion of such course of study or learning. Schools offering a correspondence course not requiring actual attendance shall not be deemed a recognized school. 
"Specified anatomical area" means human genitals, pubic region, anus, or a female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola. 
"Specified sexual activities" means any of the following: (a) the fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, anus, or female breasts; (b) sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including, but not limited to, intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation, or sodomy; or (c) excretory functions as part of or in connection with the fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts, sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation, or sodomy. 
"Stand-alone massage therapy establishment" means a massage therapy establishment that is operated as the predominant business activity on the subject premises rather than as an accessory use to a barbershop, beauty salon, hotel or resort, or any other type of business. 
"Transfer of ownership or control of a massage therapy establishment" means any of the following, whether voluntary or involuntary: (a) the sale, lease or sublease of the business; (b) the transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or (c) the establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal devise which transfers ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of a person possessing the ownership or control. 
B.  Where terms are not specifically defined in this chapter, in this code, in any applicable statute, rule, code or regulation, or in any of the Uniform Codes adopted and incorporated by reference by this code, they shall have the meanings set forth in their ordinary accepted meanings within the context with which they are used. The most current edition of Webster's Third New International Dictionary of the English Language, Unabridged, shall be construed as providing ordinary accepted meanings for any duly adopted city policy or regulation described in this chapter. 
C.  Words used in the singular include the plural and the plural the singular. 
D.  Words used in the masculine gender include the feminine and the feminine the masculine. 
(Ord. 861 § 1 (part), 2001)  
5.36.030 - Exceptions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any of the following: 
A.  Any physician, surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath, or acupuncturist duly licensed to practice their respective professions in the state of California, or any nurse or physical therapist working under the supervision thereof, when engaging in any massage therapy practice or activity within the scope of such license. Practical nurses or other persons without qualifications as massage therapists or other persons not duly licensed by the state of California to practice pursuant to the Medical Practice Act, whether or not employed by a physician, surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath, or acupuncturist, may not perform or offer to perform massage therapy without first obtaining a personal massage therapist permit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Any treatment administered in good faith in any course of the practice of any healing art or profession by any person licensed to practice any such art or profession under the Business and Professions Code of the state of California or any other laws of the state of California. 
C.  Barbers, beauticians, manicurists, and pedicurists who are duly licensed under the laws of the state of California, except that this exemption shall apply solely to the massaging of the scalp, face, neck, arms, hands, or feet of the customer or patron for cosmetic or beautifying purposes. 
(Ord. 861 § 1 (part), 2001)  
5.36.040 - Permits required. 
A.  A person may operate, maintain, run, or manage a massage therapy establishment only if that person has been validly issued a massage therapy establishment permit by the city pursuant to this chapter for the subject massage therapy establishment. 
B.  A person may perform, practice, administer, or conduct massages in exchange for money, gratuities, or any other legal consideration at a massage therapy establishment only if that person has been validly issued a personal massage therapist permit by the city pursuant to this chapter for the subject massage therapy establishment. 
C.  A person may operate, maintain, run, or manage an outcall massage therapy service only if that person has been validly issued a massage therapist permit with an off-premises endorsement by the city pursuant to this chapter for the subject outcall massage services. 
D.  When extra massage therapists are required for a one-day special event at a massage therapy establishment permitted to operate in the city pursuant to this chapter, the permittee shall complete a special event application as described in this chapter. 
E.  Unless specifically exempted by state law, the fact that a person possesses other types of permits and/or licenses does not exempt him or her or her from the requirement of obtaining a massage therapy permit to operate such a business in the city as set forth in this chapter. 
F.  The provisions set forth in this section apply to the "establishment", as defined by this chapter of any massage therapy establishment or outcall massage therapy service operating or providing service within the city. 
(Ord. 861 § 1 (part), 2001)  
5.36.050 - Special massage therapy events application. 
A.  When extra massage therapists are required for a one-day special event at a massage therapy establishment pursuant to this chapter, the permittee shall complete a special events application. The application form shall be provided by the city and shall request the following information: 
1.  The name of the applicant; 
2.  The address of the special event; 
3.  A copy of the massage therapy establishment permit validly issued by the city pursuant to this chapter; 
4.  A list of the massage therapists who will be working at the special event; 
5.  Copies of each massage therapists' diploma or certificate of graduation from a recognized school of massage verifying that the massage therapist has completed at least three hundred (300) hours of massage therapy training; 
6.  Copies of any validly issued massage therapy license or permit the participating massage therapists may have from other cities; 
7.  A declaration signed under penalty of perjury by each participating massage therapists that he or she does not have any communicable disease which is capable of being transmitted to patrons through the kind of physical contact normally associated with the massage activities described in this chapter; 
8.  A declaration signed under penalty of perjury by each participating massage therapist that provides that he or she has not been convicted of any of the following: (a) pandering as set forth in California Penal Code Section 266i; (b) keeping or residing in a house of ill-fame as set forth in California Penal Code Section 315; (c) keeping a disorderly house as set forth in California Penal Code Section 316; (d) prevailing upon a person to visit a place of illegal gambling or prostitution as set forth in California Penal Code Section 318; (e) lewd conduct as set forth in California Penal Code Section 647, subdivision (a); or (f) prostitution activities as set forth in California Penal Code Section 647, subdivisions (a) or (b); 
9.  A declaration signed under penalty of perjury by each participating massage therapist that provides that he or she has not been convicted in any other state of any offense which, if committed or attempted in this state, would have been punishable as one or more of the offenses set forth in California Penal Code Sections 266i, 315, 316, 318, or 647 (a) or (b); 
10.  A declaration signed under penalty of perjury by each participating massage therapist that provides that the applicant is not required to register as a sex offender as set forth in California Penal Code Section 290; 
11.  A declaration signed under penalty of perjury by each participating massage therapist that provides that he or she has not been convicted of any felony offense involving the sale of any controlled substance specified in California Health and Safety Code Sections 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057, or 11058; and 
12.  A declaration signed under penalty of perjury by each participating massage therapist that provides that he or she has not been convicted in any other state of any offense which, if committed or attempted in this state, would have been punishable as a felony offense involving the sale of any controlled substance specified in California Health and Safety Code Sections 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057, or 11058. 
B.  Each participating massage therapist shall provide the city with the authorization to conduct the necessary background investigations to determine the truthfulness and correctness of the information provided by applicant. 
C.  All of the above information shall be submitted to the city at seven days before the date of the special event. 
D.  The applicant shall pay an application deposit fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each one-day permit at the time of filing an application pursuant to this section. If additional funds are necessary to cover the above costs, the applicant shall pay such additional costs to the city manager before further processing of the application may proceed. Any unused portion of the deposit shall be refunded to the applicant. 
E.  Grounds for denial of the special event permit shall include any of the grounds for denial set forth in this chapter. 
F.  The decision of the city manager or his or her designee shall be final. 
G.  Nothing in this section shall be construed to permit such massage therapists to perform or conduct any massage therapist activities at any other location in the city at any other time, unless such massage therapist has obtained a validly issued massage therapist permit pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 861 § 1 (part), 2001)  
5.36.060 - Temporary permits. 
A.  Upon a finding of good cause therefor, the city manager or his or her designee may issue a temporary permit to any person who possess a valid permit issued by any other governmental entity pursuant to requirements that are similar to those set out in this chapter, including the training, physical clearance, fingerprinting and background investigation requirements. 
B.  Application for a temporary permit shall be made by written request that includes a statement, under penalty of perjury, of the justification for a temporary permit. Such request shall be submitted to the city manager, or his or her designee, together with the following: 
1.  A certified copy of a valid permit issued by any other jurisdiction; 
2.  A certified copy of the provisions of the chapter or other local law pursuant to which the permit was issued by such other jurisdiction; 
3.  Proof of identification; and 
4.  A nonrefundable application deposit fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
C.  All temporary permits shall automatically expire thirty (30) days after the date of issuance of the subject temporary permit. The city manager, or his or her designee, shall have the discretion to extend the term of any temporary permit an additional thirty (30) days provided that the entire term of the subject temporary permit does not exceed a total period of ninety (90) days. 
D.  The city manager, or his or her designee, may condition the issuance of a temporary permit on any additional requirements that he or she deems necessary to assure the purpose and intent of this chapter is met. 
(Ord. 861 § 1 (part), 2001)  
5.36.070 - Consent. 
By applying for a permit under this chapter, the applicant shall be deemed to have consented to the provisions of this chapter and to the exercise by the city's officials, representatives and employees charged with implementing and/or enforcing the provisions set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. 861 § 1 (part), 2001)  
5.36.080 - Certificate of occupancy. 
No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any newly constructed structure or substantial enlargement of a structure that will contain a massage therapy establishment until a massage therapy establishment permit has been validly issued for the subject premises pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 861 § 1 (part), 2001)  
5.36.090 - Business license. 
A.  No business license shall be issued to any person for any massage therapy business unless such person has first obtained a validly issued massage therapy establishment permit pursuant to this chapter. 
B.  No business license shall be issued to any person operating a personal massage therapist business unless such person has first obtained a validly issued personal massage therapist permit. 
C.  No business license shall be issued to any person operating an outcall therapist business unless such person has first obtained a validly issued personal massage therapist permit with an off-premises endorsement. 
(Ord. 861 § 1 (part), 2001)  
5.36.100 - City manager's responsibilities. 
The city manager or his or her designee shall be responsible for granting or denying all massage therapy establishment permits, all personal massage therapist permits and all off-premises endorsements and such permits and endorsements shall only be granted or denied pursuant to the provisions described in this chapter or any other applicable law. 
(Ord. 861 § 1 (part), 2001)  
5.36.110 - Massage therapy establishment permit application. 
A.  An application for a massage therapy establishment permit shall be made on a form provided by the city. 
B.  If an applicant does not hold a current personal massage therapist permit issued by another jurisdiction that has adopted the Coachella Valley model massage ordinance, application for issuance of a personal massage therapist permit by the city shall be made, under oath, on a form provided by the city. The following information and the following documents shall be included with the submission of all such applications: 
1.  The applicant's legal name, any aliases and date of birth; 
2.  A certified letter of intent to employ from the operator of a massage therapy establishment lawfully operating within the city. Each such letter shall verify that the operator of the massage therapy establishment has reviewed the applicant's qualifications and that the applicant has met the requirements necessary to perform massage therapy at that facility; 
3.  The applicant's home and business addresses, corresponding telephone numbers, and permanent address and telephone number, if different; 
4.  Written evidence that the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age; 
5.  The previous home addresses of applicant for the ten (10) years prior to the filing date of the application and the dates of residency at each such address; 
6.  The names, addresses and descriptions of all current and former businesses owned, operated or managed by applicant of the ten (10) years prior to the filing date of the application and the dates applicant owned, operated or managed each such business; 
7.  Employment history for the ten (10) years prior to the date of application, and all massage or similar business history and experience; 
8.  Two front-face portrait photographs taken within thirty (30) days of the date of application, at least two inches in size; 
9.  Applicant's weight, height, color of hair and eyes, and sex; 
10.  Applicant's driver's license number or identification number; 
11.  Applicant's fingerprints taken within the previous sixty (60) days by an agency approved by the city manager or his or her designee; 
12.  Applicant's social security number and/or state or federal issued tax identification number; 
13.  Proof, in the form specified here, that applicant is: (i) a graduate of a recognized school of massage; or (ii) certified by the National Certification Board for Therapeutic Massage and Bodywork. Proof of certification by the National Certification Board for Therapeutic Massage and Bodywork shall be in the form of a certified copy of the therapeutic massage and bodywork credential issued by such board. Proof of graduation from a recognized school of massage shall require both of the following: 
a.  Certified copy of the applicant's diploma or certificate of graduation, or equivalent documentation, establishing that applicant has successfully completed the course of study for competency as a massage therapist offered by the recognized school of massage; and 
b.  Certified transcript from a recognized school of massage verifying applicant has successfully completed a course of study requiring at least three hundred (300) hours of massage therapy training. If the application is submitted concurrently with an application for an off-premises endorsement, the minimum hours of training shall be as set out below for an off-premises endorsement application. 
14.  A certified statement from a physician licensed to practice medicine in the United States that provides that the applicant has, within sixty (60) days prior to the filing date of the application, been examined by such physician and it has been determined that the applicant is free of any communicable disease as defined in this chapter; 
15.  A list of all of applicant's convictions, excluding traffic violations; 
16.  Statement of whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted of any disqualifying conduct; 
17.  Statement of whether or not applicant is required to register as a sex offender pursuant to California Penal Code Section 290; 
18.  Statement of whether or not applicant has had a previous permit, license or other authority for massage services denied, suspended or revoked by any entity. If so, the date, location and reasons for the denial, suspension or revocation; 
19.  Statement of whether or not applicant has been as sole proprietor, general partner, officer, director, member or employee of any massage therapy business that has had a permit, license or authority to operate a massage business denied, suspended or revoked by an entity. If so, the applicant shall provide the name and location of the massage therapy establishment or business for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked, the date of the denial, suspension or revocation and the reason(s) for the denial, suspension or revocation; 
20.  Authorization for the city manager, or his or her designee, to conduct the necessary background investigations to determine the truthfulness and correctness of the information provided by applicant and whether the applicant is qualified pursuant to this chapter to receive the requested personal massage therapist permit; 
21.  The applicant shall date and sign the application and declare under penalty of perjury that the information contained in the application is true and correct; and 
22.  The applicant shall pay a nonrefundable application deposit of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) at the time of filing an application to defray the costs of administering this chapter. 
C.  The applicant shall provide proof of legal title or a possessory or leasehold interest in the real property upon which the proposed massage establishment will be operated. 
D.  The applicant and the prospective on-site manager, if other than the applicant, shall provide the city with the authorization to conduct the necessary background investigations to determine the truthfulness and correctness of the information provided by applicant and to determine whether applicant is qualified pursuant to this chapter to receive the requested massage therapy establishment permit. 
E.  The applicant and the prospective on-site manager, if other than the applicant, shall date and sign the application under penalty of perjury that the information contained in the application is true and correct. 
F.  The applicant shall pay an application deposit fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) at the time of filing an application pursuant to this chapter to pay for the administrative costs associated with the community development department's review of the application and the fingerprinting costs and background investigation costs of the police department. If additional funds are necessary to cover the above costs, the applicant shall pay such additional costs to the community development department before further processing of the application may proceed. Any unused portion of the deposit shall be refunded to the applicant. 
(Ord. 861 § 1 (part), 2001)  
5.36.120 - Personal massage therapist permit application. 
A.  An application for a personal massage therapist permit shall be made on a form provided by the city. 
B.  If an applicant does not hold a current personal massage therapist permit issued by another jurisdiction that has adopted the Coachella Valley model massage ordinance, application for issuance of a personal massage therapist permit by the city shall be made, under oath, on a form provided by the city. The following information and the following documents shall be included with the submission of all such applications: 
1.  The applicant's legal name, any aliases and date of birth; 
2.  A certified letter of intent to employ from the operator of a massage therapy establishment lawfully operating within the city. Each such letter shall verify that the operator of the massage therapy establishment has reviewed the applicant's qualifications and that the applicant has met the requirements necessary to perform massage therapy at that facility; 
3.  The applicant's home and business addresses, corresponding telephone numbers, and permanent address and telephone number, if different; 
4.  Written evidence that the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age; 
5.  The previous home addresses of applicant for the ten (10) years prior to the filing date of the application and the dates of residency at each such address; 
6.  The names, addresses and descriptions of all current and former businesses owned, operated or managed by applicant of the ten (10) years prior to the filing date of the application and the dates applicant owned, operated or managed each such business; 
7.  Employment history for the ten (10) years prior to the date of application, and all massage or similar business history and experience; 
8.  Two front-face portrait photographs taken within thirty (30) days of the date of application, at least two inches in size; 
9.  Applicant's weight, height, color of hair and eyes, and sex; 
10.  Applicant's driver's license number or identification number; 
11.  Applicant's fingerprints taken within the previous sixty (60) days by an agency approved by the city manager or his or her designee; 
12.  Applicant's social security number and/or state or federal issued tax identification number; 
13.  Proof, in the form specified here, that applicant is: (i) a graduate of a recognized school of massage; or (ii) certified by the National Certification Board for Therapeutic Massage and Bodywork. Proof of certification by the National Certification Board for Therapeutic Massage and Bodywork shall be in the form of a certified copy of the therapeutic massage and bodywork credential issued by such board. Proof of graduation from a recognized school of massage shall require both of the following: 
a.  Certified copy of the applicant's diploma or certificate of graduation, or equivalent documentation, establishing that applicant has successfully completed the course of study for competency as a massage therapist offered by the recognized school of massage; and 
b.  Certified transcript from a recognized school of massage verifying applicant has successfully completed a course of study requiring at least three hundred (300) hours of massage therapy training. If the application is submitted concurrently with an application for an off-premises endorsement, the minimum hours of training shall be as set out below for an off-premises endorsement application. 
14.  A certified statement from a physician licensed to practice medicine in the United States that provides that the applicant has, within sixty (60) days prior to the filing date of the application, been examined by such physician and it has been determined that the applicant is free of any communicable disease as defined in this chapter; 
15.  A list of all of applicant's convictions, excluding traffic violations; 
16.  Statement of whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted of any disqualifying conduct; 
17.  Statement of whether or not applicant is required to register as a sex offender pursuant to California Penal Code Section 290; 
18.  Statement of whether or not applicant has had a previous permit, license or other authority for massage services denied, suspended or revoked by any entity. If so, the date, location and reasons for the denial, suspension or revocation; 
19.  Statement of whether or not applicant has been as sole proprietor, general partner, officer, director, member or employee of any massage therapy business that has had a permit, license or authority to operate a massage business denied, suspended or revoked by an entity. If so, the applicant shall provide the name and location of the massage therapy establishment or business for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked, the date of the denial, suspension or revocation and the reason(s) for the denial, suspension or revocation; and 
20.  Authorization for the city manager, or his or her designee, to conduct the necessary background investigations to determine the truthfulness and correctness of the information provided by applicant and whether the applicant is qualified pursuant to this chapter to receive the requested personal massage therapist permit. 
C.  The applicant shall date and sign the application and declare under penalty of perjury that the information contained in the application is true and correct. 
D.  The applicant shall pay a nonrefundable application deposit of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) at the time of filing an application to defray the costs of administering this chapter. 
(Ord. 861 § 1 (part), 2001)  
5.36.130 - Supplemental application for off-premises endorsement. 
If an applicant does not hold a current permit with an off-premises endorsement issued by another jurisdiction pursuant to the Coachella Valley model massage ordinance, application for an off-premises endorsement to a personal massage therapist permit issued by the city shall be made, under oath, on a form provided by the city. The following information, documents and other requirements shall be included with the submission of all such applications: 
A.  The applicant's legal name; 
B.  A copy of the applicant's personal massage therapist permit issued pursuant to this chapter, or reciprocal permit, if application therefor is not submitted concurrently; 
C.  Proof, in the form specified here, that applicant is: (i) a graduate of a recognized school of massage; or (ii) certified by the National Certification Board for Therapeutic Massage and Bodywork. Proof of certification by the National Certification Board for Therapeutic Massage and Bodywork shall be in the form of a certified copy of the therapeutic massage and bodywork credential issued by such board. Proof of graduation from a recognized school of massage shall require both of the following: 
1.  Certified copy of the applicant's diploma or certificate of graduation, or equivalent documentation, establishing that applicant has successfully completed the course of study for competency as a massage therapist offered by the recognized school of massage; and 
2.  Certified transcript from a recognized school of massage verifying applicant has successfully completed a course of study requiring at least five hundred (500) hours of massage therapy training. 
D.  Authorization for the city manager, or his or her designee, to conduct the necessary background investigations to determine the truthfulness and correctness of the information provided by applicant and whether the applicant is qualified pursuant to this chapter to receive the requested off-premises endorsement. 
E.  The applicant shall date and sign the application and declare under penalty of perjury that the information contained in the application is true and correct. 
F.  The applicant shall pay a nonrefundable application deposit of fifty dollars ($50.00) at the time of filing an application for an off-premises endorsement to defray the costs of administering this chapter, which fee shall be in addition to any other permit application fees. 
(Ord. 861 § 1 (part), 2001)  
5.36.140 - Reciprocal massage therapist permit application. 
A.  If an applicant holds a current massage therapist permit issued by any other jurisdiction pursuant to the Coachella Valley model massage ordinance, then application for a reciprocal massage therapist permit may be made by submission, to the city manager or his or her designee, of all of the following: 
1.  A certified copy of a current massage therapist permit issued, pursuant to the Coachella Valley model massage ordinance, by any other jurisdiction; 
2.  A certified copy of the original and all renewal applications related to the massage therapist permit issued by any other jurisdiction pursuant to the Coachella Valley model massage ordinance; and 
3.  A nonrefundable application fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) to defray costs of administering this chapter. 
B.  If the massage therapy permit submitted in support of an application for a reciprocal permit includes an off-premises endorsement, the application shall be deemed an application for both a personal massage therapist permit and an off-premises endorsement and no further documentation, information or fees shall be required in order to apply for an off-premises endorsement to the reciprocal permit. 
(Ord. 861 § 1 (part), 2001)  
5.36.150 - Processing application. 
A.  All applications shall be submitted to the city manager, or his or her designee; 
B.  Upon receipt of an application and payment of the nonrefundable application deposit fee, the city manager or his or her designee shall immediately stamp the application as received on that date. Within thirty (30) days thereafter, the city manager, or his or her designee, shall notify the applicant if the application is deemed complete. Any subsequent submission shall be deemed a new application. 
C.  Upon receipt of a completed application, the city manager, or his or her designee, shall cause an investigation to be made by the appropriate individuals or departments as determined by the city manager or designee to be necessary for review and investigation of the accuracy of the information contained in the application and compliance with all applicable regulations. 
D.  Each department or division to which the application is submitted by the city manager, or his or her designee, shall respond in writing to the city manager, or his or her designee. 
E.  The city manager, or his or her designee, shall grant or deny an application within sixty (60) business days of receipt of a complete application. The city manager, or his or her or her designee, shall grant or deny a reciprocal permit or a renewal application within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of a complete application therefor. 
(Ord. 861 § 1 (part), 2001)  
5.36.160 - Grounds for denial. 
A.  An application for a massage therapy establishment permit shall be denied upon a showing of any of the following: 
1.  The location of the business does not comply with all applicable zoning laws or the provisions of this chapter; 
2.  The configuration and/or proposed or actual construction of the premises, as set out in the sketch or plan submitted with the application, reveals a violation of an applicable health, fire, building, safety or zoning regulation or law of the federal government, state of California, county of Riverside or ordinance of the city, including those set forth in this chapter; 
3.  The applicant or the prospective on-site manager, if other than the applicant, is not eighteen (18) years of age or older; 
4.  The application contains false information; 
5.  The applicant did not submit either: (i) a diploma or certificate of graduation or equivalent documentation from a recognized school of massage that verifies that he or she has obtained the requisite number of hours of massage therapy training; or (ii) therapeutic massage and bodywork credentials issued by the National Certification Board of Therapeutic Massage and Bodywork; 
6.  The applicant or the prospective on-site manager, if other than the applicant, officers, has been convicted of disqualifying conduct; 
7.  The applicant, or the prospective on-site manager, if other than the applicant, is required to register as a sex offender as set forth in California Penal Code Section 290; 
8.  The applicant did not submit either: (i) a diploma or certificate of graduation or equivalent documentation from a recognized school of massage that verifies that he or she has obtained the requisite number of hours of massage therapy training; or (ii) therapeutic massage and bodywork credentials issued by the National Certification Board of Therapeutic Massage and Bodywork; or 
9.  The applicant has had a massage therapist permit, or a permit or license to operate a massage therapy establishment, denied, revoked or suspended by any entity within five years prior to the date of the application. 
B.  An application for a personal massage therapist permit shall be denied if the city manager, or his or her designee, finds that, in the case of an application for a reciprocal permit, the massage therapist permit or off-premises endorsement that the applicant alleges to have been issued by another jurisdiction pursuant to the Coachella Valley model massage ordinance is not valid and/or current. In all other cases, the application shall be denied if the city manager, or his or her designee, finds any of the following: 
1.  The applicant is not eighteen (18) years of age or older; 
2.  The application contains false information; 
3.  The applicant did not submit either: (i) a diploma or certificate of graduation or equivalent documentation from a recognized school of massage that verifies that he or she has obtained the requisite number of hours of massage therapy training; or (ii) therapeutic massage and bodywork credentials issued by the National Certification Board of Therapeutic Massage and Bodywork; 
4.  The applicant has been convicted of disqualifying conduct; 
5.  The applicant is required to register as a sex offender as set forth in California Penal Code Section 290; 
6.  The applicant has had a massage therapist permit, or a permit or license to operate a massage therapy establishment, denied, revoked or suspended by any entity within five years prior to the date of the application; or 
7.  The application is incomplete or any required information or document has not been provided with the application. 
C.  If the city manager or his or her designee denies the application, he or she shall notify the applicant of the denial in writing and state the reason(s) for the denial. 
D.  Any subsequent information submitted to cure the grounds of a denied application shall be treated as a new application. 
(Ord. 861 § 1 (part), 2001)  
5.36.170 - Issuance of permit. 
The city manager shall issue the permit if there are no grounds to deny the permit as set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. 861 § 1 (part), 2001)  
5.36.180 - Appeals. 
A.  Any person aggrieved by a decision of the city manager or his or her designee, other than appeal of denial of an application for a special massage therapy permit or a temporary massage therapy permit, may file an appeal to the city council that conforms to the following requirements: 
1.  All appeals shall be in writing and shall contain the following information: (i) name(s) of the person filing the appeal ("appellants"); (ii) a brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the relief sought and the reasons why the permit should be issued; and (iii) the signatures of all parties named as appellants and their mailing addresses. 
2.  A filing fee for an appeal of one hundred dollars ($100.00), or other amount as established from time to time by city council resolution, must be paid to the city at or prior to the time of the filing of the appeal. 
3.  Any appeal filed that fails to provide all of the information required by this section and the appropriate filing fee shall be deemed incomplete. 
4.  A complete and proper appeal of the denial of a permit application shall be filed with the city clerk within ten (10) calendar days of service of the letter denying the application or within ten (10) calendar days of any other action that is the subject of appeal. 
B.  After receiving the written appeal, the city clerk shall schedule a public hearing before the city council at the next regularly scheduled city council meeting for which there is sufficient time to have the matter properly noticed. 
C.  The decision of the city council shall be final. 
(Ord. 861 § 1 (part), 2001)  
5.36.190 - Keeping application and chapter current. 
A.  During the effective duration of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, the permittee shall update, correct or supplement the information contained in the application therefor on file with the city when necessary to keep the information contained therein current and accurate. 
B.  Where reference is made in this chapter to any statute or other law, such reference shall include any subsequent amendment or superseding provision thereto. 
C.  The fees and fines and other sums set forth in this chapter shall be in effect until the city council shall, by resolution, fix some other rate based upon a cost factor. 
(Ord. 861 § 1 (part), 2001)  
5.36.200 - Renewal of permit. 
A.  All permits shall expire one year from the date they are issued, except that an off-premises endorsement shall expire concurrently with the corresponding massage therapist permit. 
B.  Applications for renewal of a permit shall be made thirty (30) calendar days prior to the expiration date of the permit. As necessary to update the information contained within the last application or renewal thereof, application for renewal shall be in the same manner as the original application. However, to the extent that the information previously submitted to the city remains current, a statement to that effect shall be sufficient and no further information or documentation shall be required except as follows: 
1.  Renewal of a Reciprocal Permit. 
a.  Where the applicant seeks to renew a reciprocal permit, application for renewal shall include evidence that the underlying massage therapist permit has been renewed by the issuing jurisdiction and that it remains valid and current. 
b.  For renewal of a reciprocal permit, permittee shall pay a nonrefundable renewal application deposit fee of ten dollars ($10.00) to help defray the expense of administering this chapter. 
c.  A reciprocal permit shall not be renewed if the underlying massage therapist permit has expired and has not been renewed, or the underlying permit has been revoked, or is otherwise no longer valid. If renewal of a reciprocal permit is denied because the underlying permit is no longer valid, permitted shall submit a complete, original application and comply with all submission requirements set out above for application for an original personal massage therapist permit. All such applications shall include an explanation of the reason why the reciprocal permit is no longer valid. 
2.  Renewal of Original Personal Massage Therapist Permits. 
a.  For renewal of an original personal massage therapist permit, permittee shall include a current physician's certificate, as defined above, with his or her renewal application. 
b.  For renewal of an original personal massage therapist permit, permittee shall also pay a nonrefundable renewal application deposit fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) at the time of filing the renewal application to help defray the expense of administering this chapter. 
(Ord. 861 § 1 (part), 2001)  
5.36.210 - Massage therapy establishments—Inspections. 
Representatives of the city including, but not limited to representatives of the police department, community development department, fire department, health department and divisions thereof, may inspect the premises of a massage therapy establishment for the purposes of insuring compliance with the law at any time such establishment is occupied or open for business pursuant to the inspection provisions set forth in Chapter 13.50 of this code. 
(Ord. 861 § 1 (part), 2001)  
5.36.220 - Massage therapy establishment—Exterior lighting. 
All off-street parking locations entrances and exits provided for or belonging to the massage therapy establishment shall be illuminated from dusk to closing hours with a lighting system that provides an average maintained horizontal illumination of one foot candle of light on the parking surface and walkways. 
(Ord. 861 § 1 (part), 2001)  
5.36.230 - Massage therapy establishments—Exterior signage. 
A.  A recognizable and readable sign that complies with all sign regulations of the city shall be posted at the main entrance of the massage therapy establishment identifying the name of the massage therapy establishment. 
B.  A recognizable and readable sign that complies with all sign regulations of the city shall be posted at the main entrance of the massage therapy establishment identifying the hours of operation of the massage therapy establishment. 
(Ord. 861 § 1 (part), 2001)  
5.36.240 - Massage therapy establishments—Exterior views. 
All building openings, entries, windows, etc., of a massage establishment shall be located, covered or screened in such a manner as to prevent an obstructed view from the exterior of the building into dressing rooms, massage therapy rooms, restrooms, and other areas where patrons of the business may not be fully clothed. 
(Ord. 861 § 1 (part), 2001)  
5.36.250 - Massage therapy establishments—Posting requirements. 
A.  The massage therapy establishment permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises within the reception area of the massage establishment. 
B.  A copy of the personal massage therapy permit for each personal massage therapist shall be kept on file on the premises of the massage establishment. 
C.  A copy of each diploma or certificate of graduation for each personal massage therapist shall be kept on file on the premises of the massage establishment. 
D.  A recent photograph of each personal massage therapist shall be kept on file on the premises of the massage establishment. 
E.  A list of massage therapy services available at the massage establishment, a description of services in readily understandable language, and the cost of such services shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises within the reception area of the massage establishment. 
(Ord. 861 § 1 (part), 2001)  
5.36.260 - Massage therapy establishments—Reception area. 
At least one artificial light providing a lighting intensity of not less than thirty (30) foot candle power at floor level shall be installed in the reception area. 
(Ord. 861 § 1 (part), 2001)  
5.36.270 - Massage therapy establishments—Massage therapy rooms. 
A.  At least one artificial light providing a lighting intensity of not less than twenty (20) foot candle power at floor level shall be installed in each massage therapy room. 
B.  There shall be no locks on any massage therapy room or any other device which impedes or obstructs access to the massage therapy room. 
C.  There shall be walls installed between each massage therapy room and such walls shall contain no openings other than doors between adjacent rooms. 
(Ord. 861 § 1 (part), 2001)  
5.36.280 - Massage therapy establishments—Client registration. 
A.  All massage therapy establishment permittees shall maintain a client registration file which shall include the following information: 
1.  First, middle and last name of client; 
2.  Signature of client; 
3.  Complete address of client; 
4.  Date and time of visit; and 
5.  First, middle and last name of personal massage therapist who administered massage services. 
B.  Every client shall provide the information set forth above and sign his or her name on the client registration form provided by the permittee before any massage services may be provided. 
C.  All client registration files shall be made available for inspection by the Riverside sheriff's office or other law enforcement agency upon written request of the police chief within three working days of receiving such request. 
D.  The information contained in client registration files shall be maintained by permittee for a period of three calendar years of the last date the respective information was entered into the file. 
(Ord. 861 § 1 (part), 2001)  
5.36.290 - Therapist dress and identification. 
A.  During all times that he or she is performing or offering to perform massage therapy services, every massage therapist shall wear a badge that identifies his or her first or last name. Upon receipt of a request or complaint by a patron, the massage therapist shall advise the patron of the full name of the massage therapy establishment through which the massage therapy services were arranged, and the identity of the city manager or his or her designee at the city through whom the therapist was issued his or her qualifying personal massage therapist permit. 
B.  All massage therapists shall have in their possession a valid permit issued pursuant to this chapter as well as valid identification at all times that he or she is performing or offering to perform massage therapy services within the city. 
C.  All massage therapists shall wear nontransparent outer garments covering all specified anatomical areas while performing or offering to perform any massage therapy services. 
(Ord. 861 § 1 (part), 2001)  
5.36.300 - Massage therapy establishments—Hours of operation. 
A.  Massage therapy establishments are prohibited from operating between the hours of ten thirty p.m. and seven thirty a.m. 
B.  Permittees shall be prohibited from permitting clients to remain on the premises of the massage establishment after closing hours. 
(Ord. 861 § 1 (part), 2001)  
5.36.310 - Massage establishment—Showers, baths and toilets. 
A.  Only one client shall be permitted in a room containing a shower stall, bath stall or toilet facility at any one time unless otherwise permitted by any applicable local, state, or federal law or regulation or accompanied by a massage therapist for massage therapy purposes. 
B.  Each room containing a shower, bath and/or toilet shall have a door that is self closing and locking. 
C.  An artificial light providing a lighting intensity of not less than thirty (30) foot candle power at floor level shall be installed in any room containing a shower, bath and/or toilet. 
(Ord. 861 § 1 (part), 2001)  
5.36.320 - Massage therapy establishment—Sanitary conditions. 
A.  The premises of the massage therapy establishment shall have adequate equipment for disinfecting and/or sanitizing nondisposable instruments and materials used in administering massages. 
B.  All nondisposable instruments and materials shall be disinfected and/or sanitized after each use on each client. 
C.  All walls, ceilings, floors, showers, bathtubs, water basins, toilets, and all other facilities must be maintained in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition. 
D.  All showers, bathtubs, water basins, and toilets shall be thoroughly cleaned at least once each day the massage therapy establishment is in operation. 
E.  Water basins with hot and cold running water from a potable source and soap dispensers shall be available to clients. 
F.  A trash receptacle shall be provided in each massage therapy room and any room containing a shower, bathtub, water basin and/or toilet. 
G.  Bathtubs shall be thoroughly cleaned after each use. 
H.  All clients shall be provided clean and sanitary towels, sheets and linens. 
I.  Towels, sheets and linens shall be provided in sufficient quantity and shall not be used by more than one person unless such towels, sheets and linens have been relaundered. 
J.  Separate closed cabinets or containers shall be provided for the storage of clean and soiled towels, sheets and linens, and such cabinets or containers shall be plainly marked "clean linen" and "soiled linen". 
K.  Massage table cover pads that come into contact with the body of a client shall be clean. 
(Ord. 861 § 1 (part), 2001)  
5.36.330 - Massage therapy establishment—Loudspeakers and sound equipment. 
Loudspeakers or sound equipment shall not be used by a massage therapy establishment for amplification of sound to a level discernible by the public beyond the walls of the building or leasable space in which the use is conducted. 
(Ord. 861 § 1 (part), 2001)  
5.36.340 - Prohibited activities. 
A.  It is unlawful for any massage therapist, any patron, or any other persons present where massage therapy services are being offered or performed, to expose or touch any specific anatomical areas, whether his or her own, or those of another person. 
B.  It is unlawful for any massage therapist, any patron, or any other person present where massage therapy services are being offered or performed, to be in a state of full nudity or semi-nudity. 
C.  It is unlawful for any massage therapist, any patron, or any other person present where massage therapy services are being offered or performed, to engage in any specified sexual activities. 
D.  No person shall provide or offer to provide any massage therapy services to a minor unless written permission is provided by the minor's parent or legal guardian. 
E.  No permittee shall provide or offer to provide massage therapy services under any name not specified in the qualifying permit. 
F.  No massage therapist permittee shall perform or offer to perform massage therapy services at any site other than a lawfully operating massage therapy establishment unless the permittee's massage therapist permit includes an off-premises endorsement. 
G.  No permittee shall provide or offer any alcoholic beverage to a patron during the course of providing or offering to provide any massage therapy service. 
H.  No permittee shall transfer or assign any permit issued pursuant to this chapter to another person or entity. Any attempted transfer will result in the automatic termination of such permit. 
I.  No massage therapy establishment permittee shall permit any patron to be administered any massage services without the patron first being informed of the services to be performed and the cost of each such service. It will be presumed that patrons are informed of the cost of each service if a notice listing all available services and the charges for each is posted so as to be readily visible to patrons upon entry into the facility. 
J.  No massage therapy establishment permitted shall employ a person under eighteen (18) years of age. 
(Ord. 861 § 1 (part), 2001)  
5.36.350 - Transfer of ownership. 
All transfers of ownership of any business operating pursuant to a permit validly issued pursuant to this chapter shall result in the automatic termination of such permit. 
(Ord. 861 § 1 (part), 2001)  
5.36.360 - Relocation. 
Relocation of any business operating pursuant to this chapter shall result in the automatic termination of the subject permit. 
(Ord. 861 § 1 (part), 2001)  
5.36.370 - Change of on-site manager. 
A change of the on-site manager of a massage establishment without submitting a new massage establishment permit application shall result in the automatic termination of the subject permit. 
(Ord. 861 § 1 (part), 2001)  
5.36.380 - Reference applies to amendments. 
Whenever a reference is made to any part of this code or to any ordinance of the city, reference applies to all amendments and additions now or hereafter made. 
(Ord. 861 § 1 (part), 2001)  
5.36.390 - Computation of time. 
A.  The time in which any act provided by this chapter is to be done is computed by excluding the first day and including the last, unless the last day is a holiday which is also excluded. 
B.  If the last day for the performance of any act set forth in this chapter is a holiday, then the time in which to perform the act is extended to and including the next day which is not a holiday. 
C.  If the last day for the performance of any act provided by this chapter is Saturday or Sunday, then the time in which to perform the act is extended to and including the next Monday. 
(Ord. 861 § 1 (part), 2001)  
5.36.400 - Nonconforming uses and permits. 
A.  All permittees legally permitted to engage in massage therapy business activities on August 22, 2001, but which are in noncompliance as a result of an amendment to this chapter shall be deemed legal nonconforming and will be allowed to continue operation provided they are in compliance with all limitations and requirements of their original permit except as noted below. 
B.  Any expansion of massage services beyond those specified in the original approval shall require a newly issued permit pursuant to this chapter. 
C.  All legal nonconforming permittees shall come into compliance with all licensing and operational criteria identified in this chapter by February 1, 2002. 
(Ord. 861 § 1 (part), 2001)  
5.36.410 - Suspension and revocation. 
Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be revoked by the city manager or his or her designee if he or she receives notice that, after administrative proceedings conducted in conformity with this code, the city has made any of the following findings and determinations with respect to the permittee: 
A.  The massage business or service is conducted in a manner that does not comply with all applicable laws, including but not limited to this chapter and the city's building, zoning and health regulations; 
B.  The permittee is convicted of any disqualifying conduct or is required to register as a sex offender as set forth in California Penal Code Section 290; 
C.  The permittee failed to keep current and accurate the information contained in the permit application; 
D.  Information contained in the approved application is inaccurate; 
E.  Any patron of the permittee contracts any communicable disease during the course of any services offered by the permittee; 
F.  The permittee, or any applicant for permit, refuses to allow representatives of the city or the city manager or his or her designee to inspect business records of the permittee, or any premises utilized by the permittee for massage therapy services; 
G.  The permitted fails to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter; or 
H.  The permittee has ceased to meet any of the requirements for issuance of the permit. 
(Ord. 861 § 1 (part), 2001)  
5.36.420 - Public nuisance. 
Any violation of Sections 5.36.040 and 5.36.220 thorough 5.36.340 of this chapter by any person responsible for committing, causing or maintaining such violation shall constitute a public nuisance which shall be subject to the provisions of chapter of this code. 
(Ord. 861 § 1 (part), 2001)  
5.36.430 - Violation. 
Any violation of Sections 5.36.040 and 5.36.220 through 5.36.340 of this chapter by any person responsible for committing, causing, or maintaining such violation shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 861 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 1098, § 29, 12-14-16)  
5.36.440 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1098, § 30, adopted Dec. 14, 2016, repealed former § 5.36.440 in its entirety which pertained to infraction civil fines and derived from Ord. 861 § 1 (part), 2001.  
5.36.450 - Administrative citation. 
A.  In lieu of issuing a criminal citation, the city may issue an administrative citation, pursuant to Title 3 of this code, to any person responsible for committing, causing, or maintaining the subject violation. 
B.  The city may issue an administrative citation, pursuant to Title 3 of this code, to any person responsible for committing, causing, or maintaining a violation of Sections 5.36.040 and 5.36.220 through 5.36.340 of this chapter. 
C.  Nothing in this section shall preclude the city from also issuing an infraction or misdemeanor citation upon the occurrence of the same subject offense on a separate day. 
(Ord. 861 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 1098, § 31, 12-14-16)  
5.36.460 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1098, § 31, adopted Dec. 14, 2016, repealed former § 5.36.460 in its entirety which pertained to an administrative fine and derived from Ord. 861 § 1 (part), 2001.  
5.36.470 - Additional remedies. 
A.  Any violation of Sections 5.36.040 and 5.36.220 through 5.36.340 of this chapter by the holder of any city permit and/or city license validly issued pursuant to this or any other chapter of this code shall constitute grounds for modification, suspension and/or revocation of such permit and/or license pursuant to the provisions set forth in Title 3 of this code. 
B.  Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the city from pursuing other remedies provided by Title 3 of this code, including, but not limited to, denial or revocation of certificates of occupancy, issuance of stop work orders and injunctive relief. 
(Ord. 861 § 1 (part), 2001)  
Chapter 5.44 - NONCOMMERCIAL SOLICITATIONS 
 
5.44.010 - Definitions. 
"Applicant" means the person applying to the license collector for a solicitation permit on behalf of the permit holder. 
"Contribution" means the giving of anything of value, including money, property or any other type of financial assistance, or the pledging of anything of value, including money, property or any other type of financial assistance, or the purchasing or offering to purchase anything of value or not, including, but not limited to goods, services, books, pamphlets, tickets, subscriptions to publications, upon the implied or express representation that the proceeds, or a portion thereof, of the gift, pledge, or purchase will be used for a noncommercial purpose. 
"License collector" means the person exercising that function or any city employee designated by the license collector to perform such functions hereunder. 
"Noncommercial purpose" means the purpose of any nonprofit organization which has obtained recognized state or federal tax exempt status. 
"Organization" means any partnership, corporation, or association, including any firm, company, society, church, congregation, assembly, or league, and shall include any director, officer, trustee, receiver, assignee, agent or other similar representative thereof. 
"Permit holder" means the person on whose behalf the solicitation will be conducted. 
"Person" means any individual, partnership, corporation, or association, including any firm, company, society, organization, church, congregation, assembly, or league, and shall include any director, officer, trustee, receiver, assignee, agent, or other similar representative thereof. 
"Solicit" and "solicitation" means the request, directly or indirectly, for any contribution. A "solicitation" shall be complete when the request is made, whether or not the person making the request receives any contribution. 
"Solicitor" means an individual who solicits or who engages in a solicitation as defined in this section. 
(Prior code § 7½-1)  
5.44.020 - Permit required for noncommercial solicitation. 
A.  No person shall, within the city, conduct or knowingly allow to be conducted on such person's behalf the solicitation of contributions for any noncommercial purpose, unless the person holds a valid permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and the solicitation is conducted in accordance with all the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  No individual shall, within the city, solicit or engage in the solicitation of, contributions for any noncommercial purpose, unless the person on whose behalf the solicitation is being made holds a valid permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and the solicitation is made in accordance with all the provisions of this chapter. 
C.  Nothing set forth in this chapter shall be construed as granted to the license collected or the city council any discretion to grant, deny, suspend, revoke or renew any permit by reason of disapproval or agreement with the philosophy, opinion or belief of the permit holder. 
(Prior code § 7½-2)  
5.44.030 - Exemptions. 
The following are exempted from the operation of this chapter: 
A.  Solicitation by any organization from its members. 
B.  Solicitation by a person when such solicitation occurs on premises owned or controlled by the solicitor or with the permission of the person who owns or controls the premises. 
C.  Solicitation which is subject to disclosure under state or federal political disclosure laws. 
D.  The issuance of any announcement or advertisement that such solicitation as described in subsections A, B or C above will occur or which announces or advertises an event at which unannounced solicitation as described in subsections A, B or C above occurs. 
E.  Solicitation conducted solely by means of radio or television broadcasts or solely by means of newspapers or magazines or solely by direct solicitations by United States mail. 
(Prior code § 7½-3)  
5.44.040 - Application for permit. 
A.  Applications for noncommercial solicitation permits shall be made to the license collector upon forms prescribed by the city. The application shall be declared under penalty of perjury and filed with the license collector. The application shall be accompanied by an application fee, in an amount to be set by resolution of the city council. The application fee will not be refunded if a permit is not issued. 
B.  Such application shall contain the following information and documentation: 
1.  The full name, mailing address, principal business, residential address, telephone number and date of birth of the applicant and the nature of the relationship between the applicant and the permit holder, including whether the applicant is a volunteer, a paid officer or employee, an independent contributor, or an agent of the permit holder; 
2.  Documentation from the United States Internal Revenue Service or from the California Franchise Tax Board that the permit holder is tax exempt under federal or state income tax laws; 
3.  If the permit holder is: 
a.  An individual, the full name, mailing address and principal business or residential address and telephone number. 
b.  A partnership, the full name, mailing address and principal business or residential address and telephone number of each partner. However, if there are more than ten (10) partners, only the ten (10) principal partners need be listed. 
c.  A corporation, whether it is organized under the laws of California or is a foreign corporation, and, if a foreign corporation, the place of incorporation, the full name, mailing address, and principal business address and telephone number of the individual in charge of the local office of the corporation and of all officers, directors and trustees of the corporation. However, if there are more than ten (10) officers, directors and trustees, only the ten (10) principals among the officers, directors and trustees of the corporation need be listed. 
d.  An association, the mailing address and principal business address and telephone number of the association and the full name, mailing address, and principal business or residential address and telephone number of each member of the association. However, if there are more than ten (10) members of the association, only the ten (10) principal members of the association need be listed. If the association is part of a multi-state association, the mailing address and business address and telephone number of its central officer shall also be given. 
4.  If the permit holder intends to use a paid solicitor to solicit contributions on behalf of the permit holder, the information required by subsection (B)(3) above shall also be applicable to the paid solicitor; 
5.  The full name, mailing address and principal business or residential address and telephone number, of each individual who will be in charge of supervising the solicitation; 
6.  The full name, mailing address and principal business or residential address and telephone number, of each individual who will be in direct charge or control of the contribution solicited and of their disbursement; 
7.  The exact purpose of the solicitation and the exact geographic area in which the solicitation will be conducted; 
8.  The total monetary value of contributions projected to be raised by the solicitation, and the estimated percentage of the total monetary value of the projected contributions that will be used for the noncommercial purpose; 
9.  A description of the records which will be kept of the contributions received and the revenues and expenses of the permit holder, including administrative and fundraising costs, and whether such records will be open to the public, and if so, the address and telephone number of the place where they may be inspected; 
10.  The time during the day when the solicitation will be made, and the dates for the commencement and termination of the solicitation; 
11.  A short outline of the method or methods to be used in conducting the solicitation, including the number of solicitors; 
12.  A statement that none of the solicitors have been convicted of any of the crimes specified in Section 5.44.070(E); 
13.  A statement that the permit holder assumes responsibility that all solicitors comply with all the requirements of Section 5.44.070; 
14.  A statement that if a permit is granted it will not be used or represented in any way as an endorsement by the city or any department, officer or employer thereof; and 
15.  The address of the applicant and of the permit holder where the license collector can send notices required by this part. 
C.  The license collector shall forward a copy of the application to the police department. 
D.  If, while the application is pending or during the term of any permit granted, there is a change in fact, policy or method that would alter the information to be given on the application, the applicant shall notify the license collector in writing thereof within twenty-four (24) hours after such change. 
(Prior code § 7½-4)  
5.44.050 - Issuance of permits. 
A.  The license collector shall issue the permit to the applicant within ten (10) days after the date the application is filed, unless the license collector finds that: 
1.  The applicant has not provided the information required by Section 5.44.040 and has failed to provide an amended application with the missing information after being requested to do so; 
2.  The applicant indicates on the application that the proposed solicitation will violate any provision of Section 5.44.070 and has failed to amend the application to indicate compliance with such sections after being requested to do so; 
3.  The applicant failed to file the sworn financial statement required under Section 5.44.070(D) after the expiration of the applicant's previous solicitation permit; or 
4.  The applicant has knowingly and wilfully submitted false information on the application. 
B.  The license collector shall have the duty to make the requests specified in subsection A above and shall do so by serving written notice upon the applicant within the time period of issuance of the permit. Every such request shall state the time period within which the application may be amended, and shall be served by personal service or by deposit in the United States postal service, certified mail, return receipt requested. 
C.  If the license collector requests an amended application pursuant to this section, he/she shall not act on the permit application for ten (10) days after the date the request is personally serviced or deposited in the United States mail. If the applicant fully complies with the request on or before the tenth day, the license collector shall issue the permit within five days after the amended application is filed. 
D.  If the permit is denied, the license collector shall have the duty to so notify the applicant and shall serve the notice within the time period specified in subsection C for issuance of the permit. Every such notice of denial shall be in writing, shall state the grounds therefor, and shall be served by personal service or by deposit in the United States postal service, certified mail, return receipt requested. 
E.  Any permit holder aggrieved by any action of the license collector to request an amended application or to deny a permit may appeal to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk. Such appeal shall state with specificity the reasons therefor and shall be filed within ten (10) days after the date the notice of denial is personally served or deposited in the United States mail. The council shall hear the appeal in accordance with the provisions of Section 5.44.090. 
F.  The filing of an appeal with the city council shall not stay the action of the license collector. If the applicant does not file a timely notice of appeal, as required by subsection E above, the permit holder shall have waived all rights to administrative remedy. 
(Prior code § 7½-5)  
5.44.060 - Form and duration of permit. 
A.  The permit, if issued, shall include the following information: 
1.  The name of the permit holder; 
2.  The dates the permit begins and expires; 
3.  The noncommercial purpose of the solicitation, as stated on the application; 
4.  A statement that the permit does not constitute an endorsement by the city, or any of its departments, officers, or employees, of the purpose of the solicitation; 
5.  A permit number; and 
6.  A space for the individual solicitor to type or print his or her name on a certified copy of the permit. 
B.  The permit, if issued, may include the following information: 
1.  The total monetary value of contributions projected to be raised by the solicitation; 
2.  The percentage of the contributions projected to be raised that will be used for noncommercial purpose; and 
3.  The percentage of the contributions raised by solicitation in the preceding year that were used for the noncommercial purpose. 
C.  The permit shall be valid for the time stated in the permit application, but in no case shall the time exceed a period of six months. 
D.  Certified copies of the permit shall be issued to the applicant in a number equal to the number of solicitors that are listed on the application. 
(Prior code § 7½-6)  
5.44.070 - Manner of solicitation. 
A.  Solicitations pursuant to permits under this part shall: 
1.  Not be made by any person under the age of sixteen (16) years, unless accompanied by an adult; and 
2.  Not be made at any house, apartment or other dwelling nor at any business to which is affixed a sign indicating "No Solicitors" or similar indication that no solicitation contact is desired by the occupant. 
B.  The solicitor shall: 
1.  Show a certified copy of the permit, bearing the name of that individual, to the person from whom a contribution is sought prior to the time of the solicitation. Before beginning to solicit contributions, the solicitor shall print or type his or her name in the blank provided for it; 
2.  Upon receipt of a contribution valued in excess of five dollars ($5.00), give the contributor a written receipt signed by the solicitor showing plainly the name of the permit holder and the solicitor, and permit number, the date, the amount received, and the amount of the contribution which is tax-deductible. This subsection shall not apply to any contribution collected by means of a closed box or receptacle where it is impractical to determine the amount of such contribution; 
3.  Not affix any object to the person or property of any contributor or member of the public without first receiving express permission therefor; 
4.  Not persistently or importunately request any contribution from any person after such person expresses his or her desire not to make a contribution; or 
5.  Not intentionally or deliberately obstruct the free movement of any person. 
D.  The permit holder shall file with the license collector, within thirty (30) days after the expiration of solicitation permit, a sworn financial statement showing the total monetary value of the contributions raised by the solicitation, and the percentage of the total monetary value of the contributions solicited that were used for the noncommercial purpose. 
E.  No individual shall solicit any contribution if that person has been convicted in any court of competent jurisdiction of any of the following crimes, as defined in the California Penal Code: murder, mayhem, kidnapping, robbery, assault, battery, rape, arson, burglary, possession of burglarious instruments or deadly weapons, or attempt to commit any of the aforementioned crimes. 
(Prior code § 7½-7)  
5.44.080 - Nontransferability of permits. 
No permit issued under this chapter shall be transferred or assigned, and any attempt at assignment or transfer shall be void. 
(Prior code § 7½-8)  
5.44.090 - Revocation of permits. 
A.  Whenever it shall be shown that any permit holder has violated any of the provisions of this chapter, the license collector may suspend the permit by serving written notice on the permit holder no less than two business days prior to the suspension. The notice shall be served by personal service or by deposit in United States postal service, certified mail, return receipt requested, at the address specified in the permit application or any amendment thereto. The notice shall state with specificity the reasons for the suspension and how it can be removed, that the permit will be revoked unless, within ten (10) days after the notice is served, the suspension is either removed or appealed to the city council, and the method of appeal. 
B.  if the violation concerns the manner of solicitation as set forth in Section 5.44.070, the license collector shall lift the suspension and proposed revocation if the permit holder discharges the offending solicitors. If the violation involves the disclosure of information as set forth in Section 5.44.040, the license collector shall lift the suspension and proposed revocation if the permit holder amends the application. 
C.  Any permit holder aggrieved by any action of the license collector to suspend or revoke a permit may appeal to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal to city clerk. Such appeal shall state with specificity the reasons therefor and shall be filed within ten (10) days after the notice of suspension and proposed revocation is personally served or deposited in the United States mail. 
D.  The appeal shall be heard at the next regularly scheduled council meeting held at least ten (10) days after the appeal is filed. At the time of the hearing, the council shall hear all relevant evidence and shall determine the merits of the appeal and it shall render a decision thereon within three business days after the hearing. Such decision shall be in writing, shall state with specificity the reasons therefor, and shall be served upon the applicant within two days thereafter by personal service or by deposit in the United States postal service, certified mail, return receipt requested. 
E.  The filing of an appeal with the council shall not stay the action of the license collector. If the permit holder does not file a timely appeal, as required by subsection C above, the permit holder shall have waived all rights to administrative remedy. 
(Prior code § 7½-9)  
5.44.100 - Penalty. 
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of an infraction and shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first violation, a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second violation within one year, and a third violation, or more, within one year shall be prosecuted as a misdemeanor. Each such person is guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of the provisions of this chapter is committed. 
(Prior code § 7½-10)  
Chapter 5.48 - OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGNS 
 
5.48.010 - Definitions. 
"Back-to-back" means a structure with two parallel and directly opposite signs with their faces oriented in opposite directions located not more than two feet apart and braces completely enclosed. A back-to-back sign shall constitute one outdoor advertising sign. 
"Freeway" means a divided arterial highway for through traffic with full control access and with grade separations at intersections. 
"Ground sign" means any outdoor sign erected on a freestanding framework supported and affixed by two uprights. 
"Official sign" means any sign erected by any governmental agency or at the direction of any governmental agency. 
"On-premise sign" means any sign defined in this chapter. 
"Outdoor advertising sign" means a sign including the supporting sign structure herein defined to include only two upright supports, which directs the attention of the general public to a business, service or activity not usually conducted or a product not usually offered or sold upon the premises where such sign is located. None of the following shall be deemed an outdoor advertising sign: 
1.  Directional and other official signs authorized by law; 
2.  Signs advertising the sale or lease of property upon which they are located; and 
3.  Signs advertising activities conducted on the property upon which they are located. 
"V-type sign" means one sign in the shape of the letter "V" when viewed from above with their faces oriented in different directions located not more than two feet apart at the closest points and enclosed. A V-type sign shall constitute one outdoor advertising sign. 
(Ord. 878, 2002: prior code § 3-61)  
5.48.020 - Permitted zones. 
Outdoor advertising signs which conform with the provisions of this chapter shall be permitted as a matter of right in the C-G, M-H, M-W and M-S zones pursuant to Section 5.48.060. 
(Ord. 878, 2002: prior code § 3-62)  
5.48.030 - Nonconforming signs. 
A.  Conforming Zone. All signs in conforming zones shall meet the construction standard in this chapter, within one year of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
B.  Nonconforming Zones. Signs in these zones shall be removed in accordance with the abatement schedule below, designed Exhibit A. 
Exhibit A 
Abatement Schedule 
Value of Sign 	Period for Removal and/or Compliance 
$100.00 or less 	90 days 
100.01 to 200.00 	6 months 
200.01 to 400.00 	1 year 
400.01 to 650.00 	2 years 
650.01 to 1,000.00 	3 years 
1,000.01 to 1,500.00 	4 years 
1,500.01 to 2,500.00 	5 years 
2,500.01 to 5,000.00 	7 years 
5,000.01 to 7,500.00 	8 years 
7,500.01 to 10,000.00 	9 years 
10,000.01 or more 	10 years 
 
C.  Improvement. A nonconforming sign may be enhanced or improved, at the option of the planning commission, beyond its existing condition provided that any enhancements or improvements conform to the standards of the zones which it is located. Such sign is also subject to the following provisions: 
1.  That a written agreement approved by the city contain a stipulation to remove such sign within the time established by the abatement schedule, but not to extend beyond a five-year period. That agreement is to contain provisions for sign removal at the end of the agreed time or payment to the city for removal of such sign. 
2.  Such agreement shall be deemed to be in the best interest of the city as it pertains to the provision of an industrial environment, which will be compatible with the inherent characteristics of industry and it shall provide for conditions, which would enhance the aesthetic values of the surrounding area. 
(Ord. 878, 2002: prior code § 3-63)  
5.48.040 - General provisions. 
A.  Outdoor advertising signs shall not be established at any location within six hundred (600) feet of any property which is used for public parks, public schools, church, courthouse, city hall or public museum. 
B.  No outdoor advertising sign shall be established closer to the street than the existing property line. No portion of any outdoor advertising sign may be placed on, or extend over the right-of-way line of any street or highway. 
C.  No outdoor advertising shall be constructed which resembles any official marker erected by the city, state or any governmental agency, or which by reason of position, shape or color would conflict with the proper functioning of any traffic sign or signal. 
D.  All outdoor advertising sign shall be constructed in accordance with the municipal building and electrical codes. 
E.  In addition to the provisions of subsection D of this section, no outdoor advertising sign shall be erected except as provided: 
1.  No more than two uprights shall be permitted. 
2.  All uprights must be of steel or concrete materials, as small as consistent with proper engineering standards. 
H.  No outdoor advertising sign or part thereof shall be located on any property without the consent of the owner, holder, lessee, agent or trustee. 
I.  The general area within twenty (20) feet of any point of any sign must be kept free and clear of sign materials, weeds, debris, trash and other refuse. 
J.  No mechanical devices shall be allowed on any outdoor advertising sign. 
(Ord. 878, 2002: prior code § 3-64)  
5.48.050 - Size of signs. 
A.  The area of any one sign facing, shall be seven hundred (700) square feet inclusive of any border or trim, but excluding the base or apron, supports and other structural members. 
B.  The area shall be measured by the smallest square, rectangle, triangle, circle, or combination thereof which will encompass the entire sign facing. 
C.  The maximum size limitations shall apply to each facing of a sign structure and sign may be placed back-to-back or in a V-type construction with not more than one display to each facing and such sign structures shall be considered one sign. 
(Ord. 878, 2002: prior code § 3-65)  
5.48.060 - Location of outdoor advertising signs. 
A.  Outdoor advertising signs shall only be permitted if they are oriented to and viewable from the travel way of an freeway as defined in Section 5.48.010. 
B.  The distance between outdoor advertising signs on the same side of a freeway shall be five hundred (500) feet. The distance between advertising signs shall be measured from points on the freeway pavement, which are nearest to the center of each outdoor advertising sign. No outdoor advertising sign shall be placed or maintained within one hundred (100) feet of any building or structure. 
C.  The exact location of each outdoor advertising sign on the property on which such sign is to be placed or maintained shall be approved by the planning director or the city council pursuant to Section 5.48.090. 
(Ord. 878, 2002: prior code § 3-66)  
5.48.070 - Lighting. 
Signs shall be illuminated subject to the following restrictions: 
A.  Signs which are not effectively shielded so as to prevent beams or rays from being directed at any portion of the traveled ways and are of such intensity or brilliance to cause glare or impair the vision of the driver of any motor vehicle or which otherwise interferes with any driver's operation of a motor vehicle are prohibited. 
B.  No sign shall be so illuminated that it interferes with the effectiveness or obscures an official traffic sign, device or signal. 
(Ord. 878, 2002: prior code § 3-67)  
5.48.080 - Height of outdoor advertising signs. 
No ground sign may exceed forty (40) feet in height above the roadbed of the adjacent freeway unless a variance is secured from the planning commission. 
(Ord. 878, 2002: prior code § 3-68)  
5.48.090 - Permits for outdoor advertising signs. 
A.  No outdoor advertising sign may be erected without obtaining a permit from the planning director who shall determine whether a proposed outdoor advertising sign shall comply with the provisions of this chapter. For this purpose, the planning director shall require the applicant for such a permit to submit an application which identifies the property on which the sign is to be placed, the identity and address of the owner of the property, the identity and address of the person or company that will erect the sign, a diagram of the proposed sign sufficient to determine compliance with this chapter, a diagram of the location of the proposed sign on the property where it will be erected sufficient to determine compliance with this chapter and a diagram of all outdoor advertising signs within two thousand (2,000) feet of the location of the proposed sign. 
B.  Any person who is dissatisfied with the determination of the planning director may appeal such determination to the city council upon filing a written appeal thereof and the requisite fee with the city clerk within ten (10) days of the planning director's determination. The appeal shall be heard by the city council at its next regular meeting following the filing of the appeal provided that sufficient time exists for the planning director to prepare a report to the city council on the subject matter of the appeal. The city council decision on the appeal may affirm, overturn or modify the decision of the planning director. 
C.  All permits for outdoor advertising signs shall be renewed by the owner of the sign or the owner of the property where the sign is erected prior to the anniversary of the original permit. 
(Ord. 878, 2002: prior code § 3-69)  
5.48.100 - Enforcement. 
Any outdoor advertising sign(s) which is placed or maintained in violation of the provisions of this chapter, which is not removed within thirty (30) days of written notice from the city, shall be subject to a penalty of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) plus one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each day the advertising sign(s) is placed or maintained after the city sends written notice that such penalty shall be assessed. 
Additionally, the city may declare that any nonpermitted sign is a public nuisance and after notice that such is the case, the cost of abatement shall be affixed as a lien charge upon the land whereon the sign is located and such cost shall be added to the tax bill for each such parcel, if not paid pursuant to such notice. 
(Ord. 878, 2002: prior code § 3-70)  
Chapter 5.52 - PAWNBROKERS AND SECONDHAND DEALERS 
 
5.52.010 - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter: 
"Pawnbroker" includes every person who keeps a place of business where personal property is received on which money is advanced with the right or privilege granted to the person to whom the money is advanced to reclaim such property upon the repayment of such money so advanced, together with all legal charges incident thereto. The term shall include every person, firm or corporation other than banks, saving and loan institutions, and similar organizations otherwise regulated by law which engage in or carry on the business of receiving jewelry, watches, precious stones, valuables, firearms, clothing or personal property, or any other article or articles in pledge for loans, or as security, or in pawn for the repayment of moneys, and which exact interest for such loans. 
"Secondhand dealer" includes every person who engages in or conducts the business of buying, selling or exchanging, whether as a separate business or in connection with other businesses, secondhand or rebuilt typewriters, adding and calculating machines, secondhand bicycles, bicycle accessories, scales, clothing, tools, harnesses, surgical, dental or drawing instruments, firearms, table model or auto radios, musical instruments other than pianos, household appliances other than stoves, refrigerators and washing machines, or any similar secondhand article or articles or things, excepting, however, secondhand jewelry dealers, secondhand automobile dealers and junk dealers, nor shall it pertain to automobile wrecking establishments or book sales. 
"Secondhand jewelry dealer" includes every person who engages in or conducts the business of buying, selling or exchanging the following used or old articles: gold, silver, platinum, or articles of platinum, silverware, secondhand jewelry, watches or other precious metals or stones. The term "secondhand jewelry dealer" includes every person engaged in such business, whether as a separate business or in connection with other businesses. 
(Prior code § 13-147)  
5.52.020 - License to engage in pawnbroker or secondhand dealer business. 
If any person shall engage in, conduct, manage or carry on at the same time more than one of the businesses defined in Section 5.52.010, such person shall be deemed to be engaged in, conducting and carrying on each such business separately and apart from the other such business, and such person shall comply in all respects with the provisions set forth in this chapter applicable to each of such businesses and no person shall fail, neglect or refuse so to do. 
(Prior code § 13-148)  
5.52.030 - Application for license, contents. 
Before any license or licenses to engage in any of the businesses herein defined are granted, the applicant shall file with the chief of police a written application, signed by the applicant under oath, setting forth the following: 
A.  The exact nature of the business or businesses to be carried on; 
B.  The name of the applicant, together with all persons to be directly or indirectly interested in the conducting of such business or businesses should a license or licenses be granted, including all members of any firm or partnership; 
C.  The location of the proposed business or businesses for which the license or licenses are sought; 
D.  Whether or not any permit or license heretofore granted to the applicant or any members of the proposed firm or partnership has been revoked or suspended, and if so, the circumstances of such revocation or suspension; and 
E.  Such further information bearing on the moral character and financial responsibility of the applicant as the chief of police may require as reasonably bearing on the qualifications of an application to engage in the businesses herein named. 
(Prior code § 13-149)  
5.52.040 - Approval of chief of police. 
In addition to the foregoing information, the applicant who conducts a pawnshop or whose principal business is buying and selling secondhand articles at the time of filing his or her application for a license or licenses shall be fingerprinted by and his or her record filed in the Coachella police department. Upon receipt of the application, the chief of police shall cause an investigation to be made of the qualifications and moral character of the applicant, and if the investigation satisfies the chief of police, as a reasonable man, that the applicant has not been convicted of a felony, is financially responsible, and is of good moral character, he or she shall issue to the applicant the license or licenses for which an application has been made. 
(Prior code § 13-150)  
5.52.050 - Exemptions. 
In the event that the applicant or applicants are members of a religious, charitable, public service club, or nonprofit organization conducting a periodic sale of goods, wares or merchandise as set forth in Section 5.52.010, the applicant or applicants shall comply with the provisions of Section 5.52.030; provided, however, that the applicant or applicants shall not be required to furnish all the names of all the members of the organization, but shall be required to furnish the names of the principal officers of the organization, but shall not be required to furnish fingerprints of the applicant as required in Section 5.52.040. 
(Prior code § 13-151)  
5.52.060 - Record of transactions. 
Every person managing, maintaining or conducting the business of pawnbroker, secondhand jewelry dealer or secondhand dealer, as defined in this chapter, in the city, shall keep or cause to be kept at the store or place of business a well-bound book, containing a record in which shall be legibly entered in the English language, in ink, at the time of every purchase, sale, exchange, pledge, pawn or other transfer of possession of any article, or loan thereon, a description of such article received or delivered in such transaction sufficient to identify the same, (including all particular or prominent marks of identification that may be found on such property), the signature, age, sex, residence and accurate description of the vendor or person from whom received, the amount of money paid or received in such transaction, the rate of interest, if any, and the date and hour of the transaction. 
(Prior code § 13-152)  
5.52.070 - Articles to be identified by tags. 
It shall be the duty of each pawnbroker, secondhand jewelry dealer or secondhand dealer to attach to each article so received a tag, or other device, containing sufficient information so that the article described and recorded in the bound book may be readily identified. 
(Prior code § 13-153)  
5.52.080 - Record of transactions to chief of police. 
In addition to the keeping of a permanent bound record as provided in this chapter, every person engaged in any of the aforesaid businesses shall likewise be required, at the time of taking or receiving any article in the business for which he or she is so licensed, to place the description of the article or thing pledged, received or taken on a form prescribed by the state Bureau of Criminal Identification and Investigation and shall by the next working day following the transaction, prepare to deliver to the chief of police, or his or her designee, a written report of the transaction and receipt on a form prescribed by the state Bureau of Criminal Identification and Investigation. 
(Ord. 891 § 27, 2003: prior code § 13-154)  
5.52.090 - Exemptions. 
The requirements of keeping a record as set forth and defined in Sections 5.52.060 and 5.52.080, and the provisions of Section 5.52.100 stated in this chapter, shall not be applicable to any person, organization, firm, business or corporation who purchases, receives, sells or exchanges books and other essential school supplies when such person, organization, firm, business or corporation is located upon the campus or grounds of any public or private school, college or university. 
(Prior code § 13-155)  
5.52.100 - Inspection of records and goods. 
It is unlawful for any pawnbroker or secondhand dealer, or for any agent or employee of such pawnbroker or secondhand dealer, to fail, refuse or neglect to file a report, as required in this chapter, in the manner, form, at the time and in all respects in accordance with the requirements set forth in this chapter, or to fail, refuse or neglect to exhibit to the chief of police or to any member of the police department of the city, or to any officer authorized by law, immediately upon demand, any such record or report, or any goods, wares and merchandise, including radios for use in or upon automobiles, so purchased or received by such pawnbroker or secondhand dealer, or by any agent or employee of such pawnbroker or secondhand dealer. 
(Prior code § 13-156)  
5.52.110 - Goods to be held for thirty days. 
All articles purchased, received or exchanged, pledged, or otherwise taken into possession by any person maintaining or operating any of the herein enumerated businesses shall be held for a period of thirty (30) days before being placed on exhibition, sold, exchanged, removed from the place of business where it was received, or delivered to any person, or otherwise disposed of; provided, however, that any such article may be delivered or returned at any time to the true owner thereof or his or her authorized agent; provided further, however, that any person whose principal business is not the buying and selling or receiving pledges of used or secondhand articles, who keeps a record of his or her vendees and articles sold, need not hold any typewriters, adding or calculating machines, musical instruments or other office equipment for more than five days pursuant to the provisions of this section; and provided further, that the provisions of this section shall not be applicable to the sale of articles of household furniture or appliances. 
(Prior code § 13-157)  
5.52.120 - Inapplicable provisions. 
The requirements of Sections 5.52.060, 5.52.080 and 5.52.100 in this chapter shall not be applicable to any person whose principal business is not the buying and selling or receiving pledges of used or secondhand articles, when such person receives office equipment, scales or musical instruments from any governmental subdivision or manufacturing business or professional concern known to the secondhand dealer, which concern has used such article or articles in its business. 
(Prior code § 13-158)  
5.52.130 - Dealing with intoxicated persons. 
It is unlawful for any person licensed hereunder, or his or her manager, agent or employee, to take or receive any goods, articles or things from any person who is in an intoxicated state or condition, or from any person who is a suspected or known thief, or associate of thieves, or a suspected or known receiver of stolen property, or from any persons he or she may reasonably suspect to be contained in any of the foregoing categories. 
(Prior code § 13-159)  
5.52.140 - Hours and holidays. 
No person engaged in, conducting, managing or carrying on any business defined in Section 5.52.010 in this chapter shall accept any pledge of or loan money upon personal property, or purchase or receive any goods, wares, merchandise or any article or thing, between nine p.m. and eight a.m. of any day from Monday to Friday, inclusive; between nine p.m. Saturday and eight a.m. of the following Monday; on any of the following holidays or the day that is officially observed as the holiday: New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Fourth of July, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day. 
(Prior code § 13-160)  
5.52.150 - Revocation of license. 
In the event that an applicant shall violate or cause or permit to be violated any of the provisions set forth in this chapter, or shall conduct or carry on the business in an unlawful manner, or shall cause or permit such business to be so conducted or carried on, it shall be the duty of the chief of police, and the chief of police shall, in addition to the other penalties provided in this chapter revoke the license or licenses issued for conducting or carrying on such business or businesses. If the license or licenses to conduct or carry on any business specified in this chapter shall be revoked, no license or licenses shall be granted such person to conduct or carry on any business specified in this chapter within six months of the date of such revocation. 
(Prior code § 13-161)  
5.52.160 - Time limit to obtain license. 
Any person who, at the time of the passage of this chapter is engaged in or conducts any business or businesses as herein defined, and who is required by the provisions set forth in this chapter to secure a license or licenses for the conduct of the business or businesses shall have to prepare and submit to the chief of police the necessary applications for the issuance of the required license or licenses and to comply with the requirements in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 13-162)  
5.52.170 - Penalty. 
It is unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct, manage or carry on the business of pawnbroker or secondhand dealer, as defined in this chapter, without having a valid, existing and unrevoked license therefor. 
(Prior code § 13-163)  
Chapter 5.56 - PUBLIC DANCES 
 
5.56.010 - Defined—Exceptions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, "public dance" means a gathering of persons in or upon any premises where dancing is participated in, either as a main purpose for such gathering or as an incident to some other purpose, and to which premises the public is invited; provided, however, that the following designated dances are excepted from the provisions of this chapter. 
A.  Any dance conducted by the Coachella Valley recreation district as a part of its recreation program. 
B.  Any dance conducted by any public school, or private school which is prominently located within the city, as a part of the recreation program of the school for the exclusive entertainment of its duly registered pupils. 
(Prior code § 4-18)  
5.56.020 - Permit required. 
It is unlawful for any person or any association of persons to conduct or assist in conducting any public dance in the city, unless by authority and under a written permit secured from the finance director, as provided in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 4-19)  
5.56.030 - Application for permit required. 
Permits to conduct public dances in the city shall be issued only upon written application to the finance director on behalf of any person for himself or herself, or on behalf of any association of persons, or of a firm or a corporation. All such applications shall be submitted to the finance director at least five working days prior to the date on which the public dance is scheduled to occur. Every such application for a permit shall be presented by the finance director to the chief of police and shall set forth the following facts: 
A.  The name and address of the applicant or applicants, and if the applicant is from a firm or corporation, then the names and residences of the partners or officers, respectively, thereof; and if the applicant is a fraternal organization, or shall be an organization conducted by and the membership of which is composed of women, then the names of the principal officers thereof and also the name of any manager or employee who will be in charge of such dance. 
B.  The place for which the permit is desired, or on which any dance is to be held. 
C.  The date of the dance to be held under the permit. 
(Prior code § 4-20)  
5.56.040 - Sections 5.56.010 through 5.56.140 inapplicable to certain dances. 
Nothing in Sections 5.56.010 through 5.56.140 inclusive, of this code shall apply to any dance held within the confines of any public park, within the city limits of the city, pursuant to a permit obtained in accordance with the rules and regulations as set forth in Chapter 12.32 of this code. 
(Prior code § 4-20.1)  
5.56.050 - Referral of application to chief of police—Investigation. 
Upon filing of the application for a permit under this chapter with the finance director and the payment of the fees here and after provided for, the finance director shall forward the application to the chief of police for investigation and report, whether or not the applicant is of a good moral character. The chief of police shall ascertain and consider the following: 
A.  Through the use of fingerprints or other methods of investigation, all penal convictions, the reasons therefor, and the demeanor of applicants subsequent thereto; 
B.  The history of the applicant; whether such person, in previously operating in this or another county in this state under a similar permit, has had such permit revoked or suspended, the reasons therefor, and the demeanor of applicant subsequent thereto; 
C.  Whether applicant has made a full disclosure of all the matters required to be set forth in the application; 
D.  Whether applicant has been in default in the payment of license fees to any governmental agencies; 
E.  Such other facts relative to the general personal history of the applicant as he or she shall find necessary to a fair determination of the eligibility of the applicant; 
F.  Whether the granting of the permit will or will not be detrimental to the safety, public morals or general welfare of the city. 
(Prior code § 4-21)  
5.56.060 - Report, action on application. 
The approval or disapproval of the chief of police as to the qualifications of applicant shall be endorsed on each copy of the application. One copy thereof shall be filed in the office of the chief of police, the other copy with the director of finance. If the chief of police, after making his or her investigation, approves the applicant, and the finance director finds that the applicant has in all due respects complied with the requirements of this chapter, such application shall be granted. If the applicant is denied, the finance director shall promptly give applicant notice thereof, and the reasons for such rejection. 
(Prior code § 4-22)  
5.56.070 - Policing required. 
Persons that conduct a public dance shall employ as many police officers or licensed uniformed security personnel trained in crowd control as the police chief determines are necessary to police and control each dance. The presence of any police officer at any public dance shall not relieve the permittee/licensee thereof, or any of his or her employees, from the responsibility of enforcing the provisions of this chapter or the regulations issued hereunder. 
(Prior code § 4-22.1)  
5.56.080 - Peace officer access. 
Any peace officer of the city shall have access at all times to the premises where a public dance is conducted. 
(Prior code § 4-22.2)  
5.56.090 - Fees. 
A fee of sixteen dollars ($16.00) or such other fee as may be set by city council resolution shall be paid for each dance conducted. In addition, permittee shall pay any additional fee as shall be necessary to reimburse the city for the cost of peace officers found necessary by the police chief to sufficiently police and control each dance. 
(Ord. 891 § 28, 2003: prior code § 4-23)  
5.56.100 - Permit not transferable. 
No permit issued under this chapter shall be transferable, except by the written consent of the city council. 
(Prior code § 4-24)  
5.56.110 - Permit to be posted. 
A public dance permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises where the dance for which the permit is issued is conducted, and shall remain so posted during all the time dancing is taking place. 
(Prior code § 4-25)  
5.56.120 - Permit extension, revocation. 
Any public dance permit may be immediately suspended or revoked by the city or by the chief of police or his or her designee if disturbances occur at the dance or in the surrounding area as a result of the dance or other reasonable cause. 
(Prior code § 4-26)  
5.56.130 - Appeals. 
A.  Any applicant aggrieved by the action of the finance director in refusing to issue any permit, or in summarily revoking any permit already issued, shall have the right of appeal to the city council. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the finance director, within ten (10) days after notice of such action, a verified written statement in triplicate setting forth fully the grounds of appeal, and accompanied by a filing fee in the sum of five dollars ($5.00) payable to the city; otherwise the action of the finance director shall be final. 
B.  The council shall set a time and place for the hearing, and notice of such hearing on appeal shall be given at least five days prior to the date of hearing. At such hearing, the applicant or licensee and his or her or its attorney may present and submit evidence. The decision and order of the city council at or after such hearing shall be final and conclusive. 
(Prior code § 4-27)  
5.56.140 - Regulations authorized—Compliance. 
The city council shall make rules and regulations governing the conduct of dances, and such dances shall be conducted strictly in accordance with such rules and regulations, and all the laws of the state. 
(Prior code § 4-28)  
5.56.150 - Hours of dancing. 
The city council establishes that all public dances within the city shall close at the hour of one thirty a.m., and it is unlawful for any person to conduct or assist in conducting any public dance between the hours of one thirty a.m. and six a.m. of any day. 
(Prior code § 4-29)  
Chapter 5.60 - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Prior history: Prior code §§ 19 ½-1—19 ½-63 as amended by Ord. 892 
 
5.60.010 - Intent and purpose. 
A.  The intent and purpose of this chapter is to: 
1.  Regulate sexually oriented businesses to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city; 
2.  Establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent deleterious effects of sexually oriented businesses within the city; and 
3.  Discourage and to minimize the opportunity for criminal conduct. 
B.  The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. 
The provisions of this chapter are not intended to: 
1.  Limit or restrict the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials; 
2.  Restrict orderly access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment; 
3.  Deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment; 
4.  Deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market; and/or 
5.  Condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene or harmful materials to minors. 
(Ord. 937 § 1 (part), 2005)  
5.60.020 - Classification of businesses. 
The following uses and/or activities shall be classified as "sexually oriented businesses": 
A.  Adult arcades; 
B.  Adult bookstores; 
C.  Adult cabarets; 
D.  Adult motels; 
E.  Adult motion picture theaters; 
F.  Adult novelty stores; 
G.  Adult theaters; 
H.  Adult video stores; 
I.  Nude model studios; and 
J.  Massage establishments. 
(Ord. 937 § 1 (part), 2005)  
5.60.030 - Prohibited uses, conduct and activities. 
A.  One of the important purposes of the regulations set forth in this chapter is to discourage and to minimize the opportunity for criminal conduct. As such, nothing in this chapter shall permit or be interpreted to permit any use, conduct, and/or activity which is specifically prohibited under the following California Penal Code sections: 
1.  Receipt of money for placement of person for purposes of cohabitation (Penal Code § 266d); 
2.  Purchase of person for purposes of prostitution or placement of person for immoral purposes (Penal Code § 266e); 
3.  Sale of person for immoral purposes (Penal Code § 266f); 
4.  Pimping (Penal Code § 266h); 
5.  Pandering (Penal Code § 266i); 
6.  Lewd or obscene conduct (Penal Code § 314); 
7.  Houses of ill-fame (Penal Code § 315); 
8.  Disorderly houses which disturb the immediate neighborhood (Penal Code § 316); 
9.  Places of prostitution (Penal Code § 317); and 
10.  Place of prostitution; place of lewdness; place used as bath house permitting conduct capable of transmitting AIDS (Penal Code § 11225). 
B.  Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to permit or permit any use, conduct, and/or activity which violates any federal, state or local law or regulation. 
C.  A "sexual encounter establishment" is not a permitted use. For purposes of these regulations, a "sexual encounter establishment" means any business or commercial establishment that as one of its important business purposes offers for any form of consideration a place where two or more persons may congregate, associate or consort for the purpose of specified sexual activities when one or more of the persons of the establishment is in a state of nudity or where two or more persons may congregate, associate or consort for the purpose of the exposure of specified anatomical areas where one of the patrons of the establishment is in a state of nudity or state of semi-nudity. The definition of sexual encounter establishment shall not include an establishment where a medical practitioner, physiologist, psychiatrist or similar professional person licensed by the state engages in medically approved and recognized sexual therapy. 
(Ord. 937 § 1 (part), 2005)  
5.60.040 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases are defined as follows: 
A.  The term "sexually oriented business" includes any of the following: 
1.  Any business, whether or not identified specifically in this chapter, that is conducted exclusively for the patronage of adults and from which minors are specifically excluded either by law or by the operators of such business, except any business licensed by the State Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control, if such business is strictly limited to the sale of alcoholic beverage and foods; 
2.  Any business, whether or not identified specifically in this chapter, where employees or patrons expose "specified anatomical areas," or engage in "specified sexual activities"; or 
3.  Any business or establishment, whether or not identified specifically in this chapter, that offers its patrons services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, exposing, describing, discussing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
B.  Sexually oriented businesses means and includes, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
1.  "Adult arcade" means an establishment where at least twenty-five (25) percent of the volume of the business involves the maintaining of one or more electronically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture projectors, slide projectors, video or laser disc players, or other image-producing machines, for the viewing of films, motion pictures, video cassettes, video discs, slides or other photographic reproductions which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
2.  "Adult bookstore" and "adult novelty store" mean an establishment that has at least twenty-five (25) percent of the volume of its stock-in-trade and offers for sale or rent for any form of consideration any one or more of the following: 
a.  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, video discs, slides or other visual representations that are characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of "specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activities"; 
b.  Instruments, devices or paraphernalia that are designed for use in connection with "specified sexual activities" or sexually oriented devices; 
c.  Goods that are replicas of, or that stimulate "specified anatomical areas" or goods, with the exception of normal outer and undergarments, that are designed to be placed on "specified anatomical areas" to cause sexual excitement. 
C.  "Adult cabaret" means a nightclub, theatre, bar, restaurant or similar establishment that features live performances (by topless and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, exotic dancers, strippers or similar entertainers) that are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities," or features films, motion pictures, video cassettes, video discs, slides or other photographic reproductions that are characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
D.  "Adult hotel" and "adult motel" mean a motel or similar establishment offering public accommodations for any form of considerations that provide patrons with closed circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, video discs, slides, or other photographic reproductions that are characterized by an emphasis on the depiction of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
E.  "Adult motion picture arcade" means an establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, video discs, slides or similar photographic reproductions are shown, and in that at least twenty-five (25) percent or more of the total presentation time is devoted to the showing of material that is characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
F.  "Sexually oriented devices" means without limitation any artificial or simulated specified anatomical area or other device or paraphernalia that is designed in whole or part for "specified sexual activities." 
G.  "Adult theater" means a theatre, concert hall, auditorium or similar establishment that, for any form of consideration, features twenty-five (25) percent or more live performances that are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities." 
H.  "Adult video store" means a commercial establishment where a significant or substantial portion of the business involves the use, rental, purchase, viewing or perusal of video cassettes, video discs, photographs, films, motion pictures, or similar video reproductions that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
I.  "Bar" means any commercial establishment licensed by the State Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control to serve alcoholic beverages on the premises. 
J.  "Employee" means a person who works or performs in and/or for a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or not the person is paid a salary, wage or other compensation by the operator of the business. 
K.  "Encounter center" or "rap studio" means an establishment, other than a hotel, motel or similar establishment offering public accommodations, that, for any form of consideration, provides a place where two or more persons may congregate, associate or consort in connection with "specified sexual activities" or the exposure of "specified anatomical areas." This definition does not include an establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist, or similar professional person licensed by the state of California engages in sexual therapy. 
L.  "Establishment" means and includes any of the following: 
1.  The opening or commencement of a business as a new business; 
2.  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any of the classifications of sexually oriented businesses defined in Section 5.18.010 of this title; 
3.  The addition of any of the sexually oriented businesses defined in this chapter, to any of the sexually oriented businesses defined in this chapter; 
4.  The relocation of any of the sexually oriented businesses defined by this chapter to any other existing sexually oriented business; or 
5.  The substantial enlargement of a sexually oriented business. 
M.  "Massage establishment" is any room, parlor, place or institution having a fixed place of business where any person, association, firm or corporation administers or permits the administration of massage of the human body for consideration of any kind. For the purposes of this section, the word "massage" means any method of pressure on or friction against, or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding or stimulating the external parts of the body with the hands or other parts of the body, with or without the aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliances, or with or without supplementary aids such as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powder, creams, lotions, ointments or other similar preparations used in this practice. Exceptions. As used in this chapter, the term "massage establishment" does not apply to any of the following: 
1.  Physician, surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath or any nurse working under the supervision of a physician, surgeon, chiropractor or osteopath duly licensed to practice their respective professions in the state of California, or any treatment administered in good faith in the course of the practice of any healing art or professions by any person licensed to practice any such art or profession under the Business and Professions Code of the state of California or of any other law of this state; 
2.  Hospital, medical clinic, nursing home, sanitarium or other major medical or mental facility duly licensed under the laws of the state of California; 
3.  Barbershop or beauty salon where massage is limited to the head, scalp or neck and is administered by barbers or cosmetologists licensed under the laws of the state of California; 
4.  Any school or institution of higher education including a community or junior college, college or university whose course of study is approved by the State Department of Education or superintendent of public instruction where massage is administered or taught by authorized school employees in conjunction with an athletic training program, training in the healing arts or the school courses; 
5.  Any athletic club, health club, country club, gymnasium, reducing salon, beauty salon or similar establishment where massage is offered as an incidental or accessory service to its primary program of sports, exercise, athletic training, weight reduction or beauty care. Any such establishment shall utilize no more than fifteen (15) percent of its total floor area used for the provision of facilities/services to patrons for the provision of massage services. 
N.  "Nude" or "state of nudity" means the display, appearance or showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering or the showing of the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. 
O.  "Nude model studio" means and includes any premises or mobile facility where there is conducted the business or transaction of furnishing, providing or procuring figure models who pose or dance for the purpose of being observed or viewed by any person, or being sketched, painted, drawn, sculpted, photographed, filmed, videotaped or otherwise similarly depicted in the nude before persons who pay a fee or any other thing of value, as consideration, compensation or gratuity, for the right or opportunity to so observe a figure model, or for admission to, permission to, or as a condition of, remaining on the premises. "Nude model studio" does not include any studio or classroom that is operated by any public agency, or any public or private educational institution authorized under California Education Code Section 94300, et seq., to issue and confer a diploma or degree. 
P.  "Operator" means and includes the owner, permittee, custodian, manager or person in charge of any sexually oriented business. 
Q.  "Permitted premises" means any premises that require an adult-oriented business permit. 
R.  "Permittee" means a person in whose name a permit to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a permit. 
S.  "Person" means an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association or other legal entity. 
T.  "Public building regularly frequented by children" means any building owned, leased or held by the United States, the state, the county, the city, any special district, school district, or any other agency or political subdivision of the state or the United States, that building is used as a library, community center, children's center, or any other use having special attraction to children, or that building is often visited by children for social activities unaccompanied by their parents or other adult custodians. 
U.  "Public park" or "recreation area" means public land that has been designated for park or recreational activities including, but not limited to, a park, playground, nature trails, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic field, basketball or tennis courts, open space, wilderness areas, or similar public land within the city that is under the control, operation or management of the city park and recreation authorities. 
V.  "Regularly features" with respect to an adult theater, adult cabaret or adult motion picture arcade, means a regular and substantial course of conduct. The fact that a live performance or film that is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities is exhibited on two or more occasions within a thirty (30)-day period; three or more occasions within a sixty (60)-day period; or four or more occasions within a one hundred eighty (180)-day period, shall to the extent permitted by law be deemed to be a regular and substantial course of conduct. 
W.  "Religious institution" means any church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building that is used primarily for religious worship and related religious activities. 
X.  "Residential district" means an area zoned for single-family homes, duplexes, townhomes, multiple-family residences, mobilehome parks or subdivisions and recreational vehicle parks, as defined in the Coachella zoning ordinance. 
Y.  "School" means any public or private educational facility including, but not limited to, child day care facilities, nursery schools, preschools, kindergartens, elementary schools, secondary schools, intermediate schools, junior high schools, middle schools, high schools, vocational schools; secondary schools, continuation schools, special education schools, junior colleges and universities. School includes the school grounds, but does not include the facilities used primarily for another purpose and only incidentally as a school. 
Z.  "Semi-nude" or "state of semi-nudity" means the display, appearance, or showing of a female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola and/or a state of undress that less than completely and opaquely covers human buttock, anus, male or female genitals, pubic region or a female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola. 
AA.  "Significant or substantial portion" means such a percentage of a business' activities, space allocation, revenues, advertising targeting, stock-in-trade, floor or display space, business receipts, revenues, or other business undertakings as to indicate to a reasonable person that the sexually oriented portion of the business is one of its important activities, though not necessarily its only or even primary activity. 
BB.  "Specified anatomical area" means and includes any of the following: 
1.  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, anus, buttocks or a female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; 
2.  The human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
CC.  "Specified sexual activities" means and includes any of the following: 
1.  The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts; 
2.  Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation or sodomy; or 
3.  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with the fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts, sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation or sodomy. 
DD.  "Transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business" means and includes any of the following: 
1.  The sale, lease or sublease of the business; 
2.  The transfer of securities that constitute a controlling interest in the business; whether by sale, exchange or similar means; and/or 
3.  The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device that transfers ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of a person possessing the ownership or control. 
(Ord. 937 § 1 (part), 2005)  
5.60.050 - Exceptions. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to a clothing-optional motel or hotel. 
B.  For purposes of this chapter, "clothing-optional motel" means a motel, hotel or similar commercial establishment that offers public accommodations for any form of consideration and: 
1.  In the ordinary course of business, permits persons to be nude or semi-nude in and on the common areas of the subject property which are not visible from any public right-of-way; 
2.  Except for closed-circuit television transmissions made available for viewing within a private room exclusively rented and occupied by individual patrons, does not provide or make available closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; 
3.  Does not offer or permit to be offered a room for rent or subrent for a period of time less than twelve (12) hours; 
4.  Does not offer or permit to be offered any single room for rent or subrent more than twice in a twenty-four (24)-hour period; 
5.  Except as specifically defined in this section to mean a "clothing-optional motel," does not engage in, offer, or permit any conduct or activities in and/or on the subject property that are defined in this chapter to constitute a sexually oriented business. 
(Ord. 937 § 1 (part), 2005)  
5.60.060 - Compliance of existing uses. 
A.  An operator of an existing sexually oriented business shall be permitted a reasonable period of time to install the lighting and surveillance equipment made necessary by the implementation of the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  The reasonable period of time shall normally be thirty (30) days from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter to amend the sketch/drawing of the configuration of the premises on file with the city in such a manner as to include the required exterior lighting and surveillance capacity; with up to ninety (90) days thereafter to install the proposed lighting and surveillance equipment. 
C.  In the event the operator reasonably requires a longer period of time to install the surveillance equipment and lighting, the city or its designee may grant a longer period of time in consultation with city's building officials. 
(Ord. 937 § 1 (part), 2005)  
5.60.070 - Annual fee. 
A.  The annual fee for a sexually oriented business permit shall be established by resolution of the city council, to partially offset the costs of monitoring and policing the operations of the business entities involved. 
B.  The city council determines that the actual cost of monitoring and policing each such business is at least that amount. 
C.  The fee shall be due yearly on the anniversary of the issuance of the permit and shall be deemed delinquent thirty (30) days thereafter. 
(Ord. 937 § 1 (part), 2005)  
5.60.080 - California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control. 
To the extent that any provision of this chapter is inconsistent with any regulation or rule of the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control applicable to a sexually oriented business, the regulation or rule of the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control shall control. 
(Ord. 937 § 1 (part), 2005)  
5.60.090 - Permit required. 
No person shall operate, maintain, manage or conduct a sexually oriented business without a valid sexually oriented business permit issued by the city for the particular type of sexually oriented business. The requirement for a sexually oriented business permit shall be in addition to any other local, state or federal permit or licensing requirements. 
(Ord. 937 § 1 (part), 2005)  
5.60.100 - Permit application. 
A.  The city's designee is responsible for granting, denying, revoking, renewing, suspending, and canceling sexually oriented business permits for proposed or existing sexually oriented businesses. 
B.  The city's designee shall be the city manager, or any other officer or employee designated in writing by the city manager to deal with the provisions of this chapter. 
C.  An application for a permit must be made on a form provided by the city. 
D.  The completed application shall contain the following information and shall be accompanied by the following documents: 
1.  If the applicant is: 
a.  An individual, the individual shall state his or her legal name, any aliases, and date of birth, 
b.  A partnership, the partnership shall state its complete name, and the names of all general partners, 
c.  A corporation, the corporation shall state its complete name, the names and capacity of all officers, directors and the name and address of the registered corporate agent for service of process; 
2.  If the applicant intends to operate the sexually oriented business under a name other than that on the application, he or she must state the sexually oriented business's fictitious name; 
3.  A statement as to whether the applicant or any other individuals identified in the application, excluding any agent for service of process who is not also listed as a director or officer, has had a previous permit under this chapter, or any other similar sexually oriented business ordinance of the city, denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the sexually oriented business for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the denial, suspension or revocation; 
4.  A statement as to whether the applicant or any other individuals identified in the application, excluding any agent for service of process who is not also listed as a director or officer, has been a sole proprietor, general partner, officer, or director of a sexually oriented business that has had a previous permit under this chapter, or any other similar sexually oriented business ordinance of the city denied, suspended or revoked by the city, including the name and location of the sexually oriented business for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked, as well as the date of denial, suspension or revocation; 
5.  The name(s) of the responsible person(s) who will be on the premises to act as manager during the times that the business is open, or a statement that the applicant has not yet selected the manager(s); 
6.  The classification, as defined in this chapter, of sexually oriented business for which the applicant is seeking a permit; 
7.  The location of the proposed sexually oriented business, including a legal description of the property, street address, and telephone number(s) currently in service; 
8.  The applicant's address; 
9.  A recent photograph of the applicant; 
10.  The applicant's driver's license or permit number or identification number and social security number and/or the applicant's state or federally issued tax identification number; 
11.  A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but it must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches; 
12.  Each individual listed on the application pursuant to Section 5.60.060 of this chapter, excluding any agent for service of process who is not also listed as a director or officer, shall sign the application. 
(Ord. 937 § 1 (part), 2005)  
5.60.110 - Filing of completed application. 
Upon receipt of an application properly filed with the city and upon payment of the nonrefundable application fee, the city or its designee shall immediately stamp the application as received on that date. 
(Ord. 937 § 1 (part), 2005)  
5.60.120 - Processing of completed application. 
The city, or its designee, shall grant or deny a completed application for a permit within twenty-five (25) business days from the date receipt by the city of a complete application. Upon the expiration of the twenty-fifth day, unless the city or its designee has given written notice to the applicant, the application shall be deemed granted and the operator shall be excused from the requirement that a duly issued permit be posted at the premises until such time as such permit is issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 937 § 1 (part), 2005)  
5.60.130 - Issuance of permit. 
A.  Within twenty-five (25) business days of receipt of a completed application, the city shall issue a sexually oriented business permit upon verification of the following facts: 
1.  The location of the business complies with all applicable zoning laws; 
2.  The configuration of the premises, as set out in the sketch or plan submitted with the application, does not reveal any violation of applicable health, zoning, fire and safety laws of the state of California and ordinances of the city of Coachella applicable thereto, including those set out in this chapter; 
3.  The applicants or individuals identified therein, excluding any agent for service of process who is not also listed as a director or officer, are not otherwise disqualified from lawful operation of a sexually oriented business pursuant to any state, county, federal or local law, including those set out in this chapter; 
4.  The applicant is eighteen (18) years of age or older; 
5.  The applicant has provided all information required by this chapter, none of which is known to the city to be incorrect; and 
6.  The application or permit fees required by this chapter have been paid. 
(Ord. 937 § 1 (part), 2005)  
5.60.140 - Notification of permit denial—Subsequent application. 
If the city or its designee denies the application, the applicant shall immediately be notified of the denial and the reason(s) for the denial. Any subsequent application which has been supplemented to cure the grounds for prior denial shall be treated as a new application. 
(Ord. 937 § 1 (part), 2005)  
5.60.150 - Appeal. 
A.  Expedited Administrative Review. 
1.  A request for an appeal of the issuance or denial of a sexually oriented business permit application pertaining to expressive conduct that is protected by the state Constitution or the First Amendment to the United States Constitution may be made to the city council upon the submission of a written request to the city clerk. 
2.  The appeal shall be heard and decided by the city council in a prompt and expedited way at the next regularly scheduled city council meeting and in no event later than fifteen (15) days from the date the request for appeal was filed with the city clerk. In the event that the next regularly scheduled city council meeting will not be conducted within fifteen (15) days from the date the request for appeal was filed with the city clerk, the city council shall schedule a special city council meeting to hear and decide the administrative appeal. 
3.  Determinations by the city council after review of the issuance or denial of a sexually oriented business permit application are deemed to constitute final determinations by the city for purposes of appeal to the Superior Court of California pursuant to the Writ of Mandate procedures set forth in California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1084 et seq. 
B.  Expedited Judicial Review. 
1.  In accordance with California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8, subsection c, determinations to issue and deny any sexually oriented business permit application pertaining to expressive conduct that is protected by the state Constitution or the First Amendment to the United States Constitution is determined to be eligible for expedited judicial review pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8. 
(Ord. 937 § 1 (part), 2005)  
5.60.160 - Continuing permit obligations. 
A.  The fact that a person possesses other types of state or city permits and/or licenses does not exempt him or her from the requirement of obtaining a sexually oriented business permit. 
B.  By applying for a permit under this chapter, the applicant shall be deemed to have consented to the provisions of this chapter and to the exercise by the city or its designee, the police chief's office, and all other city departments charged with enforcing the laws, ordinances and codes applicable in the city, of their respective responsibilities under this chapter. 
C.  An operator shall promptly update, correct or supplement the information contained in the application for a sexually oriented business permit on file with the city as necessary to keep the information contained therein accurate. 
D.  Every operator shall permit representatives of the city and/or police, fire or health departments to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of insuring compliance with the law at any time it is occupied or open for business. 
(Ord. 937 § 1 (part), 2005)  
5.60.170 - Application for a sexually oriented performer permit. 
A.  All performers, as defined in this chapter, must obtain a valid sexually oriented performer permit from the city. Failure to do so shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
B.  To obtain a sexually oriented performer permit, the individual shall make application to the city manager or his or her designee on a form provided by the city manager or his or her designee. Prior to submitting such application, a nonrefundable fee, established by resolution of the city council, shall be paid to the city to defray, in part, the cost of the investigation and report required by this chapter. The report, or a copy thereof, shall be supplied to the city manager or his or her designee at the time such application is submitted. 
C.  The application for a permit does not authorize the engaging in a performance of live performers depicting specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexually oriented activities. 
D.  A sexually oriented performer engaged in live entertainment shall provide proof of a valid sexually oriented performer permit upon demand of a police officer or code enforcement officer. Failure to provide proof shall be a violation of this chapter. 
E.  The completed application shall contain the following information and be accompanied by the following documents: 
1.  The applicant's legal name and any other names (including "stage names" and aliases) used by the applicant; 
2.  The applicant's height, weight, hair and eye color and date and place of birth; 
3.  Present residence address and telephone number; 
4.  All felony convictions of the applicant within the last five years; all misdemeanor convictions within the last two years of the applicant of any of the offenses set forth in California Penal Code Sections 315, 316, 266a, 266b, 266c, 266e, 266g, 266h, 266i, 647(a), 647(b), and 647(d) of the California Penal Code as those sections now appear or may hereafter be amended or renumbered, all offenses requiring registration under California Penal Code Section 290; and the equivalent of the aforesaid offenses outside of the state of California; 
5.  The social security number and state driver's license or identification number of the applicant; 
6.  Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age; 
7.  The applicant's fingerprints on a form provided by the police department, and a color photograph clearly showing the applicant's face. The applicant shall pay any required fees for the photographs and fingerprints; 
8.  The business address and telephone number where the performance will take place; and 
9.  Any other similar permits obtained in other jurisdictions, including year of issuance and name of jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 937 § 1 (part), 2005)  
5.60.180 - Continuing permit obligations. 
A.  The fact that a person possesses other types of state or city permits and/or licenses does not exempt him or her from the requirement of obtaining a sexually oriented performer permit. 
B.  By applying for a permit under this chapter, the applicant shall be deemed to have consented to the provisions of this chapter and to the exercise by the city, the city manager or his or her designee, and all other city departments charged with enforcing the laws, ordinances, and codes applicable in the city, of their respective responsibilities under this chapter. 
C.  A sexually oriented performer shall promptly update, correct, or supplement the information contained in the application for a sexually oriented performer permit on file with the city as necessary to keep the information contained therein accurate. 
(Ord. 937 § 1 (part), 2005)  
5.60.190 - Filing of the completed application. 
Upon receipt of an application properly filed with the city and upon payment of the nonrefundable application fee, the city manager or his or her designee shall immediately stamp the application as received on that date. 
(Ord. 937 § 1 (part), 2005)  
5.60.200 - Processing the completed application. 
The city manager or his or her designee shall grant or deny a completed application for a sexually oriented performer permit within twenty-five (25) business days from the date of receipt by the city of a complete application. Upon the expiration of the thirtieth day, unless the city manager or his or her designee has given written notice to the applicant, the application shall be deemed granted and the operator shall be excused from the requirement that a duly issued permit be posted at the premises until such time as such permit is issued pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. 937 § 1 (part), 2005)  
5.60.210 - Issuance of sexually oriented performer permits. 
Within twenty-five (25) business days of receipt of a completed application, as set forth in Section 5.05.065 of this title and payment of the applicable fees, the city manager or his or her designee shall issue a sexually oriented performer permit. However, issuance of the permit does not preclude revocation of the permit pursuant to Section 5.05.130 of this title (for sexually oriented performers). 
(Ord. 937 § 1 (part), 2005)  
5.60.220 - Notification of permit denial—Subsequent application. 
If the city manager or his or her designee denies the application, he or she shall notify the applicant of the denial and state the reason(s) for the denial. Any subsequent application that has been supplemented to cure the grounds for prior denial shall be treated as a new application. 
(Ord. 937 § 1 (part), 2005)  
5.60.230 - Annual permit fee. 
The annual fee for a sexually oriented performer permit shall be determined by resolution of the city council, to partially offset the costs of monitoring and policing the operations of the performers involved. 
(Ord. 937 § 1 (part), 2005)  
5.60.240 - Applicant to appear. 
The applicant for a sexually oriented business permit or a sexually oriented performer's permit shall personally appear during normal business hours at the finance department of the city of Coachella and shall pay a nonrefundable application fee, established by resolution of the city council, at the time that he or she presents the application containing the aforementioned and described information. 
(Ord. 937 § 1 (part), 2005)  
5.60.250 - Permit renewal. 
A.  Each sexually oriented business permit and sexually oriented performer permit shall expire one year from the date of issuance. The applicant shall make application for renewal to the city manager or his or her designee on a form provided by the city manager or his or her designee accompanied by the renewal fee and a copy of the permit to be renewed. The request for renewal shall be made at least thirty (30) days before the expiration date of the permit. When made less than thirty (30) days before the expiration date, the expiration of the permit will not be stayed. 
B.  If the application conforms to the previously approved application and the sexually oriented business has not changed, the permit shall be renewed by the city manager or his or her designee for another year. Notice of such renewal shall be given, in writing, to the permittee within ten (10) business days following the date of receipt of the completed renewal application. Any change or alteration in the location, nature or operation of the sexually oriented business will require a new application to be processed in the same manner as the original application. The renewal fee shall be established by resolution of the city council. Applications for renewal shall be acted on as provided in this chapter for action upon applications for permits. 
C.  The applicant for renewal of a sexually oriented business permit or a sexually oriented performer's permit shall personally appear during normal business hours at the finance department of the city of Coachella and produce proof that a nonrefundable application fee, established by resolution of the city council, has been paid and shall present the application containing the aforementioned and described information. 
(Ord. 937 § 1 (part), 2005)  
5.60.260 - Permits issued under this chapter are nontransferable. 
A.  No sexually oriented business permit may be sold, transferred or assigned by a permittee or by operation of law. Any such sale, transfer or assignment, or attempted sale, transfer or assignment shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such permit and such permit shall thereafter be null and void; provided and excepting, however, that if the permittee is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die, one or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or partners without effecting a surrender or termination of such permit, and in such case, the permit, upon notification to the city manager or his or her designee, shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner. A sexually oriented business permit issued to a corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when there is a change in any officer or director. 
1.  Any change in the nature or composition of the sexually oriented business from one type of sexually oriented business use to another type of sexually oriented business use shall also render the permit null and void. 
B.  No sexually oriented business performer permit may be sold, transferred or assigned to any other person or persons. 
(Ord. 937 § 1 (part), 2005)  
5.60.270 - Effect of attempted transfer of a permit. 
A.  Any attempt to transfer a sexually oriented business permit or an adult performer permit either directly or indirectly in violation of this chapter is declared void, and the permit shall be considered abandoned and shall automatically revert to the city. 
B.  Any attempt to transfer a sexually oriented business permit or an adult performer permit either directly or indirectly in violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 937 § 1 (part), 2005)  
5.60.280 - Sexually oriented businesses—Change of location or name. 
A.  No sexually oriented business shall move from the location specified on its permit until a change of location fee, established by resolution of the city council, has been deposited with the city, and approval has been obtained from the city manager or his or her designee. Such approval shall not be given unless all requirements and regulations, as provided herein for applications for permits, have been met. 
B.  No permittee shall operate, conduct, manage, engage in, or carry on a sexually oriented business under any name other than his or her name and the name of the business as specified on the applicable permit. 
C.  Any application for an extension or expansion of a building or other place of business where a sexually oriented business is located shall require inspection and shall comply with the provisions and regulations of this chapter. 
(Ord. 937 § 1 (part), 2005)  
5.60.290 - Sexually oriented performers—Change of location or name. 
No permittee shall perform under any name other than the name specified on his or her permit or in any location other than the location specified on his or her permit. 
(Ord. 937 § 1 (part), 2005)  
5.60.300 - Suspension or revocation of a sexually oriented business permit. 
A.  After an investigation, notice and hearing, the city manager or his or her designee may suspend or revoke an existing permit, or impose such conditions upon the retention of the permit as shall be found to be necessary to assure the preservation of the public health and safety, if the evidence presented establishes that at least one of the following conditions exists: 
1.  The building, structure, equipment, location or manner of operation of such business does not comply with the requirements of or fails to meet the standards of the health, zoning, fire, and safety laws of the state and ordinances of the city applicable to such business operations; 
2.  The permittee, his or her employee, agent, partner, director, officer, stockholder or manager has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for a sexually oriented business permit, or in any report or record required to be filed with the city pertaining to the permit for the sexually oriented business, or has violated any rule or regulation duly adopted by the city relating to sexually oriented businesses, including those set out in this chapter; 
3.  A court of competent jurisdiction has found that the permittee, his or her employee, agent, partner, director, manager or stockholder has knowingly engaged in or allowed or permitted to be committed any unlawful act that is classified by the state as an offense involving sexual crimes against children, sexual abuse, rape, distribution of obscene material or material harmful to minors, prostitution or pandering, including, but not necessarily limited to, any crime requiring registration under California Penal Code Section 290, or any violation of Penal Code Sections 243.4, 261, 261.5, 264.1, 266, 266a through 266k, inclusive, 267, 286, 286.5, 288, 288a, 311 through 311.10 inclusive, 314, 315, 316 or 647, on or in the subject premises; 
4.  A court of competent jurisdiction has found that the permittee, his or her employee, agent, partner, director, manager or stockholder has knowingly engaged in or allowed or permitted to be committed any unlawful act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or distribution of obscenity, on or in the subject premises; 
5.  A court of competent jurisdiction has found that the permittee, his or her employee, agent, partner, director, manager or stockholder has knowingly engaged in or permitted or allowed to occur unlawful solicitations for sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation or distribution of obscenity, on or in the subject premises; 
6.  A court of competent jurisdiction has found that the permittee, his or her employee, agent, partner, director, manager or stockholder has knowingly engaged in or permitted or allowed, in or on the premises, the unlawful possession, use or sale of a controlled substance, as defined by the California Uniform Controlled Substances Act, California Health and Safety Code Section 11000 et seq., as amended from time to time; 
7.  The permittee, his or her employee, agent, partner, director, officer, manager or stockholder has knowingly allowed prostitution, or solicitation for prostitution, knowingly allowed or permitted any act of sexual intercourse; sodomy, oral copulation or masturbation to be committed or allowed in or upon the premises where such sexually oriented business is to be located, or to be used as a place in which solicitations for sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation or masturbation openly occur; 
8.  The permittee, his or her employee, agent, partner, director, officer, manager or stockholder has within two years of the date of the application knowingly allowed or permitted any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, or masturbation to be committed or allowed in or upon the premises where such sexually oriented business is to be located, or to be used as a place in which solicitations for sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation or masturbation openly occur; 
9.  On two or more occasions within a twelve (12)-month period, a person has been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor for an offense set forth in this section as a result of such person's activity on the premises or property on which the sexually oriented business is located, and the person was an employee, contractor or agent of the sexually oriented business at the time the offenses were committed; 
10.  More than thirty (30) days have elapsed since a tax, fee, fine, any form of regulatory assessment or judgment for monetary damages, irrespective of any other form of relief set out in the judgment, that is to be paid to the city has been imposed against a sexually oriented business, and such sum remains owing; 
11.  The permittee has had a sexually oriented business permit or other similar license or permit denied or revoked for cause by this city or any other jurisdiction located in or out of this state prior to the date of application; 
12.  The sexually oriented business has been operated in violation of any of the requirements of the Coachella Municipal Code; 
13.  The violation is of a continuous nature (i.e., cannot be remedied by immediate cessation of the activity such as a building or structural violation), the business continues to be operated in violation of such provisions for more than ten (10) days following the date written notice of such violation is mailed or delivered to the owner; or 
14.  The violation is of a noncontinuous nature, two or more violations of the same provision or four or more violations of any other of the provisions of the Coachella Municipal Code occur (regardless of whether notice of each individual violation is given to owner) within any twelve (12)-month period. 
B.  In the event that a permit for a sexually oriented business is revoked pursuant to any applicable law, the premises shall be closed and shall not be used as a sexually oriented business of any classification for a period of one year commencing on the date of revocation. Further, the permittees and operators of the sexually oriented business so closed shall be disqualified from operating any other sexually oriented business established thereafter within the city for a period of one year commencing on the date that the permit was revoked. 
C.  In the event that a permit for a sexually oriented business is suspended pursuant to any applicable law, the permittees and operators of the subject sexually oriented business shall be disqualified from operating the subject sexually oriented business as well as any other sexually oriented business established thereafter within the city during the entire period of such suspension. 
D.  Upon determining that grounds for suspension or revocation of the permit exist, the city manager or his or her designee shall furnish written notice of the determination to the permittee. Such notice shall summarize the principal reasons for the determination. 
E.  Upon receipt of written notice of the determination, if the permittee files within thirty (30) days a petition for writ of mandate in state court to review the determination, then the city shall not enforce the suspension or revocation unless the superior court has denied the writ or the city has obtained injunctive relief. The notice will be deemed received if the city manager or his or her designee has placed the notice in first class mail and the notice is not returned within ten (10) days and the city has made a good faith attempt at personal service. 
F.  If the permittee fails to file a writ of mandate within thirty (30) days of the date of mailing the notice of suspension or revocation, the city shall enforce the suspension or revocation. 
(Ord. 937 § 1 (part), 2005)  
5.60.310 - Inspection. 
Every operator shall permit representatives of the city and/or police, fire or health departments to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of insuring compliance with the law at any time it is occupied or open for business. 
(Ord. 937 § 1 (part), 2005)  
5.60.320 - Administrative review of the issuance and denial of permits, licenses or other entitlements. 
Determinations by the city manager or his or her designee regarding the issuance or denial of applications for adult-business permits or adult-business performer permits or of revocation of the permits, are deemed to constitute final determinations by the city for purposes of appeal to the superior court of California pursuant to the writ of mandate procedures set forth in California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1084 et seq. 
(Ord. 937 § 1 (part), 2005)  
5.60.330 - Conditions on locating sexually oriented businesses. 
A.  Sexually oriented businesses shall only be permitted within the SC, service commercial zone within the city. 
B.  Sexually oriented businesses shall not be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of: 
1.  Any residential or open space zone; 
2.  Any church, chapel or similar place of worship or similar facility; 
3.  Any school, public or private, park or playground; 
4.  Any recreational facility, such as a game arcade, bowling alley, skating rink, or other area where minors regularly travel or congregate whether inside or outside of the Coachella city limits; or 
5.  Any public building frequented by children, as that phrase is defined in this chapter. 
C.  Sexually oriented businesses shall not be located within two thousand (2,000) feet of any other sexually oriented business, whether it is located within or outside of the city limits. 
D.  For the purpose of this section, all distances shall be measured in a straight line without regards to intervening structures, from the nearest property line for which the sexually oriented business will be located to the nearest property line of any lot zoned for residential or open space purposes, or upon which any sexually oriented business, church, park, hospital or educational institution is located. 
(Ord. 937 § 1 (part), 2005)  
5.60.340 - Visibility of interior—Exceptions. 
A.  The entire interior of an adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty store, adult cabaret, adult video arcade, nude model studio, and the entire concession area of an adult motion picture theater or adult theater, the entire common areas of an adult motel, and the entire exhibition area of an adult motion picture theater or adult theater, shall be visible upon entrance to such areas. 
B.  Visibility from the entrance shall not be obstructed by any curtain, door, wall, merchandise rack, or any other thing. 
C.  No partially or fully enclosed booths or partially or fully concealed booths shall be maintained. 
D.  No patrons shall be permitted access to any area of the premises not visible from the entrance. 
E.  This section shall not apply to the following: 
1.  Those areas of a sexually oriented business to which only employees are permitted access and patrons are excluded and which cannot be viewed from any area accessible to patrons; 
2.  A restroom, provided, however, that no restroom shall contain any merchandise, materials, product, or service referenced in Section 5.60.040 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 937 § 1 (part), 2005)  
5.60.350 - Lighting. 
The entire premises of every adult arcade, adult bookstore, nude model studio, and nonconforming sexual encounter establishment shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than two foot-candles as measured at the floor level. 
(Ord. 937 § 1 (part), 2005)  
5.60.360 - Private viewing booths or rooms. 
A.  No viewing room or booth of an adult arcade or adult video arcade may be occupied by more than one person at any time. 
B.  The walls or partitions between viewing rooms or booths shall be maintained in good repair at all times, with no holes between any two such rooms such as would allow viewing from one booth into another or such as to allow physical contact of any kind between the occupants of any two such booths or rooms. 
C.  The floors, seats, walls and other interior portions of all viewing rooms or booths shall be maintained clean and free from waste and bodily secretions. 
(Ord. 937 § 1 (part), 2005)  
5.60.370 - Posting of permit. 
A valid sexually oriented business permit duly issued pursuant to this chapter shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it can be easily read at all times. 
(Ord. 937 § 1 (part), 2005)  
5.60.380 - Manager on duty. 
A.  There shall be a responsible person on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open. 
B.  At all times that any patron is present inside the premises, at least one manager shall be situated at a location within the premises so as to allow him or her an unobstructed view of the entire area accessible to patrons. Within those sexually oriented businesses lawfully configured to include more than one open room accessible to patrons, such as an adult theater with both a concession area and an exhibition area, or various common areas of an adult motel, sufficient additional managers shall be present as necessary to allow management personnel to maintain an unobstructed view of the entirety at all times of all areas accessible to patrons. 
C.  Every permittee shall ensure that all employees are familiar with the provisions of this chapter as amended from time to time and with all other regulations adopted by the city related to sexually oriented businesses. 
(Ord. 937 § 1 (part), 2005)  
5.60.390 - Modifications to existing businesses. 
A.  An operator of a sexually oriented business shall be permitted a reasonable period of time to make modifications to the business premises if such modifications are made necessary by the implementation of the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  The reasonable period of time shall normally be thirty (30) days from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter to file the appropriate plans and designs with the city, and up to ninety (90) days thereafter for completion of the modifications. 
C.  Should modifications be so extensive as to reasonably require a longer period of time, the city or its designee may grant a longer period of time for completion of such modifications, in consultation with the city's building officials. 
(Ord. 937 § 1 (part), 2005)  
5.60.400 - Prohibited contact. 
A.  When in a state of nudity or semi-nudity, no employee shall be present in any portion of the premises accessible to (a) patron(s). For purposes of this chapter, "patron" means any individual who is not an employee. 
B.  An employee may perform live entertainment in a state of nudity or semi-nudity on a stage raised at least eighteen (18) inches above the immediate floor level and removed at least six feet from the nearest portion of the premises accessible to the patron(s). 
C.  No patron shall be permitted within six feet of any stage utilized for such entertainment. 
D.  A separate dressing room facility, to which no patron shall be permitted access, shall be provided for the exclusive use of the employee(s) performing such entertainment. 
E.  Access between the dressing room facility and the stage shall be provided for the exclusive use of the employees performing such entertainment and shall be separated from the nearest portion of the premises accessible to the patron(s) by at least six feet. 
(Ord. 937 § 1 (part), 2005)  
5.60.410 - Direct tipping prohibited. 
There shall be no physical contact between any employee in a state of nudity or semi-nudity and a patron. No patron shall directly give any gratuity to any employee while the employee is in a state of nudity or semi-nudity. No employee, when in a state of nudity or semi-nudity, shall solicit or accept any gratuity from any patron. For purposes of this chapter, "gratuity" means anything of value or potential value, including but not limited to money or token(s). For purposes of this chapter, to "directly give" means to transfer from a patron to the person, or any extension from the person, of a nude or semi-nude employee. Nothing in this chapter is intended to prohibit the placing by the patron of a gratuity into or onto any item placed or located at least six feet from the nude or semi-nude employee(s). 
(Ord. 937 § 1 (part), 2005)  
5.60.420 - Exterior security. 
A.  All off-street parking provided for, and entrances to, a sexually oriented business shall be illuminated from dusk to closing hours of operation with a lighting system which provides an average maintained horizontal illumination of one-foot-candle of light on the parking surface and walkways. 
B.  The required provision for exterior lighting shall be depicted in the sketch/diagram of the configuration of the premises on file with the city pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
C.  The operator shall provide a security system that visually records and monitors all off-street parking areas provided for, and entrances to, the sexually oriented business during all times that the business is open or occupied for business. The surveillance equipment utilized shall provide continuous recording for at least a twenty-four (24)-hour period, with all recording maintained for a minimum of seventy-two (72) hours. 
D.  Immediately upon request, the surveillance recording for all or any portion of the previous seventy-two (72)-hour period shall be made available to any representative of the Coachella Law Enforcement Agency. Such recordings shall be utilized only for purposes of investigating an alleged violation of a local, state or federal law, or to the enforcement thereof. 
E.  The exterior surveillance capacity shall be depicted in the sketch/diagram of the configuration of the premises on file with the city pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
F.  Signs shall be posted in the parking area, near the entrance to the premises, and at a conspicuous location inside the premises in such a manner as to notify the public that the exterior of the premises is subject to recorded surveillance in cooperation with the Coachella Law Enforcement Agency. 
(Ord. 937 § 1 (part), 2005)  
5.60.430 - Minors prohibited. 
The entrance to any sexually oriented business shall be designed in a manner that obscures the view of the interior of the premises from minors outside the premises so as to prohibit minors from viewing or seeing any material, conduct or activities which depict, describe or display specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(Ord. 937 § 1 (part), 2005)  
5.60.440 - Display regulations. 
No display or exhibit depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas shall be placed in, on or at the site of the subject premises in such a manner as to be visible from the exterior of the premises. 
(Ord. 937 § 1 (part), 2005)  
5.60.450 - Exemptions and defenses. 
A.  It is a defense to prosecution for any violation of this chapter that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated: 
1.  By a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; 
2.  By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or 
3.  In a structure: 
a.  Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing, 
b.  Where, in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll at least three days in advance of the class, and 
c.  Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one time. 
B.  It is a defense to prosecution for a violation of this chapter that an employee of a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or not it is permitted under the employee's bona fide use of a restroom, or during the employee's bona fide use of a restroom, or during the employee's bona fide use of a dressing room which is accessible only to employees. 
(Ord. 937 § 1 (part), 2005)  
5.60.460 - Public nuisance. 
A violation of Sections 5.60.060, 5.60.090, 5.60.160, 5.60.180, 5.60.250, 5.60.260, 5.60.310, 5.60.350, 5.60.360, 5.60.370, 5.60.380, 5.60.390, 5.60.400, 5.60.410, 5.60.420, 5.60.430 and 5.60.440 of this chapter by any person responsible for committing, causing or maintaining such violation shall constitute a public nuisance which shall be subject to the nuisance abatement provisions set forth in Title 3 of the Coachella Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 937 § 1 (part), 2005)  
5.60.470 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1098, § 33, adopted Dec. 14, 2016, repealed former § 5.60.470 in its entirety which pertained to infraction violations and derived from Ord. No. 937, § 1, adopted in 2005.  
5.60.480 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1098, § 34, adopted Dec. 14, 2016, repealed former § 5.60.480 in its entirety which pertained to administrative citations and derived from Ord. No. 937, § 1, adopted in 2005.  
5.60.490 - Misdemeanor violation. 
Any violation of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 937 § 1 (part), 2005) 
(Ord. No. 1098, § 35, 12-14-16)  
5.60.500 - Additional remedies. 
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent or restrict the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation or noncompliance. Such other lawful actions shall include, but shall not be limited to, a civil nuisance abatement or equitable action for injunctive relief or an action at law for damages in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 937 § 1 (part), 2005)  
5.60.510 - Grounds for permit suspension and/or revocation. 
A.  After an investigation, notice and hearing, the city manager or his or her designee shall suspend or revoke an existing permit, or impose such conditions upon the retention of the permit as shall be found to be necessary to ensure the preservation of the public health and safety, if the evidence presented established that one of the following conditions exists: 
1.  The building, structure, equipment, location or manner of operation of such business does not comply with the requirements of or fails to meet the standards of the health, zoning, fire and safety laws of the state of California and ordinances of the city of Coachella applicable to such business operations. 
2.  The permittee, his or her employee, agent, partner, director, officer, stockholder or manager has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statements of material fact in the application for sexually oriented business permit, or in any report or record required to be filed with the city pertaining to the permit for the sexually oriented business, or has violated any rule or regulation duly adopted by the city relating to sexually oriented businesses, including those set out in this chapter. 
3.  A court of competent jurisdiction has found that the permittee, his or her employee, agent, partner, director, manager, or stockholder has knowingly engaged in or allowed or permitted to be committed any unlawful act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or distribution of obscenity, on or in the subject premises. 
4.  A court of competent jurisdiction has found that the permittee, his or her employee, agent, partner, director, manager, or stockholder has knowingly engaged in or permitted or allowed to occur unlawful solicitations for sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation or distribution of obscenity, on or in the subject premises. 
5.  A court of competent jurisdiction has found that the permittee, his or her employee, agent, partner, director, manager, or stockholder has knowingly engaged in or permitted or allowed, in or on the premises, the unlawful possession, use or sale of a controlled substance, as defined by the California Uniform Controlled Substances Act, California Health and Safety Code Section 11000 et seq., as amended from time to time. 
6.  More than thirty (30) days have elapsed since a tax, fee, fine, any form of regulatory assessment or judgment for monetary damages, irrespective of any other form of relief set out in the judgment, which is to be paid to the city has been imposed against a sexually oriented business, and such sum remains owing. 
B.  In the event that a permit for a sexually oriented business is revoked pursuant to any applicable law, the premises shall be closed and shall not be used as a sexually oriented business of any classification for a period of one year commencing on the date of revocation. Further, the operators of the sexually oriented business so closed shall be disqualified from operating any other sexually oriented business established thereafter within the city for a period of one year commencing on the date that the permit was revoked. 
C.  In the event that a permit for a sexually oriented business is suspended pursuant to any applicable law, the operators of the subject sexually oriented business shall be disqualified from operating the subject sexually oriented business as well as any other sexually oriented business established thereafter within the city during the entire period of such suspension. 
(Ord. 937 § 1 (part), 2005)  
5.60.520 - Appeal. 
A.  Expedited Administrative Review. 
1.  A request for an appeal of the suspension or revocation of a sexually oriented business permit application pertaining to expressive conduct that is protected by the state Constitution or the First Amendment to the United States Constitution may be made to the city council upon the submission of a written request to the city clerk. 
2.  The appeal shall be heard and decided by the city council in a prompt and expedited way at the next regularly scheduled city council meeting and in no event later than fifteen (15) days from the date the request for appeal was filed with the city clerk. In the event that the next regularly scheduled city council meeting will not be conducted within fifteen (15) days from the date the request for appeal was filed with the city clerk, the city council shall schedule a special city council meeting to hear and decide the administrative appeal. 
3.  Determinations by the city council after review of the suspension or revocation of a sexually oriented business permit application are deemed to constitute final determinations by the city for purposes of appeal to the Superior Court of California pursuant to the Writ of Mandate procedures set forth in California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1084 et seq. 
B.  Expedited Judicial Review. 
1.  In accordance with California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8, subsection c, determinations to issue and deny any sexually oriented business permit application pertaining to expressive conduct that is protected by the state Constitution or the First Amendment to the United States Constitution is determined to be eligible for expedited judicial review pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8. 
(Ord. 937 § 1 (part), 2005)  
5.60.530 - Immunity from prosecution. 
The city and its designee, the chief of police's office and all other departments and agencies, and all other city officer, agents and employees, charged with enforcement of state and local laws and codes shall be immune from prosecution, civil or criminal for reasonable, good-faith trespass upon a sexually oriented business while acting within the scope of authority conferred by this chapter. 
(Ord. 937 § 1 (part), 2005)  
Chapter 5.64 - LICENSURE OF TOBACCO RETAILERS 
 
5.64.010 - Purpose and intent. 
The city of Coachella has a substantial interest in promoting compliance with federal, state, and local laws intended to regulate tobacco sales and use; in discouraging the illegal purchase of tobacco products by minors; in promoting compliance with laws prohibiting sales of cigarettes and tobacco products to minors; and finally, and most importantly, in protecting children from being lured into illegal activity through the misconduct of adults. It is the intent of this chapter to encourage responsible tobacco retailing and to discourage violations of tobacco-related laws, especially those that prohibit or discourage the sale or distribution of tobacco products to minors, but not to expand or reduce the degree to which the acts regulated by federal or state law are criminally proscribed or to alter the penalty provided therefore. 
(Ord. 980 § 1 (part), 2007)  
5.64.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the following meanings: 
"Arm's length transaction" means a sale in good faith and for valuable consideration that reflects the fair market value in the open market between two informed and willing parties, neither under any compulsion to participate in the transaction. A sale between relatives, related companies or partners, or a sale for the primary purpose of avoiding the effect of the violations of this chapter is presumed not to be arm's length transaction. 
"City" means city of Coachella. 
"City manager" means the city manager of the city of Coachella or his or her designee. 
"Person" means any natural person, partnership, cooperative association, corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee, or any other legal entity. 
"Proprietor" means a person with an ownership or managerial interest in a business. An ownership interest shall be deemed to exist when a person has a ten (10) percent or greater interest in the stock, assets, or income of a business other than the sole interest of security for debt. A managerial interest shall be deemed to exist when a person can or does have, or can or does share, ultimate control over the day-to-day operations of a business. 
"Self-service display" means the open display of tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia in a manner that is accessible to the general public without the assistance of the retailer or employee of the retailer. A vending machine is a form of self-service display. 
"Smoking" means possessing a lighted tobacco product, tobacco paraphernalia, or any other weed or plant (including a lighted pipe, lighted cigar, or lighted cigarette of any kind), and the lighting of a tobacco product, tobacco paraphernalia, or any other weed or plant (including a pipe, cigar, or cigarette of any kind). 
"Tobacco paraphernalia" means cigarette papers or wrappers, pipes, holders of smoking materials of all types, cigarette rolling machines, and any other item designed for the smoking, preparation, storing, or consumption of tobacco products. 
"Tobacco product" means: (1) any substance containing tobacco leaf, including, but not limited to cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco, dipping tobacco, bidis, or any other preparation of tobacco; and (2) any product or formulation of matter containing biologically active amounts of nicotine that is manufactured, sold, offered for sale, or otherwise distributed with the expectation that the product or matter will be introduced into the human body but does not include any product specifically approved by the Federal Food and Drug Administration for use in treating nicotine or tobacco product dependence. 
"Tobacco retailer" means any person who sells, offers for sale, or does or offers to exchange for any form of consideration, tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco paraphernalia; "tobacco retailing" means the doing of any of these things. This definition is without regard to the quantity of tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco paraphernalia sold, offered for sale, exchanged, or offered for exchange. 
(Ord. 980 § 1 (part), 2007)  
5.64.030 - Tobacco license prerequisite; application process. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to act as a tobacco retailer without first obtaining and maintaining a valid tobacco retailer's license pursuant to this chapter for each location at which that activity is to occur. 
B.  A tobacco retailer or proprietor without a valid tobacco retailer license, including, for example, a revoked license: 
1.  Shall keep all tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia from public view. The public display of tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia in violation of this provision shall constitute an "offer for sale" for the purposes of Section 5.64.050(C). 
2.  Shall not display any advertisement relating to tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia that promotes the sale or distribution of such products from the tobacco retailer's location or that would lead a reasonable consumer to believe that such products can be obtained at the tobacco retailer's location. 
C.  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to grant any person obtaining and maintaining a tobacco retailer's license any status or right other than the right to act as a tobacco retailer at the location in the city identified on the face of the license. For example, nothing in this chapter shall be construed to render inapplicable, supersede, or apply in lieu of any other provision of applicable law, including, without limitation, any condition or limitation on smoking in enclosed places of employment made applicable to business establishments by California Labor Code Section 6404.5. 
D.  Application for a tobacco retailer's license shall be submitted in the name of each proprietor proposing to conduct retail tobacco sales and shall be signed by each proprietor or an authorized agent thereof. It is the responsibility of each proprietor to be informed of the laws affecting the issuance of a tobacco retailer's license. A license that is issued in error or on the basis of false or misleading information supplied by a proprietor shall be revoked pursuant to Section 5.64.090(D), of this chapter. 
E.  In addition to any other penalty under this chapter a person found to have engaged in tobacco retailing without a valid tobacco retailers license shall be ineligible to apply for or be issued a tobacco retailing license according to the following: 
1.  After a first violation for a person within any sixty (60) month period, no new license may issue for the person as a proprietor until thirty (30) days have passed from the date of last violation; 
2.  After a second violation for a person within any sixty (60) month period, no new license may issue for the person as a proprietor until ninety (90) days have passed from the date of last violation; 
3.  After three or more violations for a person within any sixty (60) month period, no new license may issue for the person as a proprietor until five years have passed from the date of last violation; 
4.  Each day that a person engages in tobacco retailing without a valid tobacco retailer's license shall constitute a separate violation. 
F.  Tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia offered for sale or exchange in violation of this chapter are subject to seizure and forfeiture. Forfeited tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia shall be destroyed. 
G.  All applications shall be submitted on a form supplied by the city manager and shall contain the following information: 
1.  The name, address, and telephone number of each proprietor; 
2.  The business name, address, and telephone number of the single fixed location for which a tobacco retailer's license is sought; 
3.  The name and mailing address authorized by each proprietor to receive all license-related communications and notices (the "authorized address"). If an authorized address is not supplied, each proprietor shall be understood to consent to the provision of notice at the business address specified in subsection (G)(2) of this section; 
4.  Proof that the location for which a tobacco retailer's license is sought has been issued a valid state tobacco retailer's license by the California Board of Equalization. 
5.  Whether or not any proprietor is a person who has been determined to have violated this chapter or has been a proprietor at a location that has been determined to have violated this chapter and, if so, the dates and locations of all such violations. Such other information as the city manager deems necessary for the administration or enforcement of this chapter. 
(Ord. 980 § 1 (part), 2007)  
5.64.040 - License issuance; standards. 
A.  No license may issue to authorize tobacco retailing at other than a fixed location. For example, tobacco retailing by persons on foot and tobacco retailing from vehicles are prohibited. 
B.  Upon the receipt of an application for a tobacco retailer's license and the license fee, the city manager shall issue a license unless substantial record evidence demonstrates that one of the following bases for denial exists: 
1.  The application is incomplete or inaccurate; 
2.  The application seeks authorization for tobacco retailing at a location for which a prohibition on issuing licenses is in effect pursuant to Section 5.64.090(B) of this chapter. However, this subsection shall not constitute a basis for denial of a license if the applicant provides the city manager with documentation demonstrating by clear and convincing evidence that the application has acquired or is acquiring the location or business in an arm's length transaction; 
3.  The application seeks authorization for tobacco retailing for a proprietor for which a prohibition on issuing licenses is in effect pursuant to Section 5.64.090(B) of this chapter; 
4.  The application seeks authorization for tobacco retailing that is prohibited pursuant to Section 5.64.040(A) of this chapter, that is unlawful pursuant to any other city ordinance, or that is unlawful pursuant to any other local, state, or federal law. 
(Ord. 980 § 1 (part), 2007)  
5.64.050 - Licenses nontransferable. 
A.  A tobacco retailer's license is nontransferable. If the information required in the license application pursuant to Section 5.64.030(G)(1)(2) or (3) changes, a new tobacco retailer's license is required before the business may continue to act as a tobacco retailer. For example, if a proprietor to whom a license has been issued changes business location, that proprietor must apply for a new license prior to acting as a tobacco retailer at the new location. Or if the business is sold, the new owner must apply for a license for that location before acting as a tobacco retailer. 
B.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter violations accumulated against a location or business shall continue to be counted against the location or business unless the location or business has been transferred to a new proprietor and the new proprietor provides the city manager with documentation demonstrating by clear and convincing evidence that the new proprietor has acquired or is acquiring the location or business in an arm's length transaction. 
(Ord. 980 § 1 (part), 2007)  
5.64.060 - Fees for license. 
A.  A tobacco retailer license is invalid unless the appropriate fee has been paid in full and term of the license has not expired. The term of a tobacco retailer license is one year. Each tobacco retailer shall apply for the renewal of his or her tobacco retailer's license no later than thirty (30) days prior to expiration of the term. 
(Ord. 980 § 1 (part), 2007)  
5.64.070 - Other requirements and prohibitions. 
A.  Display of License. Each license shall be prominently displayed in a publicly and readily visible location at the licensed location. 
B.  Positive Identification Required. No person shall engage in tobacco retailing without first examining the identification of the purchaser, if the purchaser reasonably appears under the age of twenty-seven (27) years old, and confirming that the proposed sale is to a purchaser who is at least the minimum age in state law for being sold the tobacco product or tobacco paraphernalia. 
C.  Minimum Age for Persons Selling Tobacco. No person shall engage in tobacco retailing if the person is younger than the minimum age in state law for being sold or for possessing any tobacco product. 
D.  Self-Service Displays Prohibited. No person shall display tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia by means of a self-service display or to engage in tobacco retailing by means of a self-service display. A tobacco retailer who chooses to display tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia in a locked cabinet, case or similar structure must post a clear and conspicuous sign on or within five feet of the display stating that the cabinet, case or structure is locked at all times. 
(Ord. 980 § 1 (part), 2007)  
5.64.080 - License violation. 
A.  Violation of Tobacco-Related Laws. It shall be a violation of a tobacco retailer's license for a licensee, including his or her agent or employee, to violate any of the following laws: 
1.  Any local, state, or federal tobacco-related law; 
2.  Local, state, or federal sign laws; 
3.  Local, state, or federal laws restricting the age of purchase for any product. 
B.  License Compliance Monitoring. 
1.  Compliance with this chapter shall be monitored by the city manager. Any peace officer may enforce the penal provisions of this chapter. 
2.  The city manager shall check the compliance of each tobacco retailer at least three times per twelve (12) month period. The city manager may check the compliance of tobacco retailers previously found to be in compliance a fewer number of times so that the city manager may check the compliance of tobacco retailers previously found in violation a greater number of times. 
3.  Compliance checks shall determine, at a minimum, if the tobacco retailer is conducting business in a manner that complies with tobacco laws regulating youth access to tobacco. When appropriate, the compliance checks shall determine compliance with other tobacco-related laws. 
4.  The city shall not enforce any tobacco-related minimum-age law against person who otherwise might be in violation of such law because of the person's age (hereinafter "youth decoy") if the potential violation occurs when: 
a.  The youth decoy is participating in a compliance check supervised by a peace officer or a code enforcement official; or 
b.  The youth decoy is participating in a compliance check funded in part, either directly or indirectly through subcontracting, by the city manager or funded in part, either directly or indirectly through subcontracting, by the California Department of Health Services. 
C.  No Contest Plea. A plea of "no contest" or its equivalent by a tobacco retailer for a violation of any law designated in subsection A above shall operate as an admission that this chapter has been violated for the purposes of license revocation. 
(Ord. 980 § 1 (part), 2007)  
5.64.090 - Revocation of license. 
A.  Revocation of License. 
1.  In addition to any other penalty authorized by law, a tobacco retailer's license shall be revoked if the hearing officer designated by the city manager finds, after notice to the licensee and opportunity to be heard, that the licensee, including his or her agents or employees, has violated any of the requirements, conditions, or prohibitions of this chapter (hereinafter "license violation"). 
2.  No attorney may take part in the defense of a license revocation proceeding unless the attorney's participation meets any exception for attorneys appearing in small claims court under California Code of Civil Procedure Section 116.530. This prohibition shall not apply if the city elects to be represented by an attorney in the proceeding and notice of the election is included in the notice given pursuant to subsection (A)(1) above. 
3.  For a first or second alleged license violation within any sixty (60) month period, the city manager may engage in settlement negotiations and may enter into a settlement agreement with a tobacco retailer alleged to have violated this chapter without approval from the Coachella city council. Settlements shall not be confidential and shall contain the following minimum terms: 
a.  After an alleged first license violation at a location within any sixty (60) month period: 
i.  An agreement to stop acting as a tobacco retailer for at least one day, 
ii.  A settlement payment to city of at least one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), and 
iii.  An admission that the violation occurred and a stipulation that the violation will be counted when considering what penalty will be assessed for any future violations; 
b.  After an alleged second license violation at a location within any sixty (60) month period: 
i.  An agreement to stop acting as a tobacco retailer for at least ten (10) days, 
ii.  A settlement payment to the city of at least five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), and 
iii.  An admission that the violation occurred and a stipulation that the violation will be counted when considering what penalty will be assessed for any future violations. 
B.  New License After Revocation for Violation. 
1.  After a first license violation at a location within any sixty (60) month period, no new license may issue for the location until ten (10) days have passed from the date of the last revocation or violation, whichever is later. 
2.  After a second license violation at a location within any sixty (60) month period, no new license may issue for the location until thirty (30) days have passed from the date of the last revocation or violation, whichever is later. 
3.  After a third license violation at a location within any sixty (60) month period, no new license may issue for the location until ninety (90) days have passed from the date of the last revocation or violation, whichever is later. 
4.  After four or more license violations at a location within any sixty (60) month period, no new license may issue for the location until five years have passed from the date of the last revocation or violation, whichever is later. 
C.  Expiration of License. A tobacco retailer's license that is not timely renewed pursuant to Section 5.64.060(A) shall expire at the end of its term. To reinstate a license that has expired due to the failure to timely pay the renewal fee, the proprietor must: 
1.  Submit the renewal fee plus a reinstatement fee of ten (10) percent of the renewal fee; 
2.  Submit a signed affidavit affirming that the proprietor has not sold any tobacco product or tobacco paraphernalia during any period that the license was expired. 
D.  Revocation of License Issued in Error. A tobacco retailer's license shall be revoked if the department finds, after notice and opportunity to be heard, that one or more of the bases for denial of a license under Section 5.94.040(B) existed at the time application was made or at anytime before the license issued. The revocation shall be without prejudice to the filing of a new application for a license. 
(Ord. 980 § 1 (part), 2007)  
5.64.100 - Enforcement. 
The remedies provided by this chapter are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies available at law or in equity. 
A.  Whenever evidence of a violation of this chapter is obtained in part through the participation of a person under the age of eighteen (18) years old, such a person shall not be required to appear or give testimony in any civil or administrative process brought to enforce this chapter and the alleged violation shall be adjudicated based upon the sufficiency and persuasiveness of the evidence presented. 
B.  Violations of this chapter are subject to a civil action brought by the district attorney or city counsel, punishable by: 
1.  A fine not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for a first violation in any sixty (60) month period; 
2.  A fine not less than one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) and not exceeding two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for a second violation in any sixty (60) month period; or 
3.  A fine not less than three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) and not exceeding ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for a third and subsequent violation in any sixty (60) month period. 
C.  Violations of this chapter may, in the discretion of the district attorney or city counsel, be prosecuted as infractions or misdemeanors. 
D.  Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, or concealing a violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a violation. 
E.  Violations of this chapter are declared to be public nuisances. 
F.  In addition to other remedies provided by this chapter or by other law, any violation of this chapter may be remedied by a civil action brought by the city counsel, including, but not limited to, administrative or judicial nuisance abatement proceedings, civil or criminal code enforcement proceedings, and suits for injunctive relief. 
(Ord. 980 § 1 (part), 2007)  
Chapter 5.68 - COMMERCIAL CANNABIS ACTIVITY REGULATORY PERMIT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1109, § 2, adopted July 12, 2017, amended Ch. 5.68 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 5.68, §§ 5.68.010—5.68.260, pertained to medical cannabis facilities regulatory permit and derived from Ord. No. 1084, § 2, adopted Jan. 27, 2016. 
 
5.68.010 - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to regulate the cultivation, manufacturing, testing, distribution, and transportation of medicinal and nonmedicinal adult use cannabis (including cannabis products and edible cannabis products) within the city of Coachella. 
The regulations and prohibitions in this chapter are enacted to ensure the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the city. The regulations and prohibitions herein, which are in compliance with the Compassionate Use Act of 1996 ("CUA"), the Medical Marijuana Program ("MMP"), the Medical Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act ("MCRSA"), the Control, Use, Tax Adult Use of Marijuana Act ("AUMA"), (collectively, "State law"), do not interfere with the use and possession of cannabis as authorized under state law. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to: (1) allow persons to engage in conduct that endangers others or causes a public nuisance, or(2) allow any activity relating to the cultivation, manufacturing, testing, distribution, transportation, or use of cannabis that is otherwise illegal under California state law. 
(Ord. No. 1109, § 2, 7-12-17)  
5.68.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. If a word is not explicitly defined in this chapter, the common and ordinary meaning of the word shall apply. 
"Applicant" means a person applying for a regulatory permit under this chapter. An "applicant" includes all representatives, agents, parent entities, or subsidiary entities of the applicant. 
"Cannabis" means all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa Linnaeus, Cannabis indica, or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. "Cannabis" also means the separated resin, whether crude or purified, obtained from cannabis. "Cannabis" also means marijuana as defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 11018. "Cannabis" does not include the mature stalks of the plan, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plan which is incapable of germination. For the purpose of this chapter, "cannabis" does not mean "industrial hemp" as defined by Section 81000 of the California Food and Agricultural Code or Section 11018.5 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
"Cannabis products" has the same meaning as marijuana products in Section 11018.1 of the California Health and Safety Code. When the term "cannabis" is used in this chapter, it shall include "cannabis products." 
"City manager" means the city manager of the city of Coachella or designee. 
"Commercial cannabis activity" includes the cultivation, manufacture, distributing, laboratory testing, and transportation (including possession, processing, storing, and labeling incidental to such activities) of cannabis and cannabis products as provided in this chapter. 
"Cultivate" or "cultivation" means any commercial activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of cannabis. 
"Delivery" means the commercial transfer of cannabis or cannabis products to a customer. 
"Distribution" means the procurement, sale, and transport of cannabis and cannabis products between entities permitted or licensed under this chapter, another local California jurisdiction, or state law. 
"Edible cannabis product" means manufactured cannabis that is intended to be used, in whole or in part, for human consumption, including, but not limited to, chewing gum, but excluding products set forth in Division 15 of the California Food and Agricultural Code. An edible cannabis product is not considered food as defined by Section 109935 of the California Health and Safety Code or a drug as defined by Section 109925 of the California Health and Safety Code. When the term "cannabis" is used in this chapter, it shall include "edible cannabis products." 
"Manufacture" means to compound, blend, extract, infuse or otherwise make or prepare a cannabis product. 
"Owner" means any of the following: (1) All persons with an aggregate ownership interest of twenty (20) percent or more in the applicant, unless such interest is solely a security, lien, or encumbrance; (2) the chief executive officer of an entity or nonprofit; (3) all members of the board of directors of a nonprofit; or (4) an individual that will be participating in the direction, control, or management of the permitted commercial cannabis activity. 
"Permittee" means the individual or applicant to whom a regulatory permit has been issued under this chapter. A permittee includes all representatives, agents, parent entities, or subsidiary entities of the permittee. 
"Person" includes any individual, firm, co-partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, limited liability company, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, and the plural as well as the singular. 
"Premises" means the designated structures and land specified in the regulatory permit application that are in the possession of an used by the applicant or permittee to conduct the commercial cannabis activity. The premises must be a contiguous area and may only be occupied by one licensee. 
"Retailer" means a person or entity that sells cannabis or cannabis products to customers. The term "retailer" shall also include the term "dispensary," as defined under MCRSA. 
"Testing" means subjecting cannabis to laboratory testing for active compounds and purity prior to distribution for consumption. 
"Transportation" means transferring cannabis and/or cannabis products from one person or entity permitted under this chapter, permitted by another local California jurisdiction, and/or licensed under state law to another person or entity permitted under this chapter, permitted by another local California jurisdiction, and/or licensed under state law. 
Words and phrases not specifically defined in this code shall have the meaning ascribed to them as defined in the following sources: 
A.  The Compassionate Use Act of 1996 ("CUA"); 
B.  The Medical Marijuana Program ("MMP"); and 
C.  The Medical Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act ("MCRSA"); and 
D.  Control, Regulate, and Tax Adult Use of Marijuana Act ("AUMA")." 
(Ord. No. 1109, § 2, 7-12-17)  
5.68.030 - Regulatory permit required. 
Prior to initiating operations and as a continuing requisite to operating a commercial cannabis activity, the legal representative of the persons wishing to operate and/or lease out a facility for commercial cannabis activity shall obtain both a conditional use permit and a regulatory permit from the city manager and shall pay an application fee as established by resolution adopted by the city council as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1109, § 2, 7-12-17)  
5.68.040 - Regulatory permit application. 
An application for a regulatory permit shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following information: 
A.  The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant. 
B.  A description of the statutory entity or business form that will serve as the legal structure for the applicant and a copy of its formation and organizing documents, including, but not limited to, articles of incorporation, certificate of amendment, statement of information, articles of association, bylaws, partnership agreement operating agreement, and fictitious business name statement. 
C.  The name, address, telephone number, title, and function of each of the interested parties described in Section 5.68.150. 
D.  A legible copy of each applicant's photo identification, such as a state driver's license, a passport issued by the United States, or a permanent resident card. 
E.  A list of the license or permit types (including license or permit numbers) held by the applicant that involve the operation of a commercial cannabis activity, including the date the license or permit was issued and the jurisdiction or State license authority that issued the license or permit. 
F.  Whether the applicant has been denied a license or permit by the city, any other jurisdiction, and/or the state that involves the operation of a commercial cannabis activity. The applicant shall provide a description of the license or permit applied for, the name of the jurisdiction or state license authority that reviewed the license or permit application, and the date of denial. 
G.  The proposed commercial cannabis activity's physical address, telephone number, website address, and email address. 
H.  Contact information for the applicant's designated primary contact person including the name, title, address, phone number, and email address of the individual. 
I.  A list of every fictitious business name the applicant is operating under including the address where the business is located. 
J.  Financial information including the following: 
1.  A list of funds belonging to the commercial cannabis business held in savings, checking, or other accounts maintained by a financial institution. The applicant shall provide for each account, the financial institution's name, the financial institution's address, account type, account number, and the amount of money in the account. 
2.  A list of loans made to the commercial cannabis business. For each loan, the applicant shall provide the amount of the loan, the date of the loan, term(s) of the loan, security provided for the loan, and the name, address, and phone number of the lender. 
3.  A list of investments made into the commercial cannabis business. For each investment, the applicant shall provide the amount of the investment, the date of the investment, term(s) of the investment, and the name, address, and phone number of the investor. 
4.  A list of all gifts of any kind given to the applicant for its use in conducting commercial cannabis activity. For each gift the applicant shall provide the value of the gift or description of the gift, and the name, address, and phone number of the provider of the gift. 
K.  A copy of the applicant's completed application for electronic fingerprint images submitted to the Department of Justice and Federal Bureau of Investigation. 
L.  A list of each applicant's misdemeanor and felony convictions, if any. For each conviction, the list must set forth the date of arrest, the offense charged, the offense convicted, the jurisdiction of the court, and whether the conviction was by verdict, plea of guilty, or plea of nolo contendre. 
M.  A complete and detailed diagram of the proposed premises showing the boundaries of the property and the proposed premises to be permitted, showing all boundaries, dimensions, entrances and exits, interior partitions, walls, rooms, windows, doorways, and common or shared entryways, storage areas and exterior lighting. The diagram must show the areas in which all commercial cannabis activity will take place, including but not limited to, limited-access areas. 
N.  A detailed security plan outlining the measures that will be taken to ensure the safety of persons and property on the premises. As part of the security plan, a lighting plan is required that shows existing and proposed exterior and interior lighting that will provide adequate security lighting for the commercial cannabis activity and premises. The security plan must be prepared by a qualified professional and include provisions in compliance with the following: 
1.  Security cameras shall be installed and maintained in good condition, and used in an on-going manner with at least two hundred forty (240) concurrent hours of digitally recorded documentation in a format approved by the city manager. The cameras shall be in use twenty-four (24) hours per day, seven days per week. The areas to be covered by the security cameras shall include, but are not limited to, the public areas, storage areas, employee areas, all doors and windows, and any other areas as determined to be necessary by the city manager. 
2.  The premises shall be alarmed with an audible interior and exterior alarm system, unless waived for extenuating circumstances by the city manager that is operated and monitored by a recognized security company, deemed acceptable by the city manager. Any change in the security company shall be subject to the approval of the city manager. All current contact information regarding the security company shall be provided to the city manager. 
3.  Entrance to the cultivation, manufacturing, and testing areas and any storage areas shall be locked at all times, and under the control of cannabis facility staff. 
4.  All cannabis shall be securely stored, and a reliable, commercial alarm system shall be installed and maintained where the cannabis is secured. 
5.  A licensed security guard, licensed by the California Department of Consumer Affairs, shall be present at the premises during all hours of operation. If the security guard is to be armed, then the security guard shall possess at all times a valid security guard card and firearms permit issued by the California Department of Consumer Affairs. 
6.  A heavy-gauge chain-link (or other material as approved by the city manager) fence a minimum of eight-feet in height shall be constructed around the perimeter of the premises to prevent public access and obscure the cannabis cultivation facility from public view. Screening can include landscaping or vinyl slats, as permitted by law enforcement. 
O.  An odor control plan that describes the air treatment system or other methods that will be implemented to prevent odors generated by the commercial cannabis activity from being detected outside the building(s) on the premises. 
P.  A comprehensive business operations plan that includes the following: 
1.  Business plan. A plan describing how the commercial cannabis activity business will operate in accordance with this code, state law, and other applicable regulations. The business plan must include plans for handling cash and transporting cannabis and cannabis products to and from the premises, if applicable. 
2.  Community relations plan. A plan describing who is designated as being responsible for outreach and communication with the surrounding community, including the neighborhood and businesses, and how the designee can be contacted. 
3.  Neighborhood responsibility plan. A plan addressing any adverse impacts of the proposed commercial cannabis activity on the surrounding area. 
4.  Insurance. The applicant's certificate of commercial general liability insurance and endorsements and certificates of all other insurance related to the operation of the commercial cannabis activity. 
5.  Budget. A copy of the applicant's most recent annual budget for operations. 
Q.  The name and address of the owner and lessor of the real property upon which the commercial cannabis activity is to be operated. In the event the applicant is not the legal owner of the property, the application must be accompanied with a notarized acknowledgement from the owner of the property that a commercial cannabis activity will be operated on his or her property. 
R.  Authorization for the city manager to seek verification of the information contained within the application. 
S.  A statement in writing by the applicant that he or she certifies under penalty of perjury that all the information contained in the application is true and correct. 
T.  A full and complete copy of the applicant's most current application submitted to and approved by the applicable state licensing authority. 
U.  Any such additional and further information as is deemed necessary by the city manager to administer this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1109, § 2, 7-12-17)  
5.68.050 - Background check. 
The city will provide each applicant, including any management personnel who are responsible for the day-to-day operations of the commercial cannabis activity, with a 'request for live scan service' form, which must be taken to a live scan operator for fingerprinting. Each applicant must submit their fingerprint images to the Coachella Police Department, California Department of Justice, and the Federal Bureau of Investigation for fingerprint-based criminal history records review and reporting to the city. 
(Ord. No. 1109, § 2, 7-12-17)  
5.68.060 - Additional terms and conditions. 
Based on the information set forth in the application, the city manager may impose reasonable terms and conditions on the proposed operations of the commercial cannabis activity in addition to those specified in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1109, § 2, 7-12-17)  
5.68.070 - Regulatory permit denial. 
The city manager may deny an application for a regulatory permit or renewal of a regulatory permit upon making any of the following findings: 
A.  The applicant or the premises for which a regulatory permit is applied does not qualify for a permit under this chapter. 
B.  The applicant fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
C.  The applicant has failed to provide information required by the city manager. 
D.  The applicant or permittee has been convicted of an offense that is substantially related to the qualifications, functions, or duties of the business or profession for which the application is made, except that if the city manager determines that the applicant or permittee is otherwise suitable to be issued a license and granting the license would not compromise public safety, the city manager shall conduct a thorough review of the nature of the crime, conviction, circumstances, and evidence of rehabilitation of the applicant, and shall evaluate the suitability of the applicant or permittee to be issued a permit based on the evidence found through the review. In determining which offenses are substantially related to the qualifications, functions, or duties of the business or profession for which the application is made, the city manager shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
1.  A felony conviction for the illegal possession for sale, sale, manufacture, transportation, or cultivation of a controlled substance. 
2.  A violent felony conviction, as specified in subdivision (c) of Section 667.5 of the Penal Code. 
3.  A serious felony conviction, as specified in subdivision (c) of Section 1192.7 of the California Penal Code. 
4.  A felony conviction involving fraud, deceit, or embezzlement. 
E.  The applicant, or any of its officers, directors, or owners, has been sanctioned by a State licensing authority or a city, county, or city and county for unlicensed commercial cannabis activities or has had a State license revoked in the three years immediately preceding the date the application is filed with the city manager. 
F.  The commercial cannabis activity is not properly organized or operating in strict compliance pursuant to the Compassionate Use Act of 1996, the Medical Marijuana Program Act, the 2008 Attorney General Guidelines, Medical Marijuana Regulation and Safety Act (AB 243, AB 266, and SB 643), Control, Regulate, and Tax Adult Use of Marijuana Act ("AUMA"), and any other applicable law, rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1109, § 2, 7-12-17)  
5.68.080 - Regulatory permit term. 
A regulatory permit is valid for two years from the date that the permit is issued, unless suspended or revoked sooner. 
(Ord. No. 1109, § 2, 7-12-17)  
5.68.090 - Regulatory permit renewal process. 
A.  To renew a regulatory permit, a completed permit renewal form and renewal permit fee shall be received by the city manager from the permittee no earlier than sixty (60) calendar days before the expiration of the permit and no later than the last business day before the expiration of the permit. 
B.  In the event the regulatory permit is not renewed prior to the expiration date, the permittee must cease all commercial cannabis activity. 
(Ord. No. 1109, § 2, 7-12-17)  
5.68.100 - Regulatory permit surrender. 
Every permittee who surrenders, abandons, or quits the permitted premises after a certificate of occupancy is issued, or who closes the permitted premises for a period exceeding thirty (30) consecutive calendar days after a certificate of occupancy is issued, shall, within thirty (30) calendar days after closing, surrendering, quitting, or abandoning the permitted premises, surrender the permit to the city manager. The city manager may seize the permit of a permittee who fails to comply with the surrender provisions of this section and may proceed to revoke the permit. 
(Ord. No. 1109, § 2, 7-12-17)  
5.68.110 - Regulatory permit suspension and revocation. 
The city manager may suspend, modify, or revoke a cannabis cultivation permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter for any of the following reasons: 
A.  One or more of the circumstances upon which a regulatory permit could be denied exists or has occurred; 
B.  One or more conditions of the regulatory permit has been violated; or 
C.  The permittee, its owners, officers, directors, partners, agents, or other persons vested with the authority to manage or direct the affairs of the business have violated any provision of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1109, § 2, 7-12-17)  
5.68.120 - Appeals. 
Any decision regarding the denial, suspension, or revocation of a regulatory permit may be appealed to a hearing officer. Notice of and the procedures governing such hearing shall be provided pursuant to Chapter 3.28 of the code. 
(Ord. No. 1109, § 2, 7-12-17)  
5.68.130 - Operating standards. 
A.  Indoor cultivation only. A permittee shall only cultivate cannabis in a fully enclosed and secure building. A permittee shall not allow cannabis or cannabis products on the premises to be visible from the public right of way, the unsecured areas surrounding the buildings on the premises, or the premises' main entrance and lobby. 
B.  Odor control. A permittee shall comply with the odor control plan that is submitted during the application process and approved by the city manager. Commercial cannabis activity premises shall provide a sufficient odor absorbing ventilation and exhaust system so that odor generated inside the building(s) that is distinctive to its operation is not detected outside the premises, anywhere on adjacent property or public rights-of-way, on or about any exterior or interior common area walkways, hallways, breezeways, foyers, lobby areas, or any other areas available for common use by tenants or the visiting public, or within any other unit located within the same building as the commercial cannabis activity. As such, applicants must install and maintain the following equipment or any other equipment which the city manager or designee determines has the same or better effectiveness: 
1.  An exhaust air filtration system with odor control that prevents internal odors from being emitted externally; or 
2.  An air system that creates negative air pressure between the cannabis facility's interior and exterior so that the odors generated inside the cannabis facility are not detectable outside the cannabis facility. 
3.  Should compliance with the odor control plan fail to properly control odor, the city manager may impose additional or modified plan restrictions. 
C.  'Seed to sale' or 'track and trace'. Commercial cannabis activity businesses shall have an electronic 'seed to sale' or 'track and trace' system that produces historical transactional data for review by the city manager for auditing purposes. 
D.  Records. A commercial cannabis activity business shall maintain the following records in printed format for at least three years on the premises and shall produce them to the city within twenty-four (24) hours after receipt of the city's request: 
1.  The name, address, and telephone numbers of the owner and landlord of the property. 
2.  The name, date of birth, address, and telephone number of each manager and staff of the commercial cannabis activity business; the date each was hired; and the nature of each manager's and staff's participation in the business. 
3.  A written accounting of all income and expenditures of the commercial cannabis activity business, including, but not limited to, cash and in-kind transactions. 
4.  A copy of the commercial cannabis activity business' commercial general liability insurance policy and all other insurance policies related to the operation of the business. 
5.  A copy of the commercial cannabis activity business' most recent year's financial statement and tax return. 
6.  An inventory record documenting the dates and amounts of cannabis received at the premises, the daily amounts of cannabis on the premises, and the daily amounts of cannabis transported from the premises. 
A commercial cannabis activity business shall report any loss, damage, or destruction of these records to the city manager within twenty-four (24) hours of the loss, damage, or destruction. 
E.  Security. A permittee shall comply with the security plan that is submitted during the application process as approved by the city manager. A permittee shall report to the Coachella Police Department all criminal activity occurring on the premises. Should compliance with the security plan fail to properly secure the commercial cannabis activity premises, the city manager may impose additional or modified plan restrictions. 
F.  Retail sales prohibited. No person shall conduct any retail sales of any good or services on or from permitted premises. 
G.  Cannabis consumption prohibited. No person shall smoke, ingest, or otherwise consume cannabis in any form on, or within twenty (20) feet of, the premises. 
H.  Alcohol prohibited. No person shall possess, consume, or store any alcoholic beverage on the cultivation premises. 
I.  Juveniles prohibited. No one under the age of eighteen (18) shall be on the commercial cannabis activity premises or operate a commercial cannabis activity in any capacity, including, but not limited to, as a manager, staff, employee, contractor, or volunteer. 
(Ord. No. 1109, § 2, 7-12-17)  
5.68.140 - Building standards. 
A building that houses a commercial cannabis activity shall comply with the following requirements: 
A.  Entrances. All entrances into the buildings on the premises shall be locked at all times with entry controlled by the permittee's managers and staff. Codes for entry shall be provided to law enforcement and fire protection personnel to allow access to the buildings 24-hours a day, seven days a week. 
B.  Main entrance and lobby. The premises shall have a building with a main entrance that is clearly visible from the public street or sidewalk. The main entrance shall be maintained clear of barriers, landscaping, and other obstructions. Inside of the main entrance, there shall be a lobby to receive persons into the premises and to verify whether they are allowed in the building. 
C.  Activity area. All cultivation, manufacturing, or testing areas in any building on the premises shall be separated from the main entrance and lobby, and shall be secured by a lock accessible only to managers and staff of the permittee. 
(Ord. No. 1109, § 2, 7-12-17)  
5.68.150 - Interested parties. 
A.  A permittee shall provide the city with names and addresses of all of the following interested parties: 
1.  Persons with at least a ten (10) percent interest in the commercial cannabis activity; 
2.  Partners, officers, directors, and stockholders of every corporation, limited liability company, or general or limited partnership that owns at least ten (10) percent of the stock, capital, profits, voting rights, or membership interest of the commercial cannabis activity or that is one of the partners in the commercial cannabis activity; 
3.  The managers of the commercial cannabis activity; and 
4.  The staff of the commercial cannabis activity. 
B.  The permittee shall notify the city of any change in the information above within thirty (30) calendar days of the change. 
C.  All interested parties, as described in subsection A, must submit to fingerprinting and a criminal background check by the city. 
D.  No person shall be an interested party, as described in subsection A of this section, if he or she is charged with or convicted of a felony; has been charged with or convicted of a violation of California Penal Code section 186.22 (participation in a criminal street gang); or is currently on parole or probation for an offense relating to the sale or distribution of a controlled substance. "Convicted" within the meaning of this section means a plea or verdict of guilty or a conviction following a plea of nolo contendere was entered, but does not include any plea, verdict, or conviction that is expunged pursuant to California law or a similar federal or state law where the expungement was granted. "Charged" within the meaning of this section means (1) an indictment was issued by a grand jury, or an information, complaint, or similar pleading was issued by the United States Attorney, district attorney, city attorney, or other governmental official or agency authorized to prosecute crimes, and (2) the criminal proceedings are currently pending. 
(Ord. No. 1109, § 2, 7-12-17)  
5.68.160 - Premises restricted. 
A.  No permittee shall open their commercial cannabis activity premises to the public. 
B.  No permittee shall allow anyone on the premises, except for managers, staff, and other persons with a bona fide business or regulatory purpose for being there, such as contractors, inspectors, and cannabis transporters. 
C.  A manager must be on the premises at all times that any other person, except for security guards, is on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 1109, § 2, 7-12-17)  
5.68.170 - Emergency contact manager. 
A commercial cannabis activity permittee shall provide the city manager with the current name and primary and secondary telephone numbers of at least one 24-hour on-call manager to address and resolve complaints and to respond to operating problems or concerns associated with the commercial cannabis activity. 
(Ord. No. 1109, § 2, 7-12-17)  
5.68.180 - Community relations manager. 
Each cannabis facility shall provide the city manager with the name, phone number, facsimile number, and email address of an on-site community relations or staff person or other representative to whom the city can provide notice if there are operating problems associated with the cannabis facility or refer members of the public who may have any concerns or complaints regarding the operation of the cannabis facility. Each cannabis facility shall also provide the above information to its business neighbors located within one hundred (100) feet of the cannabis facility as measured in a straight line without regard to intervening structures, between the front doors of each establishment. 
(Ord. No. 1109, § 2, 7-12-17)  
5.68.190 - Display of regulatory permit. 
The permittee shall display its current valid permit issued in accordance with this chapter inside the lobby or waiting area of the main entrance to the premises. The permit shall be displayed at all times in a conspicuous place so that it may be readily seen by all persons entering the premises. 
(Ord. No. 1109, § 2, 7-12-17)  
5.68.200 - Inspections and enforcement. 
A.  Recordings made by security cameras at any commercial cannabis activity business shall be made immediately available to the city manager upon verbal request; no search warrant or subpoena shall be needed to view the recorded materials. 
B.  The city manager shall have the right to enter all cannabis facilities from time to time unannounced for the purpose of making reasonable inspections to observe and enforce compliance with this chapter. 
C.  Operation of the cannabis facility in non-compliance with any conditions of approval or the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a violation of the municipal code and shall be enforced pursuant to the provisions of this code. 
D.  The city manager may summarily suspend or revoke a cannabis regulatory permit if any of the following, singularly or in combination, occur: 
1.  The city manager or designee determines that the commercial cannabis activity business has failed to comply with this chapter or any condition of approval or a circumstance or situation has been created that would have permitted the city manager or designee to deny the permit under Section 5.68.070; 
2.  Operations cease for more than thirty (30) calendar days, including during change of ownership proceedings; 
3.  Ownership is changed without securing a regulatory permit; 
4.  The cannabis facility fails to maintain two hundred forty (240) continuous hours of security recordings; or 
5.  The cannabis facility fails to allow inspection of the records, security recordings, the activity logs, or the premises by authorized city officials. 
(Ord. No. 1109, § 2, 7-12-17)  
5.68.210 - Permits not transferable. 
Regulatory permits issued pursuant to this chapter are not transferable. 
(Ord. No. 1109, § 2, 7-12-17)  
5.68.220 - Limitations on city's liability. 
To the fullest extent permitted by law, the city shall not assume any liability whatsoever, with respect to approving any regulatory permit pursuant to this chapter or the operation of any commercial cannabis activity approved pursuant to this chapter. As a condition of approval a regulatory permit as provided in this chapter, the applicant or its legal representative shall: 
A.  Execute an agreement indemnifying the city from any claims, damages, etc., associated with the operation of the cannabis facility; 
B.  Maintain insurance in the amounts and of the types that are acceptable to the city manager or designee; 
C.  Name the city as an additionally insured on all city required insurance policies; 
D.  Agree to defend, at its sole expense, any action against the city, its agents, officers, and employees related to the approval of a regulatory permit; and 
E.  Agree to reimburse the city for any court costs and attorney fees that the city may be required to pay as a result of any legal challenge related to the city's approval of a regulatory permit. The city may, at its sole discretion, participate at its own expense in the defense of any such action, but such participation shall not relieve the operator of its obligation hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 1109, § 2, 7-12-17)  
5.68.230 - Compliance with state law. 
All commercial cannabis activity shall comply fully with all of the applicable restrictions and mandates set forth in state law, including without limitation the Compassionate Use Act of 1996, the Medical Marijuana Program Act, the 2008 Attorney General Guidelines, the Medical Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act, and the Control, Regulate, and Tax Adult Use of Marijuana Act. 
(Ord. No. 1109, § 2, 7-12-17)  
5.68.240 - Violations. 
A.  Any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is unlawful and a public nuisance. 
B.  Any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor violation and upon conviction thereof any violation shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day a violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
C.  In lieu of issuing a misdemeanor citation, the city may issue an administrative citation, and/or assess an administrative fine of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each violation of this chapter. 
D.  A separate offense occurs for each day any violation of this chapter is continued and/or maintained. 
E.  The remedies provided herein are not to be construed as exclusive remedies, and in the event of violation, the city may pursue any proceedings or remedies otherwise provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 1109, § 2, 7-12-17)  
Chapter 5.69 - CANNABIS RETAILER AND RETAIL MICROBUSINESS REGULATORY PERMIT 
 
5.69.010 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply. 
"Applicant" means an owner applying for a regulatory permit under this chapter. 
"Cannabis" means all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa Linnaeus, Cannabis indicia, or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. "Cannabis" also means the separated resin, whether crude or purified, obtained from cannabis. "Cannabis" does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination. For the purpose of this chapter, "cannabis" does not mean "industrial hemp" as defined by Section 11018.5 of the Health and Safety Code. 
"Cannabis products" means cannabis that has undergone a process whereby the plant material has been transformed into a concentrate, including, but not limited to, concentrated cannabis, or an edible or topical product containing cannabis or concentrated cannabis and other ingredients. 
"City manager" means the city manager of the city of Coachella or designee. 
"Delivery" means the commercial transfer of cannabis or cannabis products to a customer. "Delivery" also includes the use by a retailer of any technology platform. 
"Non-storefront retailer" means a cannabis retailer that provides cannabis exclusively through delivery. 
"Owner" means any of the following: (1) a person with an aggregate ownership interest of twenty (20) percent or more in the person applying for the permit, unless such interest is solely a security, lien, or encumbrance; (2) the chief executive officer of a nonprofit or other entity; (3) a member of the board of directors of a nonprofit; or (4) an individual who will be participating in the direction, control, or management of the person applying for the permit. 
"Permittee" means any person holding a valid permit under this chapter. 
"Person" includes any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, limited liability company, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, and the plural as well as the singular. 
"Premises" means the designated structure or structures and land specified in the regulatory permit application that is owned, leased, or otherwise held under the control of the applicant or permittee where the retailer or retail microbusiness will be or is conducted. These premises shall be a contiguous area and shall only be occupied by one permittee. 
"Purchaser" means the customer who is engaged in a transaction with a permittee for the purposes of obtaining cannabis or cannabis products. 
"Sell," "sale," and "to sell" include any transaction, whereby, for any consideration title to cannabis or cannabis products is transferred from one person to another, and includes the delivery of cannabis or cannabis products pursuant to an order placed for the purchase of the same and soliciting or receiving an order for the same, but does not include the return of cannabis or cannabis products by a permittee to the permittee from who the cannabis or cannabis product was purchased. 
"Retailer" means a business that sells and/or delivers cannabis or cannabis products to customers. 
"Retail microbusiness" means a retailer that includes up to ten thousand (10,000) square feet of cannabis cultivation on the same premises. 
"State license" means a license issued by the state of California, as listed in California Business and Professions Code Section 26050. 
(Ord. No. 1120, § 3, 2-14-18)  
5.69.020 - Regulatory permit required. 
A.  Prior to initiating operations and as a continuing request to operating a retailer or microbusiness, the owner of the proposed retailer or retail microbusiness shall obtain (i) a regulatory permit from the city manager and shall pay application fees as established by resolution adopted by the city council as amended from time to time, and (ii) either a development agreement or a conditional use permit from the city as required by this code. 
B.  This chapter, and the requirement to obtain a regulatory permit, does not apply to the individual possession or cultivation of cannabis for personal use, as allowed by state law. Personal cannabis cultivation is regulated under Chapter 17.84. Personal possession and use of cannabis pursuant to state law are permitted in the city of Coachella. 
(Ord. No. 1120, § 3, 2-14-18)  
5.69.030 - Regulatory permit application. 
An application for a regulatory permit shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following information: 
A.  The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant. 
B.  A description of the statutory entity or business form that will serve as the legal structure for the applicant and a copy of its formation and organizing documents, including, but not limited to, articles of incorporation, certificate of amendment, statement of information, articles of association, bylaws, partnership agreement operating agreement, and fictitious business name statement. 
C.  The name, address, telephone number, title, and function of each of the interested parties described in Section 5.69.130. 
D.  A legible copy of each applicant's photo identification, such as a state driver's license, a passport issued by the United States, or a permanent resident card. 
E.  A list of the license or permit types (including license or permit numbers) held by the applicant that involve the operation of a retailer or retail microbusiness, including the date the license or permit was issued and the jurisdiction or state license authority that issued the license or permit. 
F.  Whether the applicant has been denied a license or permit by the city, any other jurisdiction, and/or the state that involves the operation of a retailer or retail microbusiness. The applicant shall provide a description of the license or permit applied for, the name of the jurisdiction or state license authority that reviewed the license or permit application, and the date of denial. 
G.  The proposed retailer' or retail microbusiness' physical address, telephone number, website address, and email address. 
H.  Contact information for the applicant's designated primary contact person including the name, title, address, phone number, and email address of the individual. 
I.  A list of every fictitious business name the applicant is operating under including the address where the business is located. 
J.  Financial information including the following: 
1.  A list of funds belonging to the retailer or retail microbusiness held in savings, checking, or other accounts maintained by a financial institution. The applicant shall provide for each account, the financial institution's name, the financial institution's address, account type, account number, and the amount of money in the account. 
2.  A list of loans made to the retailer or retail microbusiness. For each loan, the applicant shall provide the amount of the loan, the date of the loan, term(s) of the loan, security provided for the loan, and the name, address, and phone number of the lender. 
3.  A list of investments made into the retailer or retail microbusiness. For each investment, the applicant shall provide the amount of the investment, the date of the investment, term(s) of the investment, and the name, address, and phone number of the investor. 
4.  A list of all gifts of any kind given to the applicant for its use in conducting retailer or retail microbusiness. For each gift the applicant shall provide the value of the gift or description of the gift, and the name, address, and phone number of the provider of the gift. 
K.  A copy of the applicant's completed application for electronic fingerprint images submitted to the Department of Justice and Federal Bureau of Investigation. 
L.  A list of each applicant's misdemeanor and felony convictions, if any. For each conviction, the list must set forth the date of arrest, the offense charged, the offense convicted, the jurisdiction of the court, and whether the conviction was by verdict, plea of guilty, or plea of nolo contendre. 
M.  A complete and detailed diagram of the proposed premises showing the boundaries of the property and the proposed premises to be permitted, showing all boundaries, dimensions, entrances and exits, interior partitions, walls, rooms, windows, doorways, and common or shared entryways, storage areas and exterior lighting. The diagram must show the areas in which all business will take place, including but not limited to, limited-access areas. 
N.  A security plan, as a separate document, outlining the proposed security arrangements to deter and prevent unauthorized entrance into limited access areas and theft of cannabis, in accordance with minimum security measures required by state law. The security plan shall be reviewed by the Coachella Police Department and the city manager and shall be exempt from disclosure as a public record pursuant to Government Code Section 6255(a). 
O.  A comprehensive business operations plan that includes the following: 
1.  Business plan. A plan describing how the retailer or retail microbusiness will operate in accordance with this code, state law, and other applicable regulations. The business plan must include plans for ensuring cannabis will be dispensed only to adults over twenty-one (21) years of age, qualified patients, or primary caregivers, controls to acquire, possess, transport, and distribute cannabis to and from State licensed cannabis entities, if applicable. 
2.  Community relations plan. A plan describing who is designated as being responsible for outreach and communication with the surrounding community, including the neighborhood and businesses, and how the designee can be contacted. 
3.  Neighborhood responsibility plan. A plan addressing any adverse impacts of the proposed retailer or retail microbusiness on the surrounding area. 
4.  Insurance. The applicant's certificate of commercial general liability insurance and endorsements and certificates of all other insurance related to the operation of the retailer or retail microbusiness. 
5.  Budget. A copy of the applicant's most recent annual budget for operations. 
P.  The name and address of the owner and lessor of the real property upon which the retailer or retail microbusiness is to be operated. In the event the applicant is not the legal owner of the property, the application must be accompanied with a notarized acknowledgement from the owner of the property that a retailer or retail microbusiness will be operated on his or her property. 
Q.  Authorization for the city manager to seek verification of the information contained within the application. 
R.  A statement in writing by the applicant that he or she certifies under penalty of perjury that all the information contained in the application is true and correct. 
S.  A full and complete copy of the applicant's most current application submitted to and approved by the applicable State licensing authority. 
T.  Any such additional and further information as is deemed necessary by the city manager to administer this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1120, § 3, 2-14-18)  
5.69.040 - Background check. 
The city will provide each applicant, including any management personnel who are responsible for the day-to-day operations of the retailer or retail microbusiness, with a 'request for live scan service' form, which must be taken to a live scan operator for fingerprinting. Each applicant must submit their fingerprint images to the Coachella Police Department, California Department of Justice, and the Federal Bureau of Investigation for fingerprint-based criminal history records review and reporting to the city. 
(Ord. No. 1120, § 3, 2-14-18)  
5.69.050 - Additional terms and conditions. 
Based on the information set forth in the application, the city manager may impose reasonable terms and conditions on the proposed operations of the retailer or retail microbusiness in addition to those specified in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1120, § 3, 2-14-18)  
5.69.060 - Regulatory permit denial. 
The city manager may deny an application for a regulatory permit or renewal of a regulatory permit upon making any of the following findings: 
A.  The applicant or the premises for which a regulatory permit is applied does not qualify for a permit under this chapter. 
B.  The applicant made a material misrepresentation of the application. 
C.  The applicant fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
D.  The applicant has failed to provide information required by the city manager. 
E.  The applicant or permittee has been convicted of an offense that is substantially related to the qualifications, functions, or duties of the business or profession for which the application is made, except that if the city manager determines that the applicant or permittee is otherwise suitable to be issued a license and granting the license would not compromise public safety, the city manager shall conduct a thorough review of the nature of the crime, conviction, circumstances, and evidence of rehabilitation of the applicant, and shall evaluate the suitability of the applicant or permittee to be issued a permit based on the evidence found through the review. In determining which offenses are substantially related to the qualifications, functions, or duties of the business or profession for which the application is made, the city manager shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
1.  A felony conviction for the illegal possession for sale, sale, manufacture, transportation, or cultivation of a controlled substance. 
2.  A violent felony conviction, as specified in subdivision (c) of Section 667.5 of the California Penal Code. 
3.  A serious felony conviction, as specified in subdivision (c) of Section 1192.7 of the California Penal Code. 
4.  A felony conviction involving fraud, deceit, or embezzlement. 
F.  The applicant, or any of its officers, directors, or owners, has been sanctioned by a State licensing authority or a city, county, or city and county for unlicensed commercial cannabis activities (including, but not limited to, retail, cultivation, manufacturing, distribution, testing) or has had a State license or local permit revoked in the three years immediately preceding the date the application is filed with the city manager. 
G.  The retailer or retail microbusiness is not properly organized or operating in strict compliance pursuant to the Compassionate Use Act of 1996, the Medical Marijuana Program Act ("MMP"), Medicinal and Adult-Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act ("MAUCRSA"), and any other applicable law, rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1120, § 3, 2-14-18)  
5.69.070 - Regulatory permit term. 
A regulatory permit is valid for one year from the date that the permit is issued, unless suspended or revoked sooner. 
(Ord. No. 1120, § 3, 2-14-18)  
5.69.080 - Regulatory permit renewal process. 
A.  To renew a regulatory permit, a completed permit renewal form and renewal permit fee shall be received by the city manager from the permittee no earlier than sixty (60) calendar days before the expiration of the permit and no later than the last business day before the expiration of the permit. 
B.  In the event the regulatory permit is not renewed prior to the expiration date, the permittee must cease all retailer or retail microbusiness. 
(Ord. No. 1120, § 3, 2-14-18)  
5.69.090 - Regulatory permit surrender. 
Every permittee who surrenders, abandons, or quits the permitted premises after a certificate of occupancy is issued, or who closes the permitted premises for a period exceeding sixty (60) consecutive calendar days after a certificate of occupancy is issued, shall, within sixty (60) calendar days after closing, surrendering, quitting, or abandoning the permitted premises, surrender the permit to the city manager. The city manager may seize the permit of a permittee who fails to comply with the surrender provisions of this section and may proceed to revoke the permit. If a permittee wishes to close a retailer or retail microbusiness for repair or refurbishment for a period of longer than sixty (60) calendar days, the permittee shall notify the city manager of same in writing. 
(Ord. No. 1120, § 3, 2-14-18)  
5.69.100 - Regulatory permit suspension and revocation. 
The city manager may suspend, modify, or revoke a regulatory permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter for any of the following reasons: 
A.  One or more of the circumstances upon which a regulatory permit could be denied exists or has occurred; 
B.  One or more conditions of the regulatory permit has been violated; or 
C.  The permittee, its owners, officers, directors, partners, agents, or other persons vested with the authority to manage or direct the affairs of the business have violated any provision of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1120, § 3, 2-14-18)  
5.69.110 - Appeals. 
Any decision regarding the denial, suspension, or revocation of a regulatory permit may be appealed to a hearing officer. Notice of and the procedures governing such hearing shall be provided pursuant to Chapter 3.28 of the code. 
(Ord. No. 1120, § 3, 2-14-18)  
5.69.120 - Onsite consumption permit. 
A.  A retailer or retail microbusiness must obtain an onsite consumption permit (in addition to a regulatory permit under this chapter, and a conditional use permit or development agreement under Coachella Municipal Code Chapter 17) in order for cannabis to be consumed on the premises of the retailer or retail microbusiness. 
B.  An onsite consumption permit may be issued at the discretion of the city manager to existing retailers or retail microbusinesses in good standing. An application for an onsite consumption permit may be denied for failure to meet requirements of the city building code, fire code, zoning code, this chapter, and/or any violation of state or local law relevant to the operation of retailers or retail microbusinesses. 
C.  The city manager shall establish conditions of approval for each onsite consumption permit, including, but not limited to a parking plan, ventilation plan, and anti-drugged driving plan. 
D.  The permit shall be subject to suspension or revocation in accordance with Section 5.69.100, and the owner or operator shall be liable for excessive police costs related to enforcement. 
E.  The application fee and annual fee for the onsite consumption permit shall be determined by city council resolution. 
F.  All onsite consumption permits shall be issued for a term of one year. No property interest, vested right, or entitlement to receive a future license to operate a retailer or retail microbusiness shall ever inure to the benefit of such permit holder as such permits are revocable at any time with or without cause by the city manager subject to Section 5.69.100. 
(Ord. No. 1120, § 3, 2-14-18)  
5.69.130 - Temporary cannabis events. 
A.  Temporary cannabis events are allowed within the city, provided that the event organizer obtain a cannabis event organizer license from the state, obtain a valid temporary cannabis event license, obtain and maintain a valid special use permit from the city pursuant to Chapter 17.48, and operate such a temporary cannabis event in full compliance with State law and corresponding state regulations. 
B.  A cannabis event organizer must provide notice to the city of the proposed temporary cannabis event no less than sixty (60) days before the first day of the cannabis event. 
(Ord. No. 1120, § 3, 2-14-18)  
5.69.140 - Operating standards. 
A.  Limited access areas. A permitted retailer shall only permit authorized individuals to enter the retailer or retail microbusiness limited-access areas. 
B.  Retail area. Individuals shall only be granted access to the area to purchase cannabis goods after the permittee has identified the individual as a medical cannabis patient, primary caregiver, or person over the age of twenty-one (21), depending on whether the retailer or retail microbusiness sells medicinal or nonmedicinal cannabis or both. 
C.  Delivery. All deliveries of cannabis must be performed in compliance with State law and corresponding state-issued regulations. 
D.  Track and trace program. Retailers and retail microbusinesses shall have an electronic 'track and trace' system that produces historical transactional data for review by the city manager for auditing purposes. 
E.  Records. A retailer or retail microbusiness shall maintain the following records in printed format for at least three years on the premises and shall produce them to the city manager within twenty-four (24) hours after receipt of the city's request: 
1.  The name, address, and telephone numbers of the owner and landlord of the property. 
2.  The name, date of birth, address, and telephone number of each manager and staff of the retailer or retail microbusiness; the date each was hired; and the nature of each manager's and staff's participation in the business. 
3.  A written accounting of all income and expenditures of the retailer or retail microbusiness, including, but not limited to, cash and in-kind transactions. 
4.  A copy of the retailer's or retail microbusiness' commercial general liability insurance policy and all other insurance policies related to the operation of the business. 
5.  A copy of the retailer's or retail microbusiness' most recent year's financial statement and tax return. 
6.  An inventory record documenting the dates and amounts of cannabis received at the premises, the daily amounts of cannabis on the premises, and the daily amounts of cannabis transported from the premises. A retailer or retail microbusiness shall report any loss, damage, or destruction of these records to the city manager within twenty-four (24) hours of the loss, damage, or destruction. 
F.  Security. A permittee shall comply with the security plan that is submitted during the application process as approved by the city manager. A permittee shall report to the Coachella Police Department all criminal activity occurring on the premises. Should compliance with the security plan fail to properly secure the retailer or retail microbusiness premises, the city manager may impose additional or modified plan restrictions. 
G.  Cannabis consumption prohibited. No person shall smoke, ingest, or otherwise consume cannabis in any form on the premises of a retailer or retail microbusiness unless the retailer has a valid onsite consumption permit. No person shall smoke, ingest, or otherwise consume cannabis in violation of state law. 
H.  Alcohol and tobacco sale prohibited. A permittee shall not sell alcoholic beverages or tobacco products on or at any premises permitted under this chapter. 
I.  State law compliance. All retailers and retail microbusinesses must operate in full incompliance with state law. 
J.  No cannabis odors shall be detectable outside of the permitted retailer or retail microbusiness. 
(Ord. No. 1120, § 3, 2-14-18)  
5.69.150 - Interested parties. 
A.  A permittee shall provide the city with names and addresses of all of the following interested parties: 
1.  Persons with at least a ten-percent interest in the retailer or retail microbusiness; 
2.  Partners, officers, directors, and stockholders of every corporation, limited liability company, or general or limited partnership that owns at least ten (10) percent of the stock, capital, profits, voting rights, or membership interest of the retailer or retail microbusiness or that is one of the partners in the retailer or retail microbusiness; 
3.  The managers of the retailer or retail microbusiness; and 
4.  The staff of the retailer or retail microbusiness. 
B.  The permittee shall notify the city of any change in the information above within thirty (30) calendar days of the change. 
C.  All interested parties, as described in subsection A, must submit to fingerprinting and a criminal background check by the city. 
D.  No person shall be an interested party, as described in subsection A of this section, if he or she is charged with or convicted of a felony; has been charged with or convicted of a violation of California Penal Code section 186.22 (participation in a criminal street gang); or is currently on parole or probation for an offense relating to the sale or distribution of a controlled substance. "Convicted" within the meaning of this section means a plea or verdict of guilty or a conviction following a plea of nolo contendere was entered, but does not include any plea, verdict, or conviction that is expunged pursuant to California law or a similar federal or state law where the expungement was granted. "Charged" within the meaning of this section means (1) an indictment was issued by a grand jury, or an information, complaint, or similar pleading was issued by the United States Attorney, district attorney, city attorney, or other governmental official or agency authorized to prosecute crimes, and (2) the criminal proceedings are currently pending. 
(Ord. No. 1120, § 3, 2-14-18)  
5.69.160 - Emergency contact manager. 
A retailer or retail microbusiness permittee shall provide the city manager with the current name and primary and secondary telephone numbers of at least one 24-hour on-call manager to address and resolve complaints and to respond to operating problems or concerns associated with the retailer or retail microbusiness. 
(Ord. No. 1120, § 3, 2-14-18)  
5.69.170 - Community relations manager. 
Each retailer or retail microbusiness shall provide the city manager with the name, phone number, facsimile number, and email address of an on-site community relations or staff person or other representative to whom the city can provide notice if there are operating problems associated with the retailer or retail microbusiness or refer members of the public who may have any concerns or complaints regarding the operation of the retailer or retail microbusiness. Each retailer or retail microbusiness shall also provide the above information to its business neighbors located within one hundred (100) feet of the retailer or retail microbusiness as measured in a straight line without regard to intervening structures, between the front doors of each establishment. 
(Ord. No. 1120, § 3, 2-14-18)  
5.69.180 - Display of regulatory permit. 
The permittee shall display its current valid permit issued in accordance with this chapter inside the lobby or waiting area of the main entrance to the premises. The permit shall be displayed at all times in a conspicuous place so that it may be readily seen by all persons entering the premises. 
(Ord. No. 1120, § 3, 2-14-18)  
5.69.190 - Inspections and enforcement. 
A.  Recordings made by security cameras at any retailer or retail microbusiness shall be made immediately available to the city manager upon verbal request; no search warrant or subpoena shall be needed to view the recorded materials. 
B.  The city manager shall have the right to enter all cannabis facilities from time to time unannounced for the purpose of making reasonable inspections to observe and enforce compliance with this chapter. 
C.  Operation of the retailer or retail microbusiness in non-compliance with any conditions of approval or the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a violation of the municipal code and shall be enforced pursuant to the provisions of this code. 
D.  The city manager may summarily suspend or revoke a cannabis regulatory permit if any of the following, singularly or in combination, occur: 
1.  The city manager or designee determines that the retailer or retail microbusiness has failed to comply with this chapter or any condition of approval or a circumstance or situation has been created that would have permitted the city manager or designee to deny the permit under Section 5.69.060. 
2.  Operations cease for more than thirty (30) calendar days, including during change of ownership proceedings, unless otherwise authorized by the city manager; 
3.  Ownership is changed without securing a regulatory permit; or 
4.  The retailer or retail microbusiness fails to allow inspection of the records, security recordings, the activity logs, or the premises by authorized city officials. 
(Ord. No. 1120, § 3, 2-14-18)  
5.69.200 - Permits not transferable. 
Regulatory permits issued pursuant to this chapter are not transferable. 
(Ord. No. 1120, § 3, 2-14-18)  
5.69.210 - Liability and indemnification. 
A.  To the fullest extent permitted by law, any actions taken by a public officer or employee under the provisions of this chapter shall not become a personal liability of any public officer or employee of the city. 
B.  To the maximum extent permitted by law, the permittees under this chapter shall defend (with counsel acceptable to the city), indemnify and hold harmless the city of Coachella, the Coachella City Council, and its respective officials, officers, employees, representatives, agents and volunteers (hereafter collectively called city) from any liability damages, actions, claims, demands, litigation, loss (direct or indirect), causes of action, proceedings or judgment (including legal costs, attorneys' fees, expert witness or consultant fees, city attorney or staff time, expenses or costs (collectively called "action") against the city to attack, set aside, void or annul, any cannabis-related approvals and actions and comply with the conditions under which such permit is granted, if any. The city may elect, in its sole discretion, to participate in the defense of said action and the permittee shall reimburse the city for its reasonable legal costs and attorneys' fees. 
C.  Within ten (10) calendar days of the service of the pleadings upon the city of any action as specified in Subsection B., above, the permittee shall execute a letter of agreement with the city, acceptable to the office of the city attorney, which memorializes the above obligations. These obligations and the letter of agreement shall survive termination, extinguishment or invalidation of the cannabis-related approval. Failure to timely execute the letter of agreement does not relieve the applicant of any of the obligations contained in this section or any other requirements or performance or operating standards that may be imposed by the city. 
To the fullest extent permitted by law, the city shall not assume any liability whatsoever, with respect to approving any regulatory permit pursuant to this chapter or the operation of any retailer or retail microbusiness approved pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1120, § 3, 2-14-18)  
5.69.220 - Compliance with state law. 
All retailer or retail microbusinesses shall comply fully with all of the applicable restrictions and mandates set forth in state law, including without limitation the Compassionate Use Act of 1996 ("CUA"), the Medical Marijuana Program Act ("MMP"), and the Medicinal and Adult-Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act ("MAUCRSA"). 
(Ord. No. 1120, § 3, 2-14-18)  
5.69.230 - Violations. 
A.  In addition to any other remedy allowed by law, any person who violates a provision of this chapter is subject to criminal sanctions, civil actions, administrative penalties, permit suspension, and permit revocation. 
B.  Violations of this chapter constitute an infraction or misdemeanor and may be enforced by any applicable law. 
C.  Violations of this chapter are hereby declared to be public nuisances. 
D.  Each person is guilty of a separate offense each day a violation is allowed to continue and every violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense and shall be subject to all remedies. 
E.  All remedies prescribed under this chapter shall be cumulative and the election of one or more remedies shall not bar the city from the pursuit of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions hereof. 
(Ord. No. 1120, § 3, 2-14-18)  
Chapter 5.70 - ART MURALS 
 
5.70.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to permit and encourage public art murals on a content-neutral basis under certain terms and conditions. Murals comprise a unique medium of expression that serves the public interest. Murals have purposes distinct from signs and confer different benefits. Such purposes and benefits include improved aesthetics; avenues for original artistic expression; public access to original works of art, community participation in the creation of original works of art, community-building through the presence of an identification with original works of art, education about the history of the city depicted in original works of art, and a reduction in the incidence of vandalism. Murals can increase community identity and foster a sense of place if they are located in a manner visible to pedestrians, are retained for substantial periods of time, and include a neighborhood process for discussion. 
(Ord. No. 1089, § 1, 5-25-16)  
5.70.020 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter: 
"Alteration" means any change to a permitted mural, including but not limited to any change to the image(s), materials, colors, or size of the permitted mural. "Alteration" does not include naturally occurring changes to the mural caused by exposure to the elements or the passage of time. Minor changes to the permitted mural that result from the maintenance or repair of the mural shall not constitute "alteration." Such minor changes may include slight and unintended deviations from the original image, colors, or materials that occur when the permitted mural is repaired due to the passage of time or as a result of vandalism. 
"Applicant" means an applicant for a mural permit application under this chapter. 
"City council" means the city council of the city of Coachella. 
"Commission" means the Coachella Public Arts Commission, as established in Municipal Code Section 2.68.010 et seq. 
"Development services director" means the development services director of the city of Coachella, or his or her designee. 
"Mural" means an original work of visual art produced by hand that is tiled, painted directly upon, or affixed directly to an exterior wall of a structure. 
"Permittee" means an applicant who has received a mural permit pursuant to the process outlined in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1089, § 1, 5-25-16)  
5.70.030 - Permit required. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, or other entity to authorize, erect, construct, maintain, move, alter, change, place, suspend, or attach any mural within the city without first obtaining final approval from the city council and meeting all requirements set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1089, § 1, 5-25-16)  
5.70.040 - Application procedure. 
A.  Any person, firm, corporation, or other entity desiring to place a mural on any property shall first submit an application to the Development Services Department. A mural permit application shall include the following information: 
1.  Name and address of the creator of the mural. 
2.  Name and address of the owner, operator, or person in possession of the premises where the mural is proposed to be located. 
3.  A detailed drawing or sketch of the proposed mural. 
B.  A mural permit application shall be submitted with the notification fees and mural application permit fee, as established by resolution of the city council. 
C.  The development services department shall submit each completed application to the commission for review as to the compatibility of the proposed mural in the location and on the specific structure the mural is proposed, and all other applicable requirements of the Zoning Code. 
D.  Prior to any action by the commission, the applicant shall send notice of such application to all property owners within five hundred (500) feet of the location of the mural at least 30 days prior to the commission consideration of the mural. No mural shall be permitted until the applicant has certified that notification has been completed. 
E.  Each mural permit application will be considered at a public meeting of the commission. The commission will make a recommendation to the city council to accept or reject the mural permit application. The applicant will be notified in writing of the commission's decision. 
F.  The development services department shall submit the application and recommendation of the commission to the city council for final review at a public meeting. The city council's decision to issue or reject the mural permit is final. 
G.  A permit issued under this chapter is granted for the specific design and one-time production of the mural as presented in the application. Any alterations must be submitted to the development services director for review and may require additional public review and approval by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1089, § 1, 5-25-16)  
5.70.050 - Permit revocation, expiration. 
A.  A mural permit is revocable by the development services director if it is determined at any time that the mural conflicts with the information provided in the application or with any one of the requirements listed in Section 5.70.060, below. 
B.  Unless a shorter period of time has been granted by the city council, a permit issued under this chapter expires two (2) years after issuance if the approved mural has not been installed, or one hundred eighty (180) days from issuance if the work permitted hereunder has not been commenced. The permit shall also expire if it is determined that the work authorized by the permit has been suspended, discontinued, or abandoned for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days. 
C.  Upon completion of the mural, the permittee shall request a final inspection and release of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 1089, § 1, 5-25-16)  
5.70.060 - Mural requirements. 
Murals that meet all of the following requirements will be allowed upon satisfaction of the applicable permit procedures: 
A.  A new mural shall remain in place, without alteration, for a minimum period of five years. The artist or landowner must enter into a five-year maintenance agreement with the city to provide an assurance that the mural will be repaired in case of vandalism, weathered wall surface damage, or chipping paint. A mural may be removed within the first five years of the date it is permitted under the following circumstances: 
1.  The property on which the mural is located is sold; or 
2.  The structure or property is substantially remodeled or altered in a way that precludes continuance of the mural; or 
3.  The property undergoes a change of use authorized by the building and safety department. 
B.  A mural shall not include mechanically-produced or computer-generated prints or images, including, but not limited to, digitally printed vinyl. 
C.  A mural shall not contain electrical or mechanical components. 
D.  A mural shall not have moving structural elements, flashing or sequential lights, lighting elements, or other automated methods that result in movement, the appearance of movement, or change of mural image, not including static illumination turned off and back on not more than once every twenty-four (24) hours. 
E.  A mural shall not be placed over the exterior surface of any building opening, including, but not limited to, windows, doors, and vents. 
F.  No part of the mural shall exceed the height of the structure to which it is tiled, painted, or affixed. 
G.  No part of the mural shall extend more than six inches from the plane of the wall upon which it is tiled, painted, or affixed. 
H.  No mural shall be placed on a lot that is improved with only one single-family residential structure and accessory structures. 
I.  No mural shall be arranged and illuminated in a manner that will produce light intensity of greater than three foot candles above ambient lighting, as measured at the property line of the nearest residentially zoned property. 
J.  The owner of the property on which a mural is installed shall execute and deliver to the city clerk a covenant for recordation in a form approved by the city attorney. The covenant shall provide that the mural will be installed and maintained at all times in full compliance with this chapter. In addition, the covenant shall remain in force for as long as the mural exists. 
K.  Upon change of ownership of the property on which a mural is installed, the new owner may, at the owner's election and without the need for permission from the city, terminate the covenant and remove the mural, subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1089, § 1, 5-25-16)  
5.70.070 - Violation; penalty. 
A.  It is unlawful to violate any provision of this chapter. This applies to any applicant, any permittee, the proprietor of a use or development on which a permitted mural is located, or to the owner of the land on which the permitted mural is located. For the ease of reference in this Section, all of these persons are referred to by the term "operator." 
B.  The department of development services must give written notice of any violation to the operator. Failure of the operator to receive the notice of the violation does not invalidate any enforcement actions taken by the city. 
C.  Any violation of this chapter is considered a public nuisance. 
D.  The development services director shall have the authority to enforce the regulations of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1089, § 1, 5-25-16)  
Chapter 5.80 - REGULATION OF SHORT-TERM VACATION RENTALS 
 
5.80.005 - Purpose. 
A.  The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations for the use of privately owned residential dwelling units as short term vacation rentals to minimize secondary impacts of such uses on surrounding residential neighborhoods to ensure the collection and payment of transient occupancy taxes. 
B.  This chapter is not intended to provide any owner of residential property with the right or privilege to violate any private conditions, covenants and restrictions applicable to the owner's property that may prohibit the use of such owner's residential property for short term rental purposes as defined in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1105, § 2, 5-10-17)  
5.80.010 - Definitions. 
The definitions set forth in this section shall govern the meaning and construction of the words and phrases used in this chapter, except where the context of such words and phrases clearly indicates a different meaning or construction. 
"Bedroom" shall mean an area of a short-term vacation rental normally occupied and being heated or cooled by any equipment for human habitation, which consists of four walls to the ceiling, at least one of which is located along an exterior wall with a window, and contains a built-in closet. 
"Short-term vacation rental" shall mean a "dwelling unit" as defined by the city's zoning ordinance that is rented by the owner to another party for a period of not more than thirty (30) consecutive days in exchange for any form of monetary or non-monetary consideration such as but not limited to trade, fee, swap or any other in lieu of cash payments. 
"Owner of a short-term vacation rental" shall mean the person(s) entity(ies) that hold(s) legal and or equitable title to the subject short term vacation rental. As used in this chapter, the term "owner" shall include owner's authorized representative or agent as set forth in Section 5.80.040. 
(Ord. No. 1105, § 2, 5-10-17)  
5.80.020 - Administration. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be administered by finance director or such other city employee as may be designated by the city manager, hereinafter referred to as the "permit administrator". In order to facilitate orderly administration of this chapter, the permit administrator shall have the authority to make interpretations and to promulgate administrative regulations consistent with the provisions of this chapter for the purpose of interpreting, clarifying, carrying out, furthering and enforcing the requirements and provision of this chapter. A copy of such administration regulations shall be on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 1105, § 2, 5-10-17)  
5.80.030 - Permit requirement. 
A.  No owner of a short-term vacation rental shall rent, offer to rent, or advertise for rent the short-term vacation rental to another person without a permit approved and issued in the manner provided for by this chapter. The permit shall be required to be renewed on an annual basis in order to remain valid. 
B.  No person shall rent, offer to rent, or advertise for rent a balcony, patio, or other outdoor area of a short-term vacation rental (" outdoor area") if such rental does not occur in connection with the rental of the remaining residence or dwelling unit to which the outdoor area is attached. 
C.  No person shall rent, offer to rent, or advertise for rent a dwelling unit, or any portion thereof, as a short-term vacation rental to any partnership, corporation, limited liability company, commercial enterprise, or similar entity. 
D.  No person who has rented a short-term vacation rental shall sublease such dwelling unit, or any portion thereof, to any other person or entity. 
E.  No person shall charge a fee or request or require a donation for entrance into any short-term vacation rental. 
(Ord. No. 1105, § 2, 5-10-17)  
5.80.040 - Authorized agent or representative. 
A.  An owner may authorize an agent or a representative to comply with the requirements of this chapter on behalf of the owner ("agent") 
B.  Notwithstanding subsection (A), the owner of the short-term vacation rental is responsible for compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the owner shall not be relieved from any personal responsibility and/ or personal liability for non-compliance with any applicable law, rule or regulation pertaining to the use and occupancy of the subject short-term vacation rental unit, regardless of whether such non-compliance was committed by the owner's authorized agent or representative or the occupants of the owner's vacation rental unit or their guests. Failure of an agent to comply with this chapter shall be deemed non-compliance by the owner. 
(Ord. No. 1105, § 2, 5-10-17)  
5.80.050 - Advertising shall include permit number. 
A.  No person shall offer to rent or advertise for rent a short-term vacation rental without including in the offer or advertisement (whether the advertisement is web - based, print media, radio and/ or television) the city permit number applicable to the property in the form "Coachella Permit No._____." If the offer to rent or advertisement contains different sizes of type or fonts, the permit number shall be printed in the same size type as the large type used in the main body of the offer or advertisement. In the case of audio -only advertising, the city permit number shall be read as part of the advertising. 
B.  Any person advertising or causing the advertisement of a short-term vacation rental that contains information regarding the maximum occupancy of the short-term vacation rental, shall advertise only the overnight maximum occupancy limit as set forth in the permit issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1105, § 2, 5-10-17)  
5.80.060 - Short-term rental permit applications. 
A.  The owner or the owner's agent shall submit an application for a short-term vacation rental permit required by this chapter in a form required by the city and shall contain the following information and/or documents: 
1.  The name, address, and telephone number of the owner of the subject short-term vacation rental unit. 
2.  The name, address, and telephone number of the owner's authorized agent or representative, if any. 
3.  The name, address, and 24-hour telephone number of the local contact person or agent of the owner who is available twenty-four (24) hours per day, seven days per week for the purpose of responding in- person within forty-five (45) minutes to complaints regarding the occupancy, condition, operation, conduct or use of the short term vacation rental as well as undertaking remedial action to resolve any such complaints and/ or correct any violations ("local contact person"). 
4.  Verification that the local contact person can respond in- person to the site of the short-term vacation rental unit within forty-five (45) minutes. 
5.  The address of the proposed short-term vacation rental unit. 
6.  The number of bedrooms in the short-term vacation rental unit. 
7.  A nuisance response plan containing the information required by this chapter. 
8.  A copy of owner's transient occupancy registration certificate and city business license. 
9.  Such other information as the permit administrator deems reasonably necessary to administer this chapter. 
B.  The permit application and annual renewal applications shall be accompanied by an application fee in the amount established by resolution of the city council. Payment of the renewal fee shall be paid before a permit may be approved and before the short-term vacation rental unit may be subsequently rented. 
C.  Within fourteen (14) days of a change of property ownership, change of owner's agent or representative, or any other change in material facts pertaining to the information contained in the application, the owner or owner's authorized agent or representative shall submit an application for a new permit, which must be obtained prior to continuing to rent the subject unit as a short-term vacation rental. 
(Ord. No. 1105, § 2, 5-10-17)  
5.80.070 - Content of nuisance response plans. 
A.  Each nuisance response plan accompanying an application for a permit required by this chapter shall contain the following information and otherwise be in a form required by the permit administrator. 
1.  The mailing address and telephone number of the owner or owners of the residential dwelling unit or units to be used as a short-term vacation rental pursuant to the permit; 
2.  The name, address and telephone number of the local contact person or persons who is available in person and by telephone, and who will be responsible for responding to or causing a prompt response within forty-five (45) minutes to a nuisance or other complaint arising out of the occupancy, condition, operation or use of the short-term rental(s) by tenants, their visitors and/ or their guests and/ or undertaking remedial action to resolve any such nuisance or other complaint or correct a violation. 
a.  No more than a total of three local contact persons shall be designated in the response plan; and 
b.  Only one such person shall be designated as the person responsible for responding to a nuisance or other complaint during any particular hours of the day, different days in a week, and/ or different weeks of the year. 
B.  The manner of responding to or causing a response to a nuisance complaint, including but not limited to the manner in which the complainant or complainants will be notified of the response and the method of documenting prompt responses and timely corrective action. 
C.  The manner of assuring timely corrective action to remedy the conditions that caused the nuisance or other complaint. For the purposes of this chapter, " timely corrective action" shall include, at a minimum, a telephone call to the primary occupant of the short-term vacation rental within fifteen (15) minutes of being informed of the initial nuisance or other complaint; 
D.  The proposed maximum number of overnight occupants, with supporting documentation identifying unusual size, interior layout, parking or other physical characteristics, if any, that support a request for occupancy greater than two persons plus two persons per bedroom." 
(Ord. No. 1105, § 2, 5-10-17)  
5.80.080 - Amendment of response plans. 
At any time following the issuance of a permit required by this chapter, the owner of the short-term vacation rental being operated pursuant to such permit may change the content of the nuisance response plan approved incident to the issuance of the permit by filing an amended response plan with the permit administrator. Such amended response plan shall contain all of the information and be in the form required by Section 5.80.070 of this chapter, and shall be accompanied by an amended response plan fee, if any, in an amount established by the resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1105, § 2, 5-10-17)  
5.80.090 - Permit approval and issuance. 
A.  Upon receipt of an application for a permit required by this chapter, the permit administrator will review the application and supporting documents, and will approve and issue a permit to the owner of the property or properties that are the subject(s) of the application that authorizes the use and occupancy of such property as a short-term vacation rental if the permit administrator finds that the required application fee has been paid, the nuisance response plan submitted with the application conforms to the requirements of this chapter and the short-term vacation rental complies with the provisions of Section 5.80.100 of this chapter. Any permit issued shall contain on its face the overnight maximum occupancy limit as determined by Section 5.80.100 of this chapter. 
B.  An application may be denied if the applicant has had a prior short-term vacation rental application for the same unit revoked within the past twelve (12) calendar months. 
C.  In the event that a request is made by an applicant for increased overnight occupancy greater than the standard of two persons within each short-term vacation rental plus a number that will not exceed two persons per bedroom, as established by Section 5.80.100, the permit administrator may request an interior and/ or exterior site visit in order to verify the facts stated in the application and/ or may request additional written or photographic documentation from the owner. The owner shall be present during any site visit. The permit administrator's determination on an application for increased occupancy shall be final. No hearing shall be required or conducted. The permit administrator shall be afforded broad discretion with respect to applications for increased occupancy. This chapter shall not be interpreted to create a property interest in potential increased occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 1105, § 2, 5-10-17)  
5.80.100 - Operational requirements and performance standards established. 
A.  Each owner, and each tenant or occupant of a short-term vacation rental, shall at all times comply with or cause compliance with the operational and performance standards applicable to short-term vacation rentals they own, lease or occupy, as established by this section. 
B.  The owner shall ensure that the short-term vacation rental complies with all applicable codes regarding fire, building and safety, and all other relevant laws and ordinances. 
C.  The owner shall require the primary overnight and daytime occupant of the short-term vacation rental to be an adult twenty-one (21) years of age or older ("primary occupant"). The primary occupant shall provide a telephone number to the owner and shall be accessible to the owner by telephone at all times 
D.  Prior to occupancy, the owner shall obtain the name, address, and driver's license number or a copy of the passport of the primary occupant of the short-term vacation rental. The primary occupant is s legally responsible for compliance of all occupants of the short-term vacation rental or their guests with all provisions of this chapter and/ or the Coachella Municipal Code. This information shall be readily available upon request of any police officer or employee of the city authorized to enforce this chapter or state law. 
E.  The owner shall limit overnight occupancy of the short-term vacation rental to the permitted number of occupants, with the maximum number of overnight occupants being two persons within each short-term vacation rental plus a number that will not exceed two persons per bedroom within each short-term vacation rental ("overnight maximum occupancy limit"). The number of bedrooms in a short-term vacation rental shall be verified by the permit administrator using county assessor and/or city building records, prior to the issuance of a permit. The permit administrator in his/ her discretion may, when unusual size, interior layout, parking or other physical characteristics are shown, approve a greater maximum number of overnight occupants. 
F.  During the hours of 10:00 p.m. through 8:00 a.m. of the following day, the short-term vacation rental shall not exceed the overnight maximum occupancy limit. 
G.  Trash and refuse shall not be left stored within public view, except in proper containers for the purpose of collection by the city's authorized waste hauler on scheduled trash collection days. The owner of the short-term vacation rental shall provide sufficient trash collection containers and service to meet the demand of the occupants 
H.  1.  Prior to the occupancy of a short-term vacation rental, the owner shall enter into a written rental agreement with the primary occupant. Each written rental agreement for a short-term vacation rental shall include the following terms, notifications and disclosures, which shall also be posted in a conspicuous location inside the unit: 
a.  The name, age, address of the primary occupant along with a copy of the primary occupant's government issued identification; 
b.  The maximum number of overnight occupants that are permitted pursuant to the overnight maximum occupancy limit set forth in the permit. 
c.  A list containing the names of all guests that will occupy the short term vacation rental provided to the owner by the primary occupant, including a list of their vehicles by make and model and license plate numbers. 
d.  An acknowledgment and agreement of the primary occupant that he or she is legally responsible for compliance of all occupants of the short-term vacation rental and their guests with all provisions of this chapter and/ or the Coachella Municipal Code. 
e.  Notification, acknowledgement and agreement of the primary occupant that failure to comply with the maximum occupancy limit and/ or the provisions of Section 5.80.100 and the subsequent refusal to comply with the instructions of the owner and/ or local contact person in order to remedy such violations, shall subject the primary occupant and his/her guests and/ or other occupants to an immediate order to vacate the short-term vacation rental by the owner or local contact person in accordance with the provisions contained within the rental agreement. 
f.  The trash pick-up day and applicable rules and regulations pertaining to leaving or storing trash or refuse on the exterior of the property. 
g.  Notification that the occupant(s) may be cited or fined by the city and/ or immediately evicted by the owner pursuant to state law, in addition to any other remedies available at law, for creating a disturbance or for violating any provisions of this chapter. 
h.  Notification that failure to conform to the occupancy requirements of the short-term vacation rental is a violation of this chapter. 
i.  Notification that amplified sound, including radios, televisions and other electronic devices are subject to the city's noise ordinance as set forth in Coachella Municipal Code Chapter 7.04. 
j.  A prohibition on illegal loud parties, along with notification of the city' s right to recover the costs of special enforcement needed to address certain loud parties under the circumstances described in Coachella Municipal Code Sections 7.05.010 through 7.05.060. 
k.  A requirement that the occupant(s) participate in neighborhood quiet hours by avoiding parties and loud social events between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
l.  The name of the managing agency, agent, rental manager, local contact person, or owner of the short-term vacation rental , and a telephone number at which that party may be reached at all times. 
m.  A copy of the "good neighbor guidelines" which may from time to time be prepared by the permit administrator. These guidelines may include location - specific information, such as local speed limits. 
n.  Notification that the property is part of the city of Coachella's short-term vacation rental program. 
o.  A copy of this chapter of the Coachella Municipal Code, as it may be amended from time to time. 
2.  The rental agreement and documentation of compliance with this subparagraph (H) shall be maintained by the owner and/or agent for a period of three years and be made readily available upon request of the permit administrator or any police officer or employee of the city authorized to enforce this chapter or state law. 
I.  During the rental term of each short-term vacation rental, the local contact person shall be available by phone and in-person twenty-four (24) hours per day, seven days per week for the purpose of: (i) responding by telephone within fifteen (15) minutes of complaints regarding the occupancy, condition, operation or use of the short term vacation rental; (ii) responding in- person within forty-five (45) minutes to any additional or successive complaints regarding the occupancy, condition, operation or use short-term vacation rental; and (iii) taking action to resolve any complaint and/ or correct any violation as set forth in subparagraph (J) of this Section 5.80.100. 
J.  Upon receipt of a nuisance complaint or such other complaint or upon notification that any occupant and/ or guest of the short-term vacation rental has created unreasonable noise or disturbances, engaged in disorderly conduct, or committed violations of this chapter, the Coachella Municipal Code or any state law, the owner or the local contact person shall promptly respond to such complaint and take corrective action to remedy the complaint and prevent a recurrence of such conduct by those occupants or guests. For purposes of this paragraph, "promptly respond" shall mean a physical presence at the premises of the short-term vacation rental in which the primary occupant or other occupancy is advised of the nature of the complaint and a correction of any violation is made, or if contact with the primary occupant or other occupancy is not required, the subject of the complaint is resolved, including the correction of any violation. If the nature of the violation involves an action that would take more than an hour, "promptly respond" shall mean notifying the permit administrator of the nature of the complaint and thereafter diligently pursuing to completion the correction of the violation. Failure of the owner or the local contact person to promptly respond and/or to take timely corrective action regarding the occupancy, condition, operation, or use of the short-term vacation rental shall be a violation of this chapter and shall be grounds for the imposition of penalties as set forth in this chapter and/or revocation of the permit. An owner or local contact person is not required or authorized to act as a peace officer or to intervene in situations that pose a risk to personal safety. The owner, agent or the local contact person shall keep and maintain a written log or other record of the nature of the complaint or violation and the date, and time of each complaint, disturbance, response and the corrective action taken. Such written log or record shall be readily available upon request of the city, including the permit administrator, and any police officer or employee of the city authorized to enforce this chapter or state law and shall be retained for a minimum of three years. 
K.  The owner and/ or local contact person shall order the primary occupant and his/ her guests and/ or other occupants to immediately vacate the short-term vacation rental in accordance with provisions contained within the rental agreement if the primary occupant and/ or guests or other occupant fail to comply with the maximum occupancy limit and/or violate the provisions of this Section 5.80.100 and subsequently refuse to comply with the instructions of the owner and/or local contact person in order to remedy or correct the violation. 
L.  The owner shall keep written records documenting compliance with all elements of the performance standards and the approved nuisance response plan. Such records shall be retained for a minimum of three years and shall be available during regular business hours upon request of the city, including the permit administrator, and any police officer or employee of the city authorized to enforce this chapter or state law 
M.  The short-term vacation rental use shall not involve the use of commercial vehicles for the delivery of materials to and from the premises beyond those commercial vehicles normally associated with residential uses nor storage of delivered materials beyond those items which would normally be associated with a residential use of property. 
N.  The operational requirements and performance standards may be modified by the permit administrator upon request of the owner based upon site specific circumstances for the purpose of allowing reasonable accommodation of a short-term vacation rental occupant as may be required by state or federal disability laws. All requests must be in writing and shall identify how the strict application of the standard conditions creates an unreasonable hardship to a property such that, if the requirement is not modified, reasonable use of the property for a short-term vacation rental would not be allowed. Any hardships identified must relate to physical constraints to the subject site and shall not be self-induced or economic. Any modifications of the standard conditions shall not further exacerbate an already existing problem. 
O.  The owner and/ or the owner's authorized agent or representative shall comply with all provisions of Section 4.28.030 et. seq. of the Municipal Code concerning transient occupancy taxes, including, but not limited to, submission of a return in accordance with Section 5.80.070 of the Municipal Code, which shall be filed even if the vacation rental unit was not rented during each such reporting period. 
P.  The permit administrator shall have the authority to impose additional conditions on the use of any given short-term vacation rental unit to ensure that any potential secondary effects unique to the subject vacation rental unit are avoided or adequately mitigated. 
(Ord. No. 1105, § 2, 5-10-17)  
5.80.110 - Terminating the use of a property as short-term rental. 
Where the owner of property used and occupied as a short-term vacation rental pursuant to a permit approved and issued in the manner provided for by this chapter determines to terminate such use and restore the property either to an owner-occupied residence or a long-term rental, the property owner shall promptly cause a notice of such determination to be filed with the permit administrator. 
(Ord. No. 1105, § 2, 5-10-17)  
5.80.120 - Violations. 
A.  It is unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any person or entity owning, renting, leasing, occupying or having charge, control or possession of any real or improved property within the city of Coachella to cause, permit, maintain or allow any violation of this chapter to exist thereon. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. Such violation is punishable as set forth in Section 1.08 of this code. Each and every day, or portion thereof, that a violation of this chapter exists constitutes a separate and distinct violation. 
B.  Alternatively, this chapter may be enforced through the issuance of an administrative citation in accordance with Chapter 1.10 of this code, except that the fine for each separate violation shall be as follows: (1) an administrative fine in an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the first citation; (2) an administrative fine an amount not to exceed seven hundred and fifty dollars ($750.00) for a second citation issued for the same offense within a twelve-month period of the date of the first offense; and (3) an administrative fine in an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for a third and any subsequent citation issued for the same offense within a twelve-month period of the date of the first offense. Each and every day such a violation exists shall constitute a separate and distinct violation of this chapter. 
C.  Notwithstanding paragraph (b) of this Section 5.80.120, operating a short term vacation rental without a valid permit shall be subject to an administrative fine in the amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each citation. 
D.  In addition to the foregoing, a violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a public nuisance and shall be subject to abatement by the city by means of a civil action or administrative abatement pursuant to Chapter 3.10 of this code, and each day such condition continues it shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. 
E.  This remedies provided for in this section are in addition to, and not in lieu of, all other legal remedies, criminal or civil, which may be pursued by the city to address any violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1105, § 2, 5-10-17)  
5.80.130 - Permit suspension, modification or revocation. 
A.  In addition to any other remedy provided by this chapter, a permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be suspended, modified or revoked for violations of this chapter, for violation of any other law on the premises of the short-term vacation rental, or for the maintenance of such other conditions as may be shown to be injurious to the public health and safety or if the applicant made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application for permit, or any report or record required to be filed pursuant to this chapter. 
B.  Prior to suspension, modification or revocation of a permit, a hearing shall be held thereon by the city manager or a hearing officer designated by the city manager or his designee. The permittee shall be notified in writing of the grounds for suspension, modification or revocation of the permit at least ten (10) days prior to the scheduled hearing. The decision of the hearing officer shall be rendered within five days of the hearing. The decision shall be in writing, and shall set forth the findings and reasons for the decision. The decision of the hearing officer is final. 
(Ord. No. 1105, § 2, 5-10-17)  
5.80.140 - Specific violations. 
Any of the following acts or omissions arising out of the operation and use of a short term vacation rental is unlawful and constitutes a misdemeanor punishable as set forth in Section 1.08 of this code. 
A.  Rental, offering for rental, or advertising for rental of a dwelling unit located on any property within the city by the owner of the property as a short-term vacation rental without a permit authorizing such use that has been approved and issued in the manner required by this chapter. 
B.  Failure of the owner of a short-term vacation rental issued a permit in the manner required by this chapter or the owner's designated agent to respond to a nuisance complaint arising out of the occupancy and use of the short-term rental by a tenant, or the tenant's visitors or guests in the manner and within the time required by a nuisance response plan approved by the permit administrator incident to the issuance of such permit. 
C.  Failure of the owner of a short-term vacation rental issued a permit in the manner required by this chapter to keep a response plan required by the chapter on file with the permit administrator containing the name of the current person or persons responsible for responding to a nuisance complaint within the time required by this chapter. 
D.  Offering to rent or advertising for rent a short-term vacation rental without including in the offer or advertisement the city permit number applicable to the property in the form "Coachella Permit No._____" with the permit number printed in the same size type as the largest type used in the offer or advertisement. 
E.  Failure to comply with or cause compliance with any performance standard listed in Section 5.80.100. 
(Ord. No. 1105, § 2, 5-10-17)  
5.80.150 - Records and inspection. 
Each owner shall provide access to each short-term vacation rental and any records related to the use and occupancy of the short-term vacation rental to the city manager or his designee at any time during normal business hours, for the purpose of inspection or audit to determine that the objective and conditions of this chapter are being fulfilled. 
(Ord. No. 1105, § 2, 5-10-17)  
5.80.160 - Requirements not exclusive. 
The requirements of this chapter shall be in addition to any license, permit or fee required under any other provision of the Coachella Municipal Code. The issuance of any permit pursuant to this chapter shall not relieve any person of the obligation to comply with all other provisions of the Coachella Municipal Code pertaining to the use and occupancy of the short-term vacation rental or the property on which it is located. 
(Ord. No. 1105, § 2, 5-10-17)  
Title 6 - ANIMALS 
Chapters:  
Chapter 6.02 - ANIMAL CONTROL 
Sections: 
 
6.02.010 - Riverside County Code Title 6 adopted. 
Title 6 of the Riverside County Code as it existed effective July 21, 2016 as amended by Ordinance 630, attached hereto as Exhibit A and now on file in the office of the city clerk, is hereby adopted as the Animal Control Code of the city except as provided herein: 
A.  As it applies in the city, Section 6.05.020 of the County Code shall be amended to read in its entirety as follows: "All roosters shall be kept and/or maintained only upon lands and in the numbers authorized under Title 17 (Zoning) of the Coachella Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 929 § 2, 2005; Ord. No. 1040, § 2, 5-8-12; Ord. No. 1094, § 3, 9-14-16)  
Title 7 - NOISE CONTROL 
Chapters:  
Chapter 7.04 - NOISE CONTROL[1] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1022, adopted Nov. 17, 2010, amended ch. 7.04 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 7.04 pertained to similar subject matter, consisted of §§ 7.04.010—7.04.140, and derived from Ord. 940. 
 
7.24.010 - Purpose. 
The city council finds and declares that: 
A.  Inadequately controlled noise presents a growing danger to the health and welfare of the residents of the city of Coachella; 
B.  The making and creation of excessive, unnecessary or unusually loud noises within the limits of the city of Coachella is a condition that has existed for some time, however, the extent and volume of such noises is increasing; 
C.  The making, creation or maintenance of such excessive, unnecessary, unnatural or unusually loud noises that are prolonged, unusual and unnatural in their time, place and use affect and are a detriment to public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare and prosperity of the residents of the city of Coachella; 
D.  Every person is entitled to an environment in which the noise is not detrimental to his life, health, or enjoyment of property; and 
E.  The necessity in the public interest for the provisions and prohibitions hereinafter contained and enacted, is declared as a matter of legislative determination and public policy, and it is further declared that the provisions and prohibitions hereinafter contained and enacted are in pursuance of and for the purpose of securing and promoting the public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare and prosperity and the peace and quiet of the residents of the city of Coachella. 
(Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 11-17-10; Ord. No. 1024, 11-17-10)  
7.04.020 - Definitions. 
[As used in this chapter, the following terms have the meanings given:] 
"A-weighted sound level" means the sound pressure level in decibels as measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighting network. The level to read is designated db(A) or dBA. 
"Ambient noise level" means the all-encompassing noise level associated with a given environment, being a composite of sounds from all sources, excluding the alleged offensive noise, at the location and approximate time at which a comparison with the alleged offensive noise is to be made. 
"Amplified music" means instrumental and/or vocal music amplified through electronic means. 
"Average sound level" means a sound level typical of the sound levels at a certain place during a given period of time; also, means an equivalent continuous sound level. 
"Commercial establishments" includes, but is not limited to, any nightclub, restaurant, sports bar, industrial, retail or business establishment or combination thereof. 
"Construction equipment" means any tools, machinery or equipment used in connection with construction operations, including all types of "special construction" equipment as defined in the pertinent sections of the California Vehicle Code when used in the construction process on any construction site, home improvement site or property maintenance site, regardless of whether such site be located on-highway or off-highway. 
"Cumulative period" means an additive period of time composed of individual time segments which may be continuous or interrupted. 
"Decibel" means a unit measure of sound level noise. 
"Disturbance" means any disturbance of the peace as defined by California Penal Code Section 415 or as otherwise defined herein. 
"Disturbing, excessive or offensive noise" means any sound or noise from any source in excess of the sound level or noise level set forth in Section 7.04.030. 
"Emergency machinery," "vehicle" or "work" means any machinery, vehicle or work used, employed or performed in an effort to protect, provide or restore safe conditions in the community or for the citizenry, or work by private or public utilities when restoring utility service. 
"Fixed noise source" means a stationary device which creates sounds which are fixed or motionless including, but not limited to, industrial and commercial machinery and equipment, pumps, fans, compressors, generators, air conditioners and refrigeration equipment. 
"Gathering" means any convergence of five or more persons. 
"Impact noise" means the noise produced by the collision of one mass in motion with a second mass which may be either in motion or in rest. 
"Noise level" means the same as "sound level." The terms may be used interchangeably herein. 
"Peace officer" means a duly appointed officer of the city, as defined in California Penal Code, Sections 830, et seq. 
"Person" means a person, firm, association, copartnership, joint venture, corporation or any entity, public or private in nature. 
"Portable powered blower" means any mechanically powered device, regardless of the source of power, which is not stationary, and used for the purpose of blowing leaves, dirt or other debris off sidewalks, lawns or other surfaces. 
"Premises" means any real property or location at which a gathering may be held. 
"Sound level" (noise level) in decibels is the quantity measured using the frequency weighting of A of a sound level meter as defined herein. 
"Sound level meter" means an instrument meeting American National Standard Institute's Standard SL. 4-1974 for type 1 or type 2 sound level meters or an instrument and the associated recording and analyzing equipment which will provide equivalent data. 
(Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 11-17-10; Ord. No. 1024, 11-17-10)  
7.04.030 - Sound level limits as related to fixed noise sources. 
A.  Regardless of whether an objective measurement by sound level meter is involved, it shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue, or cause to be made or continued, within the city limits any disturbing excessive or offensive noise or vibration which causes discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitivity residing in the area or that is plainly audible at a distance greater than fifty (50) feet from the sources point for any purpose. The following ten-minute average sound level limits, unless otherwise specifically indicated, shall apply as indicated in the following table as it relates to a fixed noise source or leaf blowers pursuant to Section 7.04.075. 
Zone 	Time 	Applicable Ten-Minute Average Decibel Limit (A-weighted) 
Residential—All zones 	6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 
10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. 	55 
  
45 
Commercial—All zones 	6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 
10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. 	65 
  
55 
 
B.  If the measured ambient noise level exceeds the applicable limit as noted in the table in subsection (A) of this section, the allowable average sound level shall be the ambient noise level. The ambient noise level shall be measured when the alleged noise violation sources are not operating. 
C.  The sound level limit between two zoning districts shall be measured at the higher allowable district. 
(Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 11-17-10; Ord. No. 1024, 11-17-10)  
7.04.040 - Prohibited noise generally. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person or property owner within the city of Coachella to make, cause, or continue to make or cause, loud, excessive, impulsive or intrusive sound or noise that annoys or disturbs persons of ordinary sensibilities. 
B.  The factors, standards, and conditions that may be considered in determining whether a violation of the provisions of this section has been committed, include, but are not limited to, the following: 
1.  The level of the noise; 
2.  The level and intensity of the background (ambient) noise, if any; 
3.  The proximity of the noise to residential or commercial sleeping areas; 
4.  The nature, density and zoning of the area within which the noise emanates; 
5.  The density of inhabitation of the area within which the noise emanates; 
6.  The time of day and night the noise occurs; 
7.  The duration of the noise; 
8.  Whether the nature of the noise is natural or unnatural; 
9.  Whether the noise is constant, recurrent or intermittent; and 
10.  Whether the noise is produced by a commercial or noncommercial activity. 
(Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 11-17-10; Ord. No. 1024, 11-17-10)  
7.04.050 - Disturbing, excessive, offensive noises—Declaration of certain acts constituting. 
The following activities, are declared to be deemed disturbing, excessive or offensive noises and any of the following shall constitute prima facie evidence of a violation: 
A.  Horns, Signaling Devices, Muffler Systems, Car Alarms, Etc. Unnecessary use or operation of horns, signaling devices, uncontrolled muffler noises, car alarms on vehicles of all types, including motorcycles, and other equipment. 
1.  The operation of any such sound production or reproduction device, radio receiving set, musical instrument, drum, phonograph, television set, machine, loudspeaker and sound amplifier or similar machine or device in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of fifty (50) feet or more from the building, structure or vehicle in which located, or from the source point. 
2.  The operation of any sound amplifier, which is part of, or connected to, any radio, stereo receiver, compact disc player, cassette tape player, or other similar device when operated in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of fifty (50) feet from the source point or when operated in such a manner as to cause a person to be aware of vibration at a distance of fifty (50) feet or more from the source point. 
B.  Uses Restricted. The use, operation, or permitting to be played, used or operated, any sound production or reproduction device, radio receiving set, musical instrument, drums, phonograph, television set, loudspeakers and sound amplifiers or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet, and comfort of any reasonable person of normal sensitiveness. 
C.  Prima Facie Violations. Any of the following shall constitute evidence of a prima facie violation of this section: 
1.  The operation of any such sound production or reproduction device, radio receiving set, musical instrument, drum, phonograph, television set, machine, loudspeaker and sound amplifier or similar machine or device in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of fifty (50) feet from the building, structure or vehicle in which located, or from the source point. 
2.  The operation of any sound amplifier, which is part of, or connected to, any radio, stereo receiver, compact disc player, cassette tape player, or other similar device when operated in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of fifty (50) feet from the source point or when operated in such a manner as to cause a person to be aware of vibration at a distance of fifty (50) feet from the source point. 
D.  Enforcement of Prima Facie Violations. Any peace office, as defined in California Penal Code, Sections 830, et seq., and/or the city manager or his or her designees, who are authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter and who encounters evidence of a prima facie violation of this section whereby the component(s) amplifying or transmitting the sound in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet, or comfort of any reasonable person of normal sensitivity in any area of the city shall be empowered to issue a citation and/or to confiscate and impound as evidence, any or all of the components amplifying or transmitting the sound. 
(Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 11-17-10; Ord. No. 1024, 11-17-10)  
7.04.060 - Special provisions—Exemptions. 
The following activities shall be exempted from the provisions of this chapter: 
A.  School bands, school athletic and school entertainment events; 
B.  Outdoor gatherings, public dances, shows and sporting and entertainment events; provided, the events are authorized by the city; 
C.  Activities conducted in public parks and public playgrounds; 
D.  Any mechanical device, apparatus or equipment used, related to or connected with emergency machinery, vehicle or work; 
E.  All mechanical devices, apparatus or equipment which are utilized for the protection or salvage of agricultural crops during periods of potential or actual frost damage or other adverse weather conditions; 
F.  Mobile noise sounds associated with agricultural operations provided such operations do not take place between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays, including Saturdays, or at any time on Sunday or a federal holiday; 
G.  Mobile noise sources associated with agricultural pest control through pesticide application; 
H.  Carillon chimes between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.; 
I.  For noise sources associated with property maintenance, refer to Section 7.04.075, "property maintenance activities"; 
J.  For noise sources associated with construction activities, refer to Section 7.04.070, "construction activities"; and 
K.  The provisions of this regulation shall not preclude the construction, operation, maintenance and repairs of equipment, apparatus or facilities of park and recreation departments, public work projects or essential public services and facilities, including those of public utilities subject to the regulatory jurisdiction of the California Public Utilities Commission. 
(Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 11-17-10; Ord. No. 1024, 11-17-10)  
7.04.070 - Construction activities. 
No person shall perform, nor shall any person be employed, nor shall any person cause any other person to be employed to work for which a building permit is required by the city in any work of construction, erection, demolition, alteration, repair, addition to or improvement of any building, structure, road or improvement to realty except between the hours as set forth as follows: 
October 1st through April 30th 
Monday—Friday: 6:00 a.m. to 5:30 p.m. 
Saturday: 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. 
Sunday: 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. 
Holidays: 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. 
May 1st through September 30th 
Monday—Friday: 5:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. 
Saturday: 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. 
Sunday: 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. 
Holidays: 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. 
Emergency work and/or unusual conditions may cause work to be permitted with the consent of the city manager, or his or her designee, upon recommendation of the building director or the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 11-17-10; Ord. No. 1024, 11-17-10)  
7.04.075 - Property maintenance activities. 
A.  Noise sources associated with property maintenance activity and all portable blowers, lawnmowers, edgers or similar devices shall be prohibited except during the following hours: 
October 1st through April 30th 
Monday—Sunday: 9:00 a.m. to 5:30 p.m. 
Holidays: Not allowed. 
May 1st through September 30th 
Monday—Friday: 8:00 a.m. to 5:30 p.m. 
Saturday and Sunday: 9:00 a.m. to 5:30 p.m. 
Holidays: Not allowed. 
Notwithstanding the hours of permitted operations, such equipment that constitutes a public nuisance may be abated as otherwise provided in this Code. 
B.  No person shall willfully make or continue, or willfully cause to be made or continued, any noise from any portable powered blower at a level which exceeds seventy (70) decibels dBA measured at the midpoint of a wall area twenty (20) feet long and ten (10) feet high and at the horizontal distance fifty (50) feet away from the midpoint of the wall, or not more than seventy-six (76) decibels dBA at a horizontal distance of twenty-four (24) feet using a sound level meter. 
C.  No portable powered blower shall be operated in a manner which will permit dirt, dust, debris, leaves, grass clippings, cuttings, or trimmings from trees or shrubs to be blown or deposited onto neighboring property or public right-of-way. All waste shall be removed and disposed of in a sanitary manner by the use or property occupant. 
D.  Leaf blowers shall not be operated within a horizontal distance of ten (10) feet of any operable window, door, or mechanical air intake opening or duct. 
(Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 11-17-10; Ord. No. 1024, 11-17-10)  
7.04.080 - Schools, hospitals and churches—Special provisions. 
It is unlawful for any person to create any noise which causes the noise level at any school, hospital or church while the same is in use, to exceed the noise limits, as specified in subsection (A) of Section 7.04.030, prescribed for the assigned noise zone in which the school, hospital or church is located, or which noise level unreasonably disturbs or annoys patients in the hospital. 
(Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 11-17-10; Ord. No. 1024, 11-17-10)  
7.04.090 - Air conditioning, refrigeration and pool equipment. 
The noise standards enumerated in Section 7.04.030 shall be increased by eight dBA when the alleged offensive noise source is an air conditioning or refrigeration system or associated equipment which was installed prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. Installation of new equipment must be certified to be within the provisions of this chapter. Installation of new equipment must be certified to be within the provisions of this chapter for night and day operation noise level. 
(Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 11-17-10; Ord. No. 1024, 11-17-10)  
7.04.100 - Noise level measurement. 
A.  The location selected for measuring exterior noise levels between residential properties shall be at the property line of the affected residential property. Affected residential property shall be the address from which the complaint was received. Interior noise measurement shall be made within the affected residential unit. The measurement shall be made at a point at least four feet from the wall, ceiling or floor nearest the noise source. 
The location selected for measuring exterior noise levels between nonresidential properties shall be at the property line of the affected property. 
B.  The location selected for measuring exterior noise levels between two zoning districts shall be at the boundary of the two districts. 
(Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 11-17-10; Ord. No. 1024, 11-17-10)  
7.04.110 - Interference with authorized personnel is prohibited. 
No person shall interfere with, oppose or resist any authorized person charged with enforcement of this chapter while such person is engaged in the performance of his duty. 
(Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 11-17-10; Ord. No. 1024, 11-17-10)  
7.04.120 - Pre-existing noise source—Time extension. 
Those commercial and/or industrial noise sources in existence prior to the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, which noise sources are an integral part of a building, structure or similar fixed and permanent installation if in compliance with local zoning structures, shall be granted a three-year period from the date of adoption with which to comply with the provisions of the chapter. If, at the end of the three-year period, it can be shown that compliance with the provisions herein constitutes a hardship in terms of technical and economic feasibility, the time to comply may be extended on an annual basis until such time as compliance may be affected. 
(Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 11-17-10; Ord. No. 1024, 11-17-10)  
7.04.130 - Violation—Infractions. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an infraction. 
(Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 11-17-10; Ord. No. 1024, 11-17-10)  
7.04.140 - Continuing or subsequent violations—Misdemeanor. 
Any person having been convicted of a violation of any provisions of this chapter who thereafter commits a violation of the same provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 11-17-10; Ord. No. 1024, 11-17-10)  
7.04.150 - Severability. 
If any provision of this chapter is held to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions of this chapter shall not be invalidated. 
(Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 11-17-10; Ord. No. 1024, 11-17-10)  
Chapter 7.05 - MULTIPLE RESPONSES TO LOUD OR UNRULY PARTIES, GATHERINGS OR OTHER SIMILAR EVENTS 
 
7.05.010 - Declaration of findings and policy. 
It is hereby found and declared that: 
A.  Due to inadequate supervision, some large gatherings of people, such as parties, frequently become loud and unruly to the point that they constitute a threat to the peace, health, safety, or general welfare of the public as a result of conduct such as one or more of the following: excessive noise, excessive traffic, obstruction of public streets or crowds who have spilled over into public streets, public drunkenness, the service of alcohol to minors, fights, disturbances of the peace, and litter. 
B.  The city of Coachella is required to make multiple responses to such unruly gatherings in order to restore and maintain the peace and protect public safety. Such gatherings are a burden on scarce city resources and can result in police responses to regular and emergency calls being delayed and police protection to the rest of the city being reduced. 
C.  In order to discourage the occurrence of repeated loud and unruly gatherings, the persons responsible for the public nuisance created by these gatherings should be fined. 
(Ord. No. 1023, § 1, 11-17-10; Ord. No. 1025, 11-17-10)  
7.05.020 - Loud or unruly gatherings—Public nuisance. 
It shall be unlawful and a public nuisance to conduct a gathering of ten (10) or more persons on any private property in a manner which constitutes a substantial disturbance of the quiet enjoyment of private or public property in a significant segment of a neighborhood, as a result of conduct constituting a violation of law. Illustrative of such unlawful conduct is excessive noise or traffic, obstruction of public streets by crowds or vehicles, public drunkenness, the service of alcohol to minors, fights, disturbances of the peace, litter. A gathering constituting a public nuisance may be abated by the city by all reasonable means including, but not limited to, an order requiring the gathering to be disbanded and citation and/or arrest of any law violators under any applicable local laws and state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 1023, § 1, 11-17-10; Ord. No. 1025, 11-17-10)  
7.05.030 - Notice of unruly gatherings—Posting, mail. 
A.  When the city intervenes at a gathering which constitutes a public nuisance under this chapter, the premises at which such nuisance occurred shall be posted with a notice substantially in the form attached hereto as Exhibit "A" stating that a public nuisance under this chapter was caused by a gathering at the premises, the date and time of the police intervention, and that any subsequent or second police intervention with respect to a nuisance under this chapter at said premises, including a second intervention that same day or night, within sixty (60) days of the first intervention, shall result in the joint and several liability of any guests causing the public nuisance, persons who are residents or in control of the property at which the public nuisance occurred, persons who sponsored the gathering constituting the public nuisance, and owners of the premises as more fully set forth in Sections 7.05.040—7.05.060, below. The residents and persons in control of such property, and the sponsors of the event, shall be responsible for ensuring that such notice is not removed or defaced and shall be liable for a civil penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00) in addition to any other penalties which may be due under this chapter, if such notice is removed or defaced, provided, however, that the residents of the premises or sponsor of the event, if present, shall be consulted as to the location in which such notice is posted in order to achieve both the security of the notice and its prominent display. The notice shall remain posted for the entire 60-day period. 
B.  Notice of the police intervention shall also be mailed to any property owner at the address shown on the city's property tax assessment records and shall advise the property owner that any subsequent gathering resulting in a public nuisance within sixty (60) days on the same premises necessitating city intervention shall result in liability of the property owner for all penalties associated with such intervention as more particularly set forth below. 
EXHIBIT A 
IMPORTANT NOTICE REGARDING 
PUBLIC NUISANCE 
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN THAT, pursuant to Coachella Municipal Code (CMC) Chapter 7.05, on: 
Date: ________, 20___, at _______ a.m./p.m. 
The Coachella Police Department found that a gathering, at the below-listed premises caused a public nuisance as defined by CMC Chapter 7.05 (e.g., disturbance of the peace, threat to public safety, etc.): 
Address: _______, Coachella, California. 
WARNING 
IF THE POLICE RESPOND TO ANOTHER DISTURBANCE CONSTITUTING A NUISANCE (AS DEFINED BY CMC CHAPTER 7.05) AT THE ABOVE PREMISES WITHIN 60 DAYS OF THIS NOTICE, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO A DISTURBANCE LATER TODAY OR TONIGHT, A SUBSEQUENT RESPONSE FEE WILL BE IMPOSED UPON: 
1.  ALL GUESTS CAUSING THE NUISANCE; 
2.  ALL SPONSORS OF THE GATHERING; 
3.  ALL RESIDENTS OF THE PREMISES; 
4.  ALL PERSONS IN CONTROL OF THE PREMISES; AND 
5.  ALL OWNERS OF THE PREMISES THAT RESIDE ON OR ADJACENT TO THE PREMISES, OR ARE PRESENT AT THE PREMISES WHEN THIS NOTICE IS FIRST POSTED. 
Property owners who do not reside on or adjacent to the above premises, and who are not present when this Notice is first posted, are also jointly and severally liable for said fee, if the next disturbance occurs after two weeks after this Notice is mailed to said owner. 
THIS NOTICE MUST REMAIN POSTED ON THE PREMISES FOR 60 DAYS 
$100 FINE FOR UNAUTHORIZED REMOVAL OF THIS NOTICE 
___________ 
(Name and Signature of the Officer Issuing This Notice) 
___________ 
(Officer's Phone Number) 
Date: _______ 
Case Number: _______ 
(Ord. No. 1023, § 1, 11-17-10; Ord. No. 1025, 11-17-10)  
7.05.040 - Persons liable for subsequent response to a gathering constituting a public nuisance. 
If the city is required to intervene as to a gathering constituting a public nuisance on the same premises more than once in any 60-day period, including a second intervention during the same day or night as the first intervention, the following persons shall be jointly and severally liable for civil penalties as set forth in Section 7.05.050, below, in addition to liability for any injuries to city personnel or damage to city property. 
A.  The person or persons who own the premises where the gathering constituting a public nuisance took place if any of the following are the case: 
(1)  Said owner resides on or adjacent to the premises; 
(2)  Said owner was present when the notice described in Exhibit "A" was first posted; or 
(3)  The notice described in Exhibit "A" was mailed to said owner and fourteen (14) days have elapsed since the date of said mailing. 
For purposes of this subsection, where a gathering takes place within the confines of a single unit in a building owned by a housing cooperative, the owner of the property shall be deemed to be the owner of the single unit and not the members of the housing cooperative in general. Where the gathering took place in the common area of a building owned by a housing cooperative, only the members of the cooperative owning units in the building where the gathering took place shall be deemed the owners of the property for purposes of this subsection. Other members of the housing cooperative may still be liable if they fall within the categories of person made liable by Section 7.05.040, subsections (B), (C), or (D), below. 
B.  The person or persons residing on or otherwise in control of the property where such gathering took place. 
C.  The person or persons who organized or sponsored such gathering. 
D.  All persons attending such gathering who engaged in any activity resulting in the public nuisance. 
E.  Nothing in this section shall be construed to impose liability on the resident or owners of the premises or sponsor of the gathering, for the conduct of persons who are present without the express or implied consent of the resident or sponsor, as long as the resident and sponsor have taken all steps reasonably necessary to exclude such uninvited participants from the premises. Where an invited guest engages in conduct which the sponsor or resident could not reasonably foresee and the conduct is an isolated instance of a guest at the event violating the law which the sponsor is unable to reasonably control without the intervention of the police, the unlawful conduct of the individual guest shall not be attributable to the sponsor, owner, or resident for the purposes of determining whether the event constitutes a public nuisance under this section. 
F.  There shall be no liability for civil penalties under this chapter for a subsequent intervention during the same day or night as the prior intervention, unless a reasonable time has been provided to abate the public nuisance, taking into account the size of the gathering, the time of day, and other relevant factors. 
G.  There shall be no liability for civil penalties under this chapter for a second response during the same day or night as the first response when a person who would otherwise be liable under subsection (A) seeks assistance from the police department to abate a public nuisance under this chapter, and the person cooperates fully with the police while taking reasonable action to abate the public nuisance. 
H.  If the city is required to intervene at a gathering constituting a public nuisance on the same premises more than once in any 60-day period, excluding a second intervention during the same day or night as the first intervention, the 60-day period shall be extended by another sixty (60) days from the date of the second intervention. 
(Ord. No. 1023, § 1, 11-17-10; Ord. No. 1025, 11-17-10)  
7.05.050 - Recovery of subsequent response fee. 
A.  After given proper notice pursuant to Section 7.05.030 and a reasonable opportunity to abate a gathering constituting a public nuisance, a subsequent response fee shall be assessed against all persons liable for the city's intervention. The subsequent response fee shall include: 
1.  The actual cost to the city of law enforcement services incurred as a result of a subsequent response; 
2.  The actual cost of any medical treatment required by a police officer for injuries sustained during a subsequent response; and 
3.  The cost of repairing or replacing any city equipment or property damaged or destroyed during a subsequent response. 
B.  Except as provided in subsection (A) of this section, the subsequent response fee shall not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for any subsequent response. 
C.  The remedies set forth in this chapter shall be in addition to any other penalties imposed by law for particular violations of law committed during the course of an event which is a public nuisance under this chapter, provided however, that if the only violation of law which constituted the public nuisance under this chapter is excessive noise, the remedies provided under this chapter shall be exclusive of any other remedies provided by law to the city for such excessive noise. 
D.  The city shall bill all persons liable for subsequent response fees by mail by sending a letter in substantially the form attached hereto as Exhibit "B." Payment of the fees shall be due within thirty (30) days of the date the bill is deposited in the mail. If full payment is not received within the required time for payment, the bill will be delinquent, and all persons liable for the fees shall be charged interest at the maximum legal rate from the date the payment period expires and a further civil penalty in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
EXHIBIT B 
Date: 
To: 
Dear: 
The City of Coachella was required to abate the public nuisance caused by a gathering of 10 or more persons at (location of property), which substantially disrupted the quiet enjoyment of property in a significant segment of the adjacent neighborhood. This is the (second/third/fourth, etc.) such public nuisance at this property within the last 60 days, and thus, a fee of ________ is imposed on you. If you fail to remit this fine to the City of Coachella by (30 days from the date of this notification) you will be liable for an additional $100 penalty, plus interest. The payment should be remitted to the address listed below. Your liability is based on the fact that you were: 
[ ] An owner of the property to whom was sent prior notice of a public nuisance at the property within the previous 60 days; and/or 
[ ] An owner of the property who resided on or adjacent to the property when the public nuisance took place; and/or 
[ ] An owner of the property who was present when a Notice of a public nuisance was first posted at the property; and/or 
[ ] A person who resided on or was otherwise in control of the property when the public nuisance took place there; and/or 
[ ] A person who organized or sponsored the event that created the public nuisance at such property; and/or 
[ ] A person who attended the event constituting the public nuisance at such property and engaged in the conduct which resulted in the public nuisance. 
If you believe that you are not liable you may defend this claim in the civil action which the City of Coachella will file against you upon your failure to remit the fee. You should be aware, however, that if you fail to prevail in that action you will be liable for the additional penalty of $100 and interest on the total fee. 
Sincerely yours, 
(Name, title, address and phone number of signatory) 
(Ord. No. 1023, § 1, 11-17-10; Ord. No. 1025, 11-17-10)  
7.05.060 - Collection of delinquent costs for a subsequent city response. 
The penalties assessed as a result of a subsequent city response to a loud or unruly gathering shall constitute a debt of all persons liable for the penalties in favor of the city and may be collected in any manner authorized by law and are recoverable in a civil action filed by the city in a court of competent jurisdiction. The remedies provided by this chapter are in addition to all other civil and criminal remedies available to the city with respect to the unlawful conduct constituting the public nuisance which gave rise to the need for the city response under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1023, § 1, 11-17-10; Ord. No. 1025, 11-17-10)  
Title 8 - HEALTH AND SAFETY 
Chapters:  
Chapter 8.04 - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
Sections: 
 
8.04.010 - County enforcement of state regulations and statutes. 
The city council consents and requests that the county health officer of the county of Riverside, state of California, shall enforce and observe all of the following: 
A.  Orders, quarantine regulations, and rules prescribed by the state department and other rules and regulations issued under the provisions of the California Health and Safety Code. 
B.  Statutes relating to the public health. 
Such services shall continue indefinitely until the city council shall terminate them by adoption of a resolution or ordinances, as provided in Division I, Part II, Chapter I, Article 2, of the Health and Safety Code. 
(Prior code § 10-1)  
Chapter 8.08 - AGRICULTURAL ENTERPRISE PROTECTION FOR AUGUSTINE EAST ANNEXATION AREA 
Sections: 
 
8.08.010 - Policy. 
It is the historically demonstrated policy of the city to encourage and assist the agricultural enterprises which surround the city, just as agriculture provides jobs for many of our citizens. Furthermore, the city has drafted a comprehensive zoning and land use plan which seeks to preserve the agricultural lifestyle of our community. In an effort to find the means for a harmonious coexistence between urban and rural land uses, this chapter shall be on an experimental basis, for application only to the Augustine East annexation area, where it shall remain in effect as long as agricultural operations continue. This chapter shall not be construed as an attempt to modify, abridge or supersede any applicable federal, state or county laws. 
(Prior code § 22-75)  
8.08.020 - Assessments. 
The city shall impose no assessments, of any kind. This general exemption shall continue as long as the land remains in agricultural use. Existing nonfarm housing shall also be exempt 
(Prior code § 22-76)  
8.08.030 - Land use. 
The city has no present intention to change zoning or land use designations without the request or consent of the landowners. 
(Prior code § 22-77)  
8.08.040 - Agricultural nuisances. 
No commercial agricultural enterprise, operation or facility, or any related activity or appurtenances, shall be or become a nuisance, public or private, as a result of any changed circumstances in or about the locality thereof after the same has been in operation for more than two years, if such action was not a nuisance at the time it began, provided that the conduct of the agricultural operation is consistent with customs and standard as established and followed by other similar agricultural operations in the same locality. 
(Prior code § 22-78)  
Chapter 8.12 - ALARM SYSTEMS 
Sections: 
 
8.12.010 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows: 
Alarm systems. See California Business and Professions Code Section 7590.1(n). 
"Alarm business" means any person engaged in selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving, installing, or monitoring any alarm system or causing to be sold, maintained, serviced, repaired, altered, replaced, moved, installed or monitored an alarm system in or on any building, place or premises. 
Alarm agent. See California Business and Professions Code Section 7590.1(o). 
"Audible alarm" means a device designed for the detection of an unauthorized entry on premises and which when actuated generates a sound audible at and outside the premises. 
"False alarm" means an alarm signal which, under ordinary circumstances, will necessitate or cause response by the police department where an emergency situation does not exist. 
"Proprietor alarm" means an alarm which is not serviced by an alarm business. 
"Silent alarm" means that type of alarm system which, when activated, sounds a bell or buzzer or turns on a light at a predesignated place other than the location where the alarm has been installed. 
"Subscriber" means a person contracting with an alarm business for the leasing, servicing or maintaining of an alarm system. 
(Prior code § 7-141)  
8.12.020 - Permits required. 
A.  No person shall engage in, conduct, or carry on an alarm business without first applying for and receiving a business license in accordance with the provisions of Title 5 of this code. 
B.  No person shall engage as an alarm agent or engage in conduct or activities as an alarm agent without first registering his or her name and filing a copy of his or her state-issued identification card with the city. 
C.  No person or business shall install an alarm system, proprietor alarm, or audible alarm without first applying for a license in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
D.  No person or business shall use an operative alarm system, proprietor or audible alarm without first obtaining a license in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 7-142)  
8.12.030 - Exemptions, special alarm systems. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not be applicable to: 
A.  Audible alarms affixed to automobiles; 
B.  Fire or smoke sensor alarm systems or detectors when such systems are not used as, or in lieu of, intrusion detection devices or alarm systems; and 
C.  Emergency medical crisis alarms when such systems are not used, or in lieu of, intrusion detection devices or alarm systems. 
(Prior code § 7-143)  
8.12.040 - Preexisting systems, time within which permit required. 
Notwithstanding subsections C and D of Section 8.12.020, alarm systems installed and operative prior to the adoption of this chapter may be continued in operation without a permit until ninety (90) days following adoption hereof, after which such subsections shall be fully applicable thereto. 
(Prior code § 7-144)  
8.12.050 - Permit applications, form—Investigation. 
Applications for all permits required under this chapter shall be filed in accordance with the provisions of Title 5 of this code. 
(Prior code § 7-145)  
8.12.060 - Permits—Issuance—Denial. 
A.  Permits as applied for shall be issued in accordance with the provisions of Title 5 of this code. 
B.  A permit for an alarm system, proprietor alarm, or audible alarm, shall be issued to a person subscribing to an alarm service, either by leasing or buying an alarm system, proprietor alarm or audible alarm. Alarm businesses shall procure and process applications for their subscribers. 
(Prior code § 7-146)  
8.12.070 - Permits—Effective periods. 
Permits for alarm systems, proprietor or audible alarms shall generally be issued in accordance with the provisions of Title 5 of this code. 
(Prior code § 7-147)  
8.12.080 - Fees. 
Each applicant for a permit under this chapter, and each person filing any appeal pursuant to provisions of this chapter shall pay at the time of filing the application or appeal, a processing fee or fees in an amount or amounts as may have been established by resolution of the city council. 
(Prior code § 7-148)  
8.12.090 - Revocation or suspension of permits. 
A.  Any permit granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may be suspended or revoked in accordance with the provisions of Title 5 of this code, for the violation of any provision or regulation of this chapter or the rules or regulations applicable to alarm systems or businesses by virtue of any other ordinance or law, or for violation of minimum standards established by this chapter or by other competent authority, or where the character or moral integrity of the permit holder or his or her employee is determined inimical to the public safety or general welfare of the community, or for an alarm system, proprietor alarm, or audible alarm where such device actuates excessive false alarms as determined by the standards set forth in Section 8.12.130. 
B.  Such suspension or revocation of permit shall be made in accordance with the provisions of Title 5 of this code. 
C.  Upon failure of the permit holder to respond to the hearing after receiving notice of such hearing, the permit may be suspended or revoked. 
D.  Upon revocation or suspension of any permit, such permit shall forthwith be surrendered in accordance with the provisions of Title 5 of this code. 
E.  Upon revocation or suspension of any permit, to use or possess an operative alarm system, proprietor, or audible alarm, the same shall be promptly disconnected and inactivated, and no permit holder or other person using or possessing the same shall fail, refuse or neglect to do so. Upon receiving knowledge of the revocation or suspension of any such permit, the police department shall not consider itself obligated thereafter to respond to any alarm transmitted or sounded by the alarm system, proprietor, or audible alarm for which the permit has been suspended or revoked. 
F.  Any such suspension or revocation of any permit may be imposed in addition to any penalties otherwise provided for by law. 
(Prior code § 7-149)  
8.12.100 - Appeals. 
Any person aggrieved by, dissatisfied with, or excepting to any action, denial, order, requirement, condition, permit, decision or determination made by the city manager or his or her designee in administering the provisions of this chapter, may appeal by filing written notice specifying the grounds of appeal and the relief sought, with the city clerk within ten (10) days after notice of the action appealed from. Upon any failure to file such written appeal within the time allowed in this chapter, the action of the city manager or his or her designee shall be final and conclusive. A timely appeal shall be reviewed by the city manager, and unless an adjustment to the matter is made by the city manager satisfactory to the appellant, the appeal shall be expeditiously scheduled for hearing before the city council, which body, at the conclusion of this consideration, may affirm, reverse or modify the action appealed from and may take any action which might have been legally taken in the first instance by the city manager or his or her designee. 
(Prior code § 7-150)  
8.12.110 - Administration, regulations and standards. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the city manager. He or she and his or her designee are authorized to make inspections of alarm systems, and of the premises whereon such systems are located. He or she and his or her designee shall have the power to enforce such rules and regulations and standards as may be applicable pursuant to this chapter or other ordinance or law. 
(Prior code § 7-151)  
8.12.120 - Intrusion alarms, general requirements. 
A.  No person shall install or maintain any audible alarm or other alarm system which upon activation omits a sound similar to sirens in use on emergency vehicles or for civil defense purposes. 
B.  No person who, as owner or business manager or real estate agent or as other responsible employee or agent, maintains an audible alarm which does not contain a means to effect an automatic turn-off of the alarm within ten (10) minutes after it is first activated, and which alarm is not serviced on a twenty-four-hour basis by an alarm business, shall fail, refuse or neglect to notify the police department of: 
1.  His or her name and the telephone number at which he or she may be reached at any time of the day or night; and 
2.  The name and telephone number of an alternate responsible person who may be reached to turn off the alarm at all times that the person listed in subsection (B)(1) of this section is absent or otherwise unavailable. 
The alarm business or the above-listed person, as appropriate, shall be responsible for deactivating any alarm within thirty (30) minutes of notification that such alarm has been activated or is ringing. 
C.  The ringing of any alarm for a period in excess of thirty (30) minutes after such notification or reasonable efforts of notification have been made is declared to be a public nuisance which may be made the subject of a prosecution under this title, in addition to being made the subject of permit revocation or suspension as provided in Section 8.12.090. 
(Prior code § 7-152)  
8.12.130 - Faulty systems—False alarms. 
A.  No person shall maintain, use or possess an operative alarm system, proprietor, or audible alarm which is faulty in that it signals or sounds an excessive number of false alarms. 
B.  Any alarm system, proprietor, or audible alarm shall be presumed to be in violation of this section whenever there are any one of the following numbers of false alarms, whether activated through possessor's negligence, equipment malfunction or for any other reason under the ability to control of the possessor, whether such causes are sole or in combination: 
1.  More than one within any thirty-day period; or 
2.  More than two within any ninety-day period; or 
3.  More than three within any one hundred eighty-day period; or 
4.  More than four within any one-year period. 
C.  Any violation of this section shall constitute grounds for permit revocation or suspension pursuant to Section 8.12.090. 
D.  In lieu of actual permit suspension or revocation pursuant to Section 8.12.090, or as a precondition to permit reinstatement after action taken pursuant to such section, the city manager may require from the appropriate permit holder or other person using, possessing or maintaining a faulty alarm system, proprietor, or audible alarm, a report in writing (within such reasonable period as is specified by the city manager) describing the corrective action which has and will be taken to assure that violation of this section will not reoccur. 
(Prior code § 7-153)  
8.12.140 - Reimbursement of city for false alarms costs. 
A.  Whenever the police department has responded to a false alarm which is in excess of any of the tolerable numbers according to the criteria set forth in subsection B of Section 8.12.130, and whenever the police department has responded to any alarm sound, signal or message emitted or transmitted from or by an alarm system, proprietor alarm or audible alarm the permit for which has been suspended or revoked, or for which there was not previously issued a permit in accordance with this chapter, the police chief shall compute the costs directly and indirectly incurred by his or her, department and any other department of the city and in any other way by the city for salaries, wages and other compensation (including fringe benefits) paid or payable to or for the benefit of personnel during the period involved in the response, plus a reasonable rental cost for all city vehicles and equipment directly utilized in connection with the response and for the period involved. The chief shall promptly transmit a report of such costs to the city manager, together with an appropriate report relating the facts and circumstances concerning the incident to which the report of costs relates. 
B.  The city manager shall review the reports and unless he or she determines that exigencies of the facts and circumstances show the incident to be excusable or that for any other reason it would not be in the public interest to pursue this reimbursement procedure, he or she shall cause billings, for the total costs as reported by the police chief, or for such lesser portion thereof as he or she determines is equitable, reasonable and legal in view of the surrounding circumstances, to be mailed or otherwise transmitted to all of the following or as many thereof appropriately as are shown to be involved in connection with the particular incident and with the alarm system thereby involved: (1) the owner of the alarm system; (2) any person, firm or corporation occupying the premises where the alarm system is located, if such party is responsible for maintenance of the alarm system, or for overall general maintenance of the premises including the alarm system; (3) the alarm business responsible for maintaining or servicing the alarm system, if the alarm signal responded to was activated through equipment malfunction or failure of the [sic] of the alarm business responsible for maintaining or servicing the alarm system, if the alarm signal responded to was activated through equipment malfunction or failure of the alarm business to adequately maintain or service the alarm system; and (4) any other person, firm or corporation shown to have activated the false alarm (if such was the case) intentionally, carelessly or by negligent act or omission. 
C.  Upon billings being mailed or transmitted per subsection B of this section, each person, firm or corporation so billed shall become indebted and liable, severally and jointly, for payment to the city of the entire amount due, and additionally for such further legal costs as may be incurred by the city, including a reasonable attorney's fee to be set by the court, in the event the total amount billed is not paid and it becomes necessary for the city to resort to legal action in order to collect. In the event any billing is not paid within a reasonable time, an action or actions may be brought for collection of any amounts due pursuant hereto, in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Prior code § 7-154)  
8.12.150 - Instruction as to operation of systems. 
It shall be the responsibility of an alarm business operator or alarm agent, and no such person shall fail, refuse or neglect to instruct the subscriber, and (if a different person) the occupant of the premises wherein an alarm system is installed in the proper use and operation of such device alarm, whether silent or audible, including specifically all necessary instruction in turning off of such alarms, and that intentionally activating an alarm in the absence of an emergency is a criminal offense under Section 148.3 of the California Penal Code. 
(Prior code § 7-155)  
8.12.160 - Alarm systems terminating at police department. 
No alarm system shall be installed which, when activated, causes an alarm or signal to be sent directly to the Coachella police department or any facility thereof, unless and until written permission therefor is received from the police chief. The chief is authorized to limit the number of such devices terminating into the police department if he or she determines that any such device or devices would interfere with the normal functions of the police department. 
(Prior code § 7-156)  
8.12.170 - Automatic calling devices. 
No person other than an authorized agent of the police department shall use, maintain, operate, or attempt to use or operate, or cause to be used or operated any alarm system or other device or combination of devices that is arranged, adjusted or programmed so that it will upon activation, either mechanically, electronically or by other automatic means, initiate, call and deliver a recorded message to any telephone number assigned to the city, its police department or to any radio frequency used thereby, except on written authorization by the chief of police. 
(Prior code § 7-157)  
Chapter 8.16 - AMBULANCE SERVICES 
Sections:  
Article I - In General 
 
8.16.010 - Definitions. 
Whenever in this chapter the following terms are used, they shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section. 
"ALSD" or "LALS ambulance" means an advanced life-support or limited advanced life-support ambulance which has additional equipment and supplies as specified by the health officer. 
"Ambulance" means any vehicle or boat specifically designed, constructed, modified, equipped, arranged, maintained and operated for the sole purpose of transporting any sick, injured, wounded, invalid, incapacitated or convalescent person, or expectant mother. 
"Ambulance service" means the operation for monetary or other consideration of ambulances for the purpose of transporting any sick, injured, wounded, invalid, incapacitated or convalescent person, or expectant mother, from any location in the incorporated city to any destination regardless of location. 
"Ambulance service areas" mean all of those portions of the incorporated area of the city divided into ambulance service areas as shown on the map entitled "Ambulance Service Areas of the City" on file in the office of the city clerk of the city and in the office of the health officer of the county of Riverside. 
"BLS ambulance" means a basic life-support ambulance which has equipment and supplies as specified by Title 12, California Administrative Code. 
"Class of service" means the level or levels of complexity of field emergency medical services that may be provided by a permittee, and shall be specified as basic life support provided by EMT-1A personnel conformant to Section 1797.160 of the Health and Safety Code, full advanced life support provided by California licensed physicians or by paramedics and mobile intensive care nurses certified pursuant to applicable provisions of the Health and Safety Code, or limited advanced life support provided by EMT-II personnel authorized under Sections 128.140 or 1797.160 of the Health and Safety Code. 
"Emergency call" means a request for the dispatch of an ambulance to transport or provide other assistance to a person who has an apparent sudden or unforeseen need of medical attention. 
"Emergency service" means the functions performed in response to an emergency call. 
"EMT-II" means an emergency medical technician II certified by the state as authorized to provide unlimited advanced life support (LALS) under Section 128.140 or 1797.160 of the Health and Safety Code. 
"Health officer" means the health officer of the city, or his or her designated representative. 
"MIC nurse" means a mobile intensive care nurse who has been certified by the health officer as qualified in emergency cardiac and noncardiac care in the issuance of emergency instructions to MIC paramedics. 
"MIC paramedic" means a mobile intensive care paramedic trained in emergency cardiac and noncardiac care certified by the health officer. 
"Patient" means a sick, injured, wounded, invalid, incapacitated or convalescent person, or expectant mother. 
"Permittee" means any person who has been issued a permit to operate an ambulance service in the city. 
"Person" means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation, association, club or organization. 
(Ord. 892 §§ 8, 9, 2003; prior code § 3½-1)  
8.16.020 - Violations of chapter. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Prior code § 3½-2)  
Article II - Permit 
 
8.16.030 - Required. 
It is unlawful for any person to operate, conduct, advertise, or otherwise engage in or profess to be engaged in an ambulance service within the incorporated territory of the city, except in conformance with a current, unrevoked permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 3½-11)  
8.16.040 - Exceptions. 
The provisions of Sections 8.16.050 and 8.16.060 of this chapter relating to permits and fees shall not apply to: 
A.  Ambulances operated by a public entity. 
B.  Vehicles operated as ambulances at the request of local authorities during any "state of war emergency," duly proclaimed "state of emergency" or "local emergency," as defined in Section 8558 of the Government Code. 
With the exception of permits and fees, all other provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to such entities and vehicles. 
(Prior code § 3½-12)  
8.16.050 - Permit fees. 
A.  Permits shall be issued to expire at the end of the calendar year, and the annual fee therefor shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), plus fifty dollars ($50.00) for each ambulance to be operated under a permit, which may be prorated on a quarterly basis for the first year. 
B.  Temporary permits shall be issued in accordance with the provisions contained in Section 8.16.140 of this chapter, and the fee therefor shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00), plus five dollars ($5.00) for each ambulance to be operated under a permit. 
C.  The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to nonprofit volunteer ambulance services. 
(Prior code § 3½-13)  
8.16.060 - Application. 
Applications for a permit or renewal thereof to operate an ambulance service shall be made to the health officer upon the form provided by the health department, which shall include the following information: 
A.  Name, business and residence address of the applicant, and the fictitious name, if any, under which the applicant proposes to do business. 
B.  If the applicant is a corporation, joint venture, partnership or limited partnership, the name of all corporate officers, joint venturers or partners, their business and residence addresses and their percentage of participation in such organization. 
C.  A statement of facts showing the experience of the applicant in the operation of an ambulance service and that the applicant is qualified to render efficient twenty-four-hour ambulance service. With respect to an application for renewal, copies of current valid emergency vehicle permits issued by the California Highway Patrol for each ambulance to be operated by the applicant. 
D.  The class or classes of service which the applicant proposes to provide. 
E.  The ambulance service area for which the applicant is requesting a permit, and all facts which the applicant believes will prove that the public health, safety, welfare, convenience and necessity require the granting of a permit to operate an ambulance service in the proposed service area. 
F.  A statement that the applicant will own or will have under its control equipment to adequately conduct an ambulance service in the service area for which it is applying, which meets the requirements established by the Vehicle Code and Title 13, California Administrative Code, and that the applicant owns or has access to suitable and safe facilities in order to maintain its ambulance service in a clean and sanitary condition. 
G.  A complete description of each ambulance to be operated by applicant, including an itemization of the equipment therein, the patient capacity thereof, and with respect to an application for renewal, a copy of the most recent ambulance inspection report issued by the California Highway Patrol for each vehicle. 
H.  An affirmation that each ambulance to be operated by the applicant, and the equipment therein, conform to all the applicable provisions of this chapter, the vehicle code, the California Administrative Code and other state of California, county of Riverside and city directives. 
I.  A statement that the applicant shall employ sufficient personnel adequately trained and available to deliver ambulance services of good quality at all times within the applicant's proposed service area. 
J.  With respect to application for renewal, a list containing the description of the level of training for each ambulance employee and a copy of each certificate or license issued by the state and the county establishing qualifications of such employees in ambulance operation. 
K.  The schedule of rates to be charged by the applicant for its ambulance services. 
L.  A statement signed by the applicant that as a condition of the city's issuing a permit, the applicant shall indemnify and hold the city, its officers, agents and employees free and harmless from any liability whatsoever, based or asserted upon any act or omission of applicant, its officers, agents or employees, relating to or in anywise connected with or arising from the operation of its ambulance service under such permit, and the applicant shall defend at its expense, including attorney fees, the city, its officers, agents and employees in any legal action based upon such alleged acts or omissions. 
M.  Such other facts or information as the health officer may require. 
(Prior code § 3½-14)  
8.16.070 - Investigation, recommendation and determination. 
Upon the receipt of a completed application, the health officer shall conduct an investigation to determine if the public health, safety, welfare, convenience and necessity require the granting of a new permit for the ambulance service area for which the application has been made and shall further determine if the applicant meets all the requirements of this chapter. Upon completion of his or her investigation, the health officer shall recommend to the city council that a permit be granted or denied for the requested ambulance service area. No permit shall be issued by the health officer until the city council has determined that the public health, safety, welfare, convenience and necessity require the granting of a new permit for the particular ambulance service area. 
(Prior code § 3½-15)  
8.16.080 - Denial of permit—Request for hearing. 
If the city council determines that a permit shall not be issued, the applicant shall have the right to demand a hearing thereon. 
A request for a hearing shall be made in writing to the city clerk of the city within fifteen (15) calendar days following the decision of the council to deny the permit. Upon receipt of a written request, the city clerk shall set the matter for hearing on a date not more than sixty (60) days following receipt of the written request. At the hearing, the applicant shall have the burden of proof to show facts that the public health, safety, welfare, convenience and necessity require the granting of a permit for the requested service area and that the applicant owns or controls equipment meeting the requirements of this chapter, and that the applicant otherwise meets all the requirements of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 3½-16)  
8.16.090 - Issuance of permit. 
Upon approval by the city council of the granting of a permit for a specific ambulance service area, the health officer shall not issue the permit until: 
A.  The first year's fee, or prorated portion thereof, is paid; 
B.  The permittee delivers to the health officer copies of the most recent ambulance inspection report issued by the California Highway Patrol for each ambulance to be operated by the permittee; 
C.  The permittee delivers to the health officer copies of current, valid emergency vehicle permits issued by the California Highway Patrol for each ambulance to be operated by the permittee; 
D.  The permittee delivers to the health officer copies of policies or certificates of insurance as required by the provisions contained in Section 8.16.200; and 
E.  The permittee delivers to the health officer a list containing the description of the level of training for each ambulance employee and a copy of each certificate or license issued by the state, county and city establishing qualifications of such employees in ambulance operations. 
(Prior code § 3½-17)  
8.16.100 - Content of permit. 
A permit shall specify the date of issuance and an expiration, the geographical limits of the territory within which the permittee may provide ambulance service, the number of ambulances to be used by the permittee, the class or classes of service to be provided, and any special conditions regarding communications, equipment, personnel or waiver of requirements deemed appropriate by the state of California. 
(Prior code § 3½-18)  
8.16.110 - Renewal of permits. 
Permits to operate an ambulance service may be renewed annually by the health officer, upon application by a permittee, if the health officer determines that the permittee remains in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 3½-19)  
8.16.120 - Amendment of permit. 
A.  Upon written request by the permittee, the health officer may amend the contents of the permit relating to class or classes or service, equipment or personnel. 
B.  Upon written request by the permittee, the health officer may amend the contents of the permit other than as specified in Section 8.16.200(A) of this chapter, if the health officer finds that such amendment will be in substantial compliance with the provisions of this chapter; provided, however, that no such amendment shall be valid for more than thirty (30) days unless approved by the city council. 
(Prior code § 3½-20)  
8.16.130 - Transfer of permits. 
No permit shall be transferred to another person except upon prior approval of the city council, upon recommendation of the health officer. 
(Prior code § 3½-21)  
8.16.140 - Temporary permit. 
The health officer may issue a temporary permit to an ambulance service based and properly licensed by the California Highway Patrol outside the incorporated territory of the city for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days. Such temporary permit shall include the contents required by Section 8.16.110 of this chapter and such additional conditions as deemed appropriate by the health officer. 
(Prior code § 3½-22)  
8.16.150 - Grounds for denial of application and revocation or suspension of permit. 
An application for a permit, or a renewal thereof, may be denied and an existing permit may be revoked or suspended for any of the following grounds: 
A.  The permittee or applicant has knowingly made a false statement or fails to disclose facts in a material matter either in its application or in any reports or other documents furnished by it to the city. 
B.  The permittee does not maintain and operate its ambulances and other equipment in the manner and in the condition required by this chapter. 
C.  The permittee knowingly employs employees who do not meet the standards or requirements or have the licenses required by this chapter. 
D.  The permittee or applicant is not the real party in interest in the business. 
E.  Any other grounds or conduct which materially affect permittee's or applicant's ability or qualifications to properly operate an ambulance service or serve the public. 
F.  If the permittee or applicant: 
1.  Is required to register as a sex offender under the provisions of Section 290 of the California Penal Code; 
2.  Habitually or excessively uses or is addicted to the use of narcotics or dangerous drugs, or has been convicted of any offense, relating to the use, sale, possession, or transportation of narcotics or habit-forming drugs; 
3.  Is a habitual user of intoxicating beverages to excess; 
4.  Within the three-year period immediately preceding the application, has been under suspension, revocation or probation by the department of motor vehicles for a cause involving the safe operation of a motor vehicle, or has been convicted of any of the following offenses: failure to stop and render aid in an accident involving injury or death; driving while intoxicated or under the influence of drugs; or reckless driving involving bodily injury; 
5  Has been convicted of any offense involving moral turpitude; 
6.  Has been convicted of any offense punishable as a felony, or has been convicted within the immediately preceding ten-year period of the crime of theft in either degree; 
7.  Has been involved within the two years immediately preceding the application in any motor vehicle accident causing death or personal injury; 
8.  Has been involved in three or more motor vehicle accidents within the year immediately preceding the application; or 
9.  Has operated an authorized emergency vehicle in violation of the rules and regulations relating to authorized emergency vehicles as promulgated by the commissioner of the California Highway Patrol. 
G.  The applicant was previously a holder of a permit issued under this chapter which has been revoked or not renewed based on any of the grounds set forth in this section. 
H.  The permittee has failed to make and retain records showing its transactions, or fails to make such records available for inspection by the health officer. 
I.  The permittee accepts an emergency call when it is either unable or unwilling to provide the requested service or fails to inform the person requesting such service of any delay and fails to obtain the consent of such person before causing an ambulance to respond from a location more distant than the one to which the request was directed. 
J.  The permittee or applicant has violated any of the provisions of this chapter of has failed to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 3½-23)  
8.16.160 - Denial of application and revocation or suspension of permit. 
The health officer shall be empowered to deny an application for renewal of a permit or to suspend or revoke a permit on any of the grounds set forth in Section 8.16.150. The health officer shall give the permittee written notice of such denial, suspension or revocation as follows: 
A.  In the event an application for renewal of a permit is denied the notice shall set forth the reasons for such denial and shall be served as provided in subsection C of this section. 
B.  In the event a permit is suspended or revoked, the notice shall set forth the reasons for such suspension or revocation and the effective dates thereof, and shall be served as provided in subsection C of this section. Such notice shall not be effective until ten (10) days after service has been made or such later date as the health officer deems appropriate. 
C.  The notice shall be served personally on the permittee, or sent by registered or certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, to the permittee at its business address. 
(Prior code § 3½-24)  
8.16.170 - Hearing appeal procedure. 
A.  In the event an application to renew a permit is denied or a permit has been suspended or revoked, the permittee shall be entitled to a hearing before the health officer, by submitting a written request therefor to the health officer setting forth briefly the reasons why such denial, suspension or revocation is not proper. Such request shall be submitted within ten (10) days after service of the notice of denial, suspension or revocation was made. The hearing shall be held prior to the effective date of the suspension or revocation, or if it relates to a denial, the hearing shall be held within ten (10) days after the request was made. The health officer shall give written notice of the time, date and place of the hearing to the permittee. After the hearing, the health officer may deny the application to renew the permit, or suspend or revoke the permit, if he finds the grounds exist therefor. 
B.  If the health officer denies the application to renew a permit, or suspend or revoke a permit, after a hearing had been held as provided in subsection A of this section, the permittee may appeal the decision of the health officer by filing with the city clerk of the city, within fifteen (15) calendar days following the date of such decision, a written notice of appeal briefly setting forth the reasons why such denial, suspension or revocation is not proper. Upon receipt of such appeal, the clerk shall set the matter for hearing on a date not more than sixty (60) days following receipt of such appeal and give notice to the appellant and the health officer of the date, time and place for the hearing. At the hearing, the city council shall hear the appellant, the health officer and any other interested person who may present evidence relevant to the decision of the health officer. In conducting the hearing, the city council shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. Within thirty (30) days following the conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall issue its order as to whether or not the permit should be renewed or the suspension or revocation sustained. 
(Prior code § 3½-25)  
Article III - Operating Requirements 
 
8.16.180 - Emergency service. 
A permittee shall provide emergency service in connection with the class or classes of service specified in its permit on a continuous twenty-four-hour per day basis, except when causes beyond its control relating to acts of God, labor disputes or other similar acts prevent permittee from providing such service. In the event such service is not provided as specified in this chapter, permittee shall cause any advertisement of such services to cease and notify the health officer immediately. 
(Prior code § 3½-36)  
8.16.190 - Permittee notification requirements. 
In addition to the requirements provided in Section 8.16.180 of this chapter, permittee shall notify the health officer immediately, in writing, in the event of any interruption of ambulance service of more than twenty-four (24) hours duration or substantial change in personnel or equipment, which causes the ambulance service to be operated other than as set forth in the permit or as required by the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 3½-37)  
8.16.200 - Insurance. 
A permittee shall during the term of its permit: 
A.  Procure and maintain workers compensation insurance as prescribed by the laws of the state of California. 
B.  Procure and maintain comprehensive bodily injury liability, and property damage liability insurance as shall protect permittee from claims for damages for personal injury, including accidental and wrongful death, as well as from claims for property damage, which may arise from the operation of the permittee's ambulance services. Such insurance shall name the city as an additional insured with respect to the operation of such services. Such insurance shall provide combined coverage limits of not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per occurrence; provided, however, such limits shall not be deemed as a limitation of the indemnification and hold free and harmless statement contained in the permittee's application referred to in Section 8.16.060(L) of this chapter, and in the event the city becomes liable for an amount in excess of such insurance coverage, the permittee shall indemnify and hold the city free and harmless for the whole thereof. 
C.  The permittee shall furnish the city with policies or certificates of insurance to demonstrate that the permittee has procured such insurance and that the city is named as an additional insured with respect to the operation of the permittee's ambulance services. Such policies or certificates of insurance shall contain the covenant of the insurance carrier that thirty (30) days' written notice shall be given to the city prior to cancellation, modification or reduction in coverage of such insurance. 
(Prior code § 3½-38)  
8.16.210 - Communications requirements. 
Each permittee shall establish and maintain radio contact as prescribed in the city communications manual. No permittee shall allow an ambulance to be operated in service unless it is equipped with a two-way (VHF) radio which is compatible with and equivalent to the city emergency medical network as determined by the city manager. 
(Prior code § 3½-39)  
8.16.220 - Ambulance and personnel changes. 
A.  Subject to the provisions of Section 8.16.180 of this chapter, a permittee shall notify the health officer, in writing, of any changes relating to the ambulances specified in its permit. Such modification shall include descriptions and ambulance inspection reports as specified in Section 8.16.060(G) and any other information pertaining to such changes. 
B.  A permittee shall notify the health officer, in writing, of any changes relating to its personnel. Such notification shall include descriptions and copies of certificate or licenses as specified in Section 8.16.060(I) and any other information pertaining to such changes. 
(Prior code § 3½-40)  
8.16.230 - Ambulance safety and emergency equipment requirements. 
A permittee shall: 
A.  Maintain its ambulances in good mechanical repair and in a clean and sanitary condition. 
B.  Equip its ambulances with all the safety and emergency equipment and supplies as required by the vehicle code, the California Administrative Code and the regulations prescribed by the health officers, as the same are now written or hereinafter amended. 
C.  Protect dressings, bandaging, instruments and other medical supplies used for care and treatment of patients in such a manner so that they are sterile when ready for use. Provisions shall be made to assure autoclaving or resterilization of emergency equipment when required. 
(Prior code § 3½-41)  
8.16.240 - Ambulance personnel. 
No permittee shall allow an ambulance to be operated in service unless: 
A.  The driver meets the qualifications and training required by the California Administrative Code, as the same is now written or hereafter amended. The driver shall be trained and competent in the proper use of all the safety and emergency equipment and supplies referred to in Section 8.16.230(B) of this chapter, The driver shall hold a certificate as an emergency medical technician 1A (EMT-1A), unless the permittee has been specifically exempted from this requirement by the state and the city. 
B.  The driver is accompanied by an attendant, unless the permittee has been specifically exempted from this requirement by the health officer. The ambulance attendant shall be trained and competent in the proper use of all safety and emergency equipment and supplies referred to in Section 8.16.230(B) of this chapter, and shall hold a certificate as an emergency medical technician 1A (EMT-1A). The ambulance attendant shall occupy the patient compartment while transporting any person in apparent need of medical attention. 
C.  At least one attendant holds a certificate as an MIC paramedic issued by the health officer, if the vehicle is being used as an ALS ambulance. 
D.  At least one attendant holds a certificate as an EMT II, if the vehicle is being used as a LALS ambulance. 
(Prior code § 3½-42)  
8.16.250 - Ambulance personnel—Exceptions. 
A.  An ambulance driver or ambulance attendant who is a California licensed physician or an MIC nurse certified by the health officer shall be exempt from the emergency medical training requirement set forth in Section 8.16.240 of this chapter. 
B.  The provisions of Section 8.16.240 shall not apply during any "state of war emergency," duly proclaimed "state of emergency" or "local emergency" as defined in Section 8558 of the Government Code. 
(Prior code § 3½-43)  
8.16.260 - Continuation of call. 
An ambulance service based and properly licensed by the California Highway Patrol outside the unincorporated territory of the city shall be authorized to transport a patient to or through the incorporated territory of the city, but shall not be authorized to transport patients from the incorporated territory of the city, except as prescribed under Sections 8.16.030 and 8.16.040 of this chapter. In order to maintain proper medical support, such ambulance service shall maintain communications with a telemetry base station for medical control in compliance with the regulations prescribed by the health officer. 
(Prior code § 3½-44)  
8.16.270 - User complaint procedures. 
Any user of or subscriber to an ambulance service operating within the incorporated area of the city alleging that he or she has received unsatisfactory service may file a written complaint with the health officer setting forth such allegations. The health officer shall notify the ambulance service of such complaint and investigate the matter to determine whether or not there has been a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. In the event it is determined that there has been such a violation, the health officer shall take appropriate action to ensure compliance as authorized by this chapter. 
(Prior code § 3½-45)  
8.16.280 - Regulations. 
The health officer shall prescribe reasonable regulations regulating ambulance service operations, ambulance equipment and ambulance personnel. Any such regulation shall be submitted to the city council for approval before taking effect, and thereafter, filed in the health officer's office and made available for public inspection. 
(Prior code § 3½-46)  
8.16.290 - Inspection by health officer. 
The health officer shall inspect the records, facilities, ambulances, equipment and methods of operation of each permittee at least annually and whenever such inspections are deemed necessary by the health officer. 
(Prior code § 3½-48)  
8.16.300 - Schedule of rates. 
A.  Each permittee shall post a current schedule of rates for its ambulance services in a conspicuous place within each of its ambulances and in its office, and furnish one copy to the city clerk. 
B.  In the event the schedule of rates is changed or modified, the permittee shall deliver a copy of such changes or modifications to the health office and the city clerk forthwith. 
(Prior code § 3½-48)  
Chapter 8.20 - FUGITIVE DUST CONTROL 
Sections: 
 
8.20.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum requirements for construction and demolition activities and other specified sources in order to reduce man-made fugitive dust and the corresponding PM10 emissions. 
(Ord. 896 § 2, 2003)  
8.20.020 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions are applicable: 
"Agricultural operations" are any operation directly related to the growing of crops, or raising of fowls or animals for the primary purpose of making a livelihood. 
"AQMD" is the South Coast Air Quality Management District and the representatives thereof. 
"Average daily traffic (ADT)" is the number of motor vehicles that traverse a given unpaved or paved surface during a specified twenty-four (24)-hour period. ADT levels are calculated as the average daily volume over a specified forty-eight (48)-hour period as determined by the city (county) in consultation with the AQMD. 
"Bulk material" is all sand, gravel, soil, aggregate and other organic and inorganic particulate matter. 
"Chemical dust suppressants" are non-toxic chemical soil binders that are not prohibited for use by the city (county), the California Regional Water Quality Control Board, the California Air Resources Board, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (U.S. EPA), or any other law, rule or regulation, used to reduce dust on disturbed surfaces. 
"Coachella Valley best available control measures (CV BACM)" are methods to prevent or mitigate the emission and/or airborne transport of fugitive dust, as identified in the Coachella Valley Fugitive Dust Control Handbook. 
"Coachella Valley Fugitive Dust Control Handbook" is the most recently approved reference document by the AQMD that includes a description of fugitive dust control measures, guidance for preparation of fugitive dust control plans, notification forms, signage provisions, and test methods. 
"Construction activities" are any on-site activities preparatory to or related to the building, alteration, rehabilitation, or improvement of property, including, but not limited to, the following activities: grading, excavation, trenching, loading, vehicular travel, crushing, blasting, cutting, planning, shaping, breaking, equipment staging/storage areas, weed abatement activities or adding or removing bulk materials from storage piles. 
"Demolition activities" are the wrecking or taking out of any load-supporting structural member of a structure or building and related handling operations or the intentional burning of any structure or building. 
"Disturbed surface area" is any portion of the earth's surface (or material placed thereupon) that has been physically moved, uncovered, destabilized, or otherwise modified from its undisturbed native condition (including vehicular disturbances) thereby increasing the potential for the emission of fugitive dust. This definition does not include land that has been restored to a native condition, such that the vegetative ground cover and soil characteristics are equal to surrounding native conditions. 
"Earth-moving operations" are the use of any equipment for an activity where soil is being moved or uncovered. 
"Finish grade" is the final grade of the site that conforms to the approved grading plan. 
"Fugitive dust" is any solid particulate matter that becomes airborne, other than that emitted from an exhaust stack, directly or indirectly as a result of human activities. PM10 is a subset of fugitive dust and is defined as particulate matter with an aerodynamic diameter of ten (10) microns or less. 
"Fugitive dust control plan" is a document that describes fugitive dust sources at a site and the corresponding control measures and is prepared in accordance with the guidance contained in the Coachella Valley Fugitive Dust Control Handbook. 
"High-wind episode" is when wind speeds exceed twenty-five (25) miles per hour as measured by: 
1.  The closest AQMD monitoring station; 
2.  A certified meteorological monitoring station; or 
3.  An on-site wind monitor calibrated and operated on-site in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications with a data logger or strip chart. 
"Operator" is any person who owns, leases, operates, controls, or supervises any potential fugitive dust generating operation subject to the requirements of this chapter. This definition includes any person who has been officially designated by a property owner as the person responsible for fugitive dust control at a site, as indicated in an approved fugitive dust control plan. 
"Paved road" is an improved street, highway, alley, public way, or easement that is covered by roadway materials (e.g., cement, asphalt or asphaltic concrete). 
"Physical access restriction" is any barrier, including but not limited to: curbs, fences, gates, posts with fencing, shrubs, trees, or other measures that are effective in preventing vehicular and off-highway vehicle (OHV) use of a specified site. 
"Silt" is any bulk material with a particle size less than seventy-five (75) micrometers in diameter that passes through a Number 200 sieve as determined by American Society of Testing and Materials (ASTM) Test Method C 136 or any other test method approved by the U.S. EPA and AQMD. 
"Site" is the real property on which construction, demolition, or other activities subject to this chapter may occur. 
"Stabilized surface" is any portion of land that meets the minimum standards as established by the applicable test method contained in the Coachella Valley Fugitive Dust Control Handbook. 
"Storage pile" is any accumulation of bulk material with a height of three feet or more and a total surface area of three hundred (300) or more square feet. 
"Unpaved parking lot" is an area utilized for parking vehicles and associated vehicle maneuvering that is not covered with roadway materials (e.g., cement, asphalt or asphaltic concrete). 
"Unpaved road" is any service roads, internal access roads, heavy and light duty equipment paths and other roadways which are not covered by typical roadway materials (e.g., cement, asphalt, asphaltic concrete). 
"Temporary unpaved parking lots" are those used less than twenty-four (24) days per year. 
(Ord. 896 § 2, 2003)  
8.20.030 - Performance standards and test methods. 
All performance standards and test methods referenced in this chapter shall be based on the methodologies included in the Coachella Valley Dust Control Handbook. 
(Ord. 896 § 2, 2003)  
8.20.040 - Control requirements. 
A.  Work Practices—All Fugitive Dust Sources. 
1.  No operator shall conduct any potential dust-generating activity on a site unless the operator utilizes one or more Coachella Valley best available control measures, as identified in the Coachella Valley Fugitive Dust Control Handbook for each fugitive dust source such that the applicable performance standards are met. 
2.  Any operator involved in any potential dust-generating activity on a site with a disturbed surface area greater than one acre shall, at a minimum, operate a water application system as identified in the Coachella Valley Fugitive Dust Control Handbook, if watering is the selected control measure. 
3.  Performance Standards and Test Methods. No person subject to the requirements contained in subsection (A)(1) of this section shall cause or allow visible fugitive dust emissions to exceed twenty (20) percent opacity, or extend more than one hundred (100) feet either horizontally or vertically from the origin of a source, or cross any property line. 
B.  Construction and Demolition Activities. 
1.  Any operator applying for a grading permit or a building permit for an activity with a disturbed surface area of more than five thousand (5,000) square feet, shall not initiate any earth-moving operations unless a fugitive dust control plan has been prepared pursuant to the provisions of the Coachella Valley Fugitive Dust Control Handbook and approved by the city (county). 
2.  Any operator applying for a grading permit, or building permit shall provide a two thousand dollar ($2,000.00) cash deposit and a bond, a cash certificate of deposit, or an equivalent form approved by the city, in an amount equal to at least two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per acre. Such funds shall be in an amount sufficient to completely stabilize all disturbed areas in the event that the operator fails to adequately control dust, or abandons the site in order to initiate stabilization measures without a significant delay. 
3.  A complete copy of the approved fugitive dust control plan must be kept on site in a conspicuous place at all times and provided to the city (county) and AQMD upon request. 
4.  Any operator involved in demolition activities shall comply with AQMD Rule 1403 (Asbestos Emissions from Demolition/Renovation Activities) requirements, and the requirements of Title 40, Part 61 of the Code of Federal Regulations. 
5.  Any operator involved in earth-moving operations shall implement at least one of the following short-term stabilization methods during non-working hours: 
a.  Maintaining soils in a damp condition as determined by sight or touch; 
b.  Establishment of a stabilized surface through watering; or 
c.  Application of a chemical dust suppressant in sufficient quantities and concentrations to maintain a stabilized surface. 
6.  Within ten (10) days of ceasing activity, an operator shall implement at least one of the following long-term stabilization techniques for any disturbed surface area where construction activities are not scheduled to occur for at least thirty (30) days: 
a.  Revegetation that results in seventy-five (75) percent ground coverage provided that an active watering system is in place at all times; 
b.  Establishment of a stabilized surface through watering with physical access restriction surrounding the area; or 
c.  Use of chemical stabilizers to establish a stabilized surface with physical access restriction surrounding the area. 
7.  Any operator shall remove all bulk material track-out from any site access point onto any paved road open to through traffic: 
a.  Within one hour if such material extends for a cumulative distance of greater than twenty-five (25) feet from any site access point; and 
b.  At the conclusion of each workday. 
8.  Any operator of a project with a disturbed surface area of five or more acres or of any project that involves the import or export of at least one hundred (100) cubic yards of bulk material per day shall install and maintain at least one of the following control measures at the intersection of each site entrance and any paved road open to through traffic with all vehicles exiting the site routed over the selected device(s): 
a.  Pad consisting of minimum one inch washed gravel maintained in a clean condition to a depth of at least six inches and extending at least thirty (30) feet wide and at least fifty (50) feet long; 
b.  Paved surface extending at least one hundred (100) feet and at least twenty (20) feet wide; 
c.  Wheel shaker/wheel spreading device consisting of raised dividers (rails, pipe, or grates) at least three inches tall and at least six inches apart and twenty (20) feet long; or 
d.  A wheel washing system. 
9.  Any operator required to submit a fugitive dust control plan under subsection (B)(1) of this section shall install and maintain project contact signage that meets the minimum standards of the Coachella Valley Fugitive Dust Control Handbook, including a twenty-four (24)-hour manned toll-free or local phone number, prior to initiating any type of earth-moving operations. 
10.  Any operator of a project with a disturbed surface area of fifty (50) or more acres shall have an on-site environmental observer that: 
a.  Is hired by the property owner or developer; 
b.  Has dust control as the sole or primary responsibility; 
c.  Has successfully completed the AQMD Coachella Valley fugitive dust control class and has been issued a certificate of completion for the class; and 
d.  Is identified in the approved fugitive dust control plan as having the authority to immediately employ sufficient dust mitigation twenty-four (24) hours per day, seven days a week and to ensure compliance with this chapter, the approved fugitive dust control plan, and AQMD regulations. 
11.  Performance Standards and Test Methods. 
a.  No operator required to submit a fugitive dust control plan under subsection (B)(1) of this section shall cause or allow visible fugitive dust emissions to exceed twenty (20) percent opacity, or extend more than one hundred (100) feet either horizontally or vertically from the origin of a source, or cross any property line. 
b.  Exceedance of the visible emissions prohibition in subsection (B)(11)(a) of this section occurring due to a high-wind episode shall constitute a violation of subsection (B)(11)(a) of this section, unless the operator demonstrates to city (county) all the following conditions: 
i.  All fugitive dust control plan measures or applicable Coachella Valley best available control measures were implemented and maintained on site; 
ii.  The exceedance could not have been prevented by better application, implementation, operation, or maintenance of control measures; 
iii.  Appropriate recordkeeping was compiled and retained in accordance with the requirements in subsection (B)(12) of this section; and 
iv.  Documentation of the high-wind episode on the day(s) in question is provided by appropriate records. 
12.  Reporting/Recordkeeping. 
a.  Before Construction. The operator of a project with ten (10) acres or more of earth-moving operations shall: 
i.  Forward two copies of a site-specific, stand alone (8½ by 11 inch) fugitive dust control plan to the AQMD within ten (10) days after approval by the city (county). (Note: A separate AQMD approval will not be issued); and 
ii.  Notify the city (county) and the AQMD at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to initiating earth-moving operations. 
b.  During Construction. 
i.  Any operator involved in earth-moving operations shall compile, and maintain for a period of not less than three years, daily self-inspection recordkeeping forms in accordance with the guidelines contained in the Coachella Valley Fugitive Dust Control Handbook. 
ii.  Any operator involved in earth-moving operations that utilizes chemical dust suppressants for dust control on a site shall compile records indicating the type of product applied, vendor name, and the method, frequency, concentration, quantity and date(s) of application and shall retain such records for a period of not less than three years. 
c.  After Construction. Any operator subject to the provisions of subsection (B)(12)(a) of this section shall notify the city (county) and the AQMD within ten (10) days of the establishment of the finish grade or at the conclusion of the finished grading inspection. 
C.  Disturbed Vacant Lands/Weed Abatement Activities. 
1.  Owners of property with a disturbed surface area greater than five thousand (5,000) square feet shall within thirty (30) days of receiving official notice by the city (county) prevent trespass through physical access restriction as permitted by the city (county). 
2.  In the event that implementation of subsection (C)(1) of this section is not effective in establishing a stabilized surface within forty-five (45) days of restricting access, the owner shall implement at least one of the following long-term stabilization techniques within an additional fifteen (15) days, unless the city (county) has determined that the land has been restabilized: 
a.  Uniformly apply and maintain surface gravel or chemical dust suppressants such that a stabilized surface is formed; or 
b.  Begin restoring disturbed surfaces such that the vegetative cover and soil characteristics are similar to adjacent or nearby undisturbed native conditions. Such restoration control measure(s) must be maintained and reapplied, if necessary, such that a stabilized surface is formed within eight months of the initial application. 
3.  Any operator conducting weed abatement activities on a site that results in a disturbed surface area of five thousand (5,000) or more square feet shall: 
a.  Apply sufficient water before and during weed abatement activities such that the applicable performance standards are met; and 
b.  Ensure that the affected area is a stabilized surface once weed abatement activities have ceased. 
4.  Performance Standards and Test Methods. No person subject to the provisions of subsections (C)(1)—(C)(3) of this section shall cause or allow visible fugitive dust emissions to exceed twenty (20) percent opacity, or extend more than one hundred (100) feet either horizontally or vertically from a source, or cross any property line, and shall either: 
a.  Maintain a stabilized surface; or 
b.  Maintain a threshold friction velocity for disturbed surface areas corrected for non-erodible elements of one hundred (100) centimeters per second or higher. 
5.  Reporting/Recordkeeping. 
a.  Within ninety (90) days of chapter adoption, operators of property with disturbed surface area of five thousand (5,000) or more square feet shall notify the city (county) of the location of such lands and provide owner contact information. 
b.  Any person subject to the provisions of subsections (C)(1)—(C)(3) of this section shall compile, and retain for a period of not less than three years, records indicating the name and contact person of all firms contracted with for dust mitigation, listing of dust control implements used on site, and invoices from dust suppressant contractors/vendors. 
D.  Unpaved Roads. 
1.  Owners of public or private unpaved roads with average daily traffic levels between twenty (20) and one hundred fifty (150) vehicles must take measures (signage or speed control devices) to reduce vehicular speeds to no more than fifteen (15) miles per hour. 
2.  Owners of a cumulative distance of six or less miles of public or private unpaved roads shall pave each segment having one hundred fifty (150) or more average daily trips or, alternatively apply and maintain chemical dust suppressants in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications for a travel surface and the performance standards included in subsection (D)(4) of this section in accordance with the following treatment schedule: 
a.  One-third of qualifying unpaved road segments within one year of chapter adoption; and 
b.  Remainder of qualifying unpaved road segments within three years of chapter adoption. (Note: Treatments in excess of annual requirements can apply to future years.) 
3.  Owners of a cumulative distance of more than six miles of public or private unpaved roads shall stabilize each segment having one hundred fifty (150) or more average daily trips in accordance with the following treatment schedule: 
a.  At least two miles paved or four miles stabilized with chemical dust suppressants in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications for a travel surface and the performance standards established in subsection (D)(4) of this section within one year of the chapter adoption; and 
b.  At least two miles paved or four miles stabilized with chemical dust suppressants in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications for a travel surface and the performance standards included in subsection (D)(4) of this section in accordance with the following treatment schedule annually thereafter until all qualifying unpaved roads have been stabilized. (Note: Treatments in excess of annual requirements can apply to future years). 
4.  Performance Standards and Test Methods. Owners of any public or private unpaved road shall not allow visible fugitive dust emissions to exceed twenty (20) percent opacity, or extend more than one hundred (100) feet either horizontally or vertically from the origin of a source, and shall either: 
a.  Not allow silt loading to be equal to or greater than 0.33 ounces per square foot; or 
b.  Not allow the silt content to exceed six percent. 
5.  Reporting/Recordkeeping. 
a.  Within ninety (90) days of chapter adoption, owners of unpaved roads shall provide to the city (county) and the AQMD the location and ADT estimates for all unpaved roads. 
b.  Owners of unpaved roads that utilize chemical dust suppressants shall compile, and retain for a period of not less than three years, records indicating the type of product applied, vendor name, and the method, frequency, concentration, quantity and date(s) of application. 
E.  Unpaved Parking Lots. 
1.  Owners of parking lots established subsequent to chapter adoption are required to pave such areas, or alternatively apply and maintain chemical dust suppressants in accordance with the manufacturer' s specifications for traffic areas and the performance standards included in subsection (E)(4) of this section. 
2.  Owners of existing public or private unpaved parking lots shall implement one of the following control strategies within one hundred eighty (180) days of chapter adoption: 
a.  Pave; 
b.  Apply and maintain chemical dust suppressants in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications for traffic areas and the performance standards included in subsection (E)(4) of this section; 
c.  Apply and maintain washed gravel in accordance with the performance standards included in subsection (E)(4) of this section. 
3.  Owners of public or private temporary unpaved parking lots (those that are used twenty-four (24) days or less per year) shall apply and maintain chemical dust suppressants in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications for traffic areas and the performance standards included in subsection (E)(4) of this section prior to any twenty-four (24)-hour period when more than forty (40) vehicles are expected to enter and park. The owner of any temporary unpaved parking lot greater than five thousand (5,000) square feet shall implement the disturbed vacant land requirements contained in subsection C of this section during non-parking periods. 
4.  Performance Standards and Test Methods. The operator of any public or private unpaved parking lot shall not allow visible fugitive dust emissions to exceed twenty (20) percent opacity, or extend more than one hundred (100) feet either horizontally or vertically from the origin of a source, and shall either: 
a.  Not allow silt loading to be equal to or greater than 0.33 ounces per square foot; or 
b.  Not allow the silt content to exceed eight percent. 
5.  Reporting/Recordkeeping. 
a.  Within ninety (90) days of chapter adoption, owners of unpaved parking lots shall provide to the city (county) and the AQMD the location and ADT estimates and the size (in square feet) of unpaved parking lots. 
b.  Owners of unpaved parking lots that utilize chemical dust suppressants or apply gravel shall compile, and retain for a period of not less than three years, records indicating the type of product applied, vendor name, and the method, frequency, concentration, quantity and date(s) of application. 
F.  Public or Private Paved Roads. 
1.  Any owner of paved roads shall construct, or require to be constructed all new or widened paved roads in accordance with the following standards: 
a.  Curbing in accordance with the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials guidelines or as an alternative, road shoulders paved or treated with chemical dust suppressants or washed gravel in accordance with the performance standards included in subsection (D)(4) of this section with the following minimum widths: 
Average Daily Trips 	Minimum Shoulder Width (ft.) 
500—3,000 	4 
3,000 or greater 	8 
 
b.  Paved medians or as an alternative, medians surrounded by curbing and treated with landscaping, chemical dust suppressants, or washed gravel applied and maintained in accordance with the performance standards included in subsection (D)(4) of this section. 
2.  Any owner of public or private paved roads shall remove or cause to be removed any erosion-caused deposits of greater than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet within twenty-four (24) hours after receiving notice by the city (county) or the AQMD or prior to resumption of traffic where the paved area has been closed to vehicular traffic. 
(Ord. 896 § 2, 2003)  
8.20.050 - Administrative requirements. 
A.  Any operator preparing a fugitive dust control plan shall complete the AQMD Coachella Valley fugitive dust control class and maintain a current valid certificate of completion. 
B.  At least one representative of each construction or demolition general contractor and subcontractor responsible for earth-movement operations shall complete the AQMD Coachella Valley fugitive dust control class and maintain a current valid certificate of completion. 
C.  All reporting/recordkeeping required by Section 8.20.040(B) of this chapter shall be provided to the city (county) and AQMD representatives immediately upon request. 
D.  All reporting/recordkeeping required by Section 8.20.040(C)—(F) of this chapter shall be provided to the city (county) and AQMD representatives within twenty-four (24) hours of a written request. 
(Ord. 896 § 2, 2003)  
8.20.060 - Exemptions. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to: 
1.  Agricultural operations including on-field sources and unpaved roads used solely for agricultural operations; 
2.  Any dust-generating activity where necessary fugitive dust preventive or mitigative actions are in conflict with either Federal or State Endangered Species Act provisions as determined in writing by the appropriate federal or state agency; 
3.  Any action required or authorized to implement emergency operations that are officially declared by the city (county) to ensure the public health and safety. 
B.  The provisions of Section 8.20.040(B)(1) of this chapter shall not apply to any construction or demolition activity meeting any of the following activity levels or requirements: 
1.  The activity is occurring entirely within an enclosed structure from which no visible airborne particulate matter escapes; or 
2.  Activities that do not require issuance of a grading permit or those that require a building permit provided that the project results in five thousand (5,000) or less square feet of soil disturbance. 
C.  The provisions of Section 8.20.040(B)(9) of this chapter shall not apply to: 
1.  Projects that takes two weeks or less to complete provided that a long-term stabilization technique(s) identified in Section 8.20.040(C) of this chapter are implemented; and 
2.  Line projects (i.e., pipelines, cable access lines, etc.). 
(Ord. 896 § 2, 2003)  
8.20.070 - Compliance. 
A.  Violation of, or failure to comply with, any provisions of an approved fugitive dust control plan shall be a violation of this chapter. 
B.  Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a infraction and subject to the penalties defined in Section 1.08.010 of this code. 
(Ord. 896 § 2, 2003)  
8.20.080 - Severability. 
If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the chapter and application of such provision(s) to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected. 
(Ord. 896 § 2, 2003)  
8.20.090 - Savings clause. 
Neither the adoption of this chapter nor the repeal of any other ordinance in which violations were committed prior to the effective date hereof shall be construed as a waiver of any license or penalty or the penal provisions application to any violation thereof. The provisions of the chapter, insofar as they are substantially the same as ordinance provisions previously adopted by the city of Coachella relating to the same subject matter, shall not be construed as a new enactment unless substantial revisions or provisions are required by this chapter. 
(Ord. 896 § 2, 2003)  
8.20.100 - Effective date. 
This chapter shall take effect thirty (30) days after its second reading by the city council. 
(Ord. 896 § 2, 2003)  
8.20.110 - Certification. 
The city clerk shall certify to the adoption of this chapter and shall cause it to published and circulated in the city of Coachella. 
(Ord. 896 § 2, 2003)  
Chapter 8.24 - ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY ACT IMPLEMENTATION 
Sections:  
Article I - Definitions 
 
8.24.010 - Definitions generally. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms and phrases are defined as hereinafter set out unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended. 
(Prior code § 28-1)  
8.24.020 - Categorical exemption. 
The phrase "categorical exemption" means the immunity of a class of projects from the necessity for an environmental assessment, either based upon an exemption under the Environmental Quality Act of 1970 or based upon a determination that the type of projects comprising the class normally will have no significant effect on the environment. 
(Prior code § 28-2)  
8.24.030 - Decisionmaker. 
The term "decisionmaker" means any agency, official or employee of the city who is authorized to take a governmental action on a project, including but not limited to the city council and the planning commission. 
(Prior code § 28-3)  
8.24.040 - Discretionary project. 
The phrase "discretionary project" means a project for which the governmental action requested allows latitude of decision within which the decisionmaker determines issues for that project according to the circumstances and according to the judgment of the decisionmaker; that is, the decisionmaker is not expressly controlled by fixed rules of law. 
(Prior code § 28-4)  
8.24.050 - Environment. 
The term "environment" means the physical conditions which exist within the area which will be affected by a proposed project, including land, air, water, minerals, flora, fauna, noise, and objects of historic or aesthetic significance. The general term "environment" is divided into the following categories: 
A.  The physical or inorganic environment, comprising such factors as climate and soil. 
B.  The biological environment, comprising wild plants and animals, including bacteria and other germs. 
C.  The social environment, comprising things due to human activity and divisible in turn into: 
1.  The physiosocial environment, comprising buildings, roads, and all manufactured objects. 
2.  The biosocial environment, comprising domesticated plants and animals. 
(Prior code § 28-5)  
8.24.060 - Environmental assessment. 
The phrase "environmental assessment" means an evaluation of the characteristics of a project and of its proposed environment to determine whether the project may have a significant effect on the environment. 
(Prior code § 28-6)  
8.24.070 - Environmental documents. 
The phrase "environmental documents" means all the papers pertaining to a specific project which are prepared by the city and are relied upon as the basis, proof, or support of the environmental impact of the project. 
(Prior code § 28-7)  
8.24.080 - Environmental impact report. 
The phrase "environmental impact report" means the detailed written statement and comments as defined in the Environmental Quality Act of 1970. 
(Prior code § 28-8)  
8.24.090 - Environmental Quality Act of 1970. 
The phrase "Environmental Quality Act of 1970" means Division 13 of the California Public Resources Code, as it may be amended from time to time, and any regulations adopted pursuant thereto. 
(Prior code § 28-9)  
8.24.100 - Governmental action. 
The phrase "governmental action" means the proposed authorization by the city of a project or a discrete part of a project. Such proposed authorization may be by ordinance, resolution, contract, lease, permit, license, or any other form of entitlement to proceed with the project proposed. 
(Prior code § 28-10)  
8.24.110 - Ministerial project. 
The phrase "ministerial project" means a project for which the governmental action requested allows no latitude of decision within which the decisionmaker determines issues for that project according to the circumstances and according to the judgment of the decisionmaker; that is, the decisionmaker is expressly controlled by fixed rules of law. 
(Prior code § 28-11)  
8.24.120 - Person. 
The term "person" means any person, firm, association, organization, partnership, business, trust, corporation, company, district, county, city and county, city, town, the state, and any of the agencies and political subdivisions of such entities. 
(Prior code § 28-12)  
8.24.130 - Project. 
The term "project" means a planned undertaking requiring governmental action on the undertaking as a whole or on any discrete part of the undertaking authorizing land acquisition, site development, building alteration, building construction, or any significant intensification of the use of land. "Project" as defined by the Environmental Quality Act of 1970, includes the following: 
A.  Activities directly undertaken by the city. 
B.  Activities undertaken by a person other than the city which are supported in whole or in part through contracts, grants, subsidies, loans, or other forms of assistance from the city. 
C.  Activities involving the issuance to a person other than the city of a lease, permit, license, certificate, or other entitlement for use by the city. 
(Prior code § 28-13)  
8.24.140 - Significant effect on the environment. 
The phrase "significant effect on the environment" means an important result, either beneficial or adverse, in the environment of a project which may be produced by the implementation of the project as proposed. The significance of an effect generally is directly proportional to the following qualities of the effect: 
A.  Its magnitude; 
B.  Its duration; 
C.  Its proximity to the project site; 
D.  The number of individuals directly affected by it; and 
E.  The closeness of its relationship to the physical and biological environment. 
In accordance with the legislative intent stated in the Environmental Quality Act of 1970, the effects on the following items are deemed to be more significant than other environmental effects: 
A.  Aesthetic environmental qualities; 
B.  Natural environmental qualities; 
C.  Scenic environmental qualities; 
D.  Historic environmental qualities, especially examples of the major periods of California history; 
E.  The maintenance and perpetuation of fish and wildlife species; 
F.  Freedom from excessive noise; and 
G.  Waste disposal and environmental pollution. 
(Prior code § 28-14)  
8.24.150 - Sponsor. 
The term "sponsor" means the person who submits a project or a discrete part of a project for governmental action. 
(Prior code § 28-15)  
Article II - General Provisions 
 
8.24.160 - Purpose of chapter. 
The purpose of this chapter is to implement the Environmental Quality Act of 1970 insofar as it is applicable to the city. 
(Prior code § 28-16)  
8.24.170 - Construction of chapter. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be constructed in accordance with the Environmental Quality Act of 1970 and any interpretations thereof by a competent tribunal. Any provision of this chapter which is less restrictive than required by such state law shall be construed to be as restrictive as required by such state law insofar as possible. Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the city from taking such other action in respect to projects as is deemed necessary by the city to obtain full compliance by the city with the provisions of the Environmental Quality Act of 1970. 
(Prior code § 28-17)  
8.24.180 - Effect of chapter on past actions. 
The adoption of this chapter shall not be construed to invalidate any past governmental action by the city which did not comply with the provisions of this chapter or of the Environmental Quality Act of 1970. Any past governmental action by the city on the following types of projects are ratified and approved: 
A.  Projects which would not have a significant effect on the environment; 
B.  Projects for which there was substantial compliance with the provisions of this chapter or of the Environmental Quality Act of 1970; 
C.  Projects which received environmental approval from the state or federal government; 
D.  Projects for which the environmental impact was considered by the city even though there was no environmental impact report prepared. 
(Prior code § 28-18)  
8.24.190 - Fees. 
Fees for a preliminary environmental assessment, an environmental assessment, and the preparation of an environmental impact report shall be set by the city council on motion. 
(Prior code § 28-19)  
8.24.200 - Public comment on environmental documents. 
All written comment or record thereof by the public or by a governmental agency specifically on the environmental characteristics of a discretionary project shall be transmitted to the planning department and, if not required to be a part of the environmental impact report by the Environmental Quality Act of 1970, may be included with the environmental documents for the project. 
(Prior code § 28-20)  
8.24.210 - Authority to sign findings. 
Whenever an agency of the city, such as city council or the planning commission, is required by this chapter to make a finding, such finding may be made orally. The clerk or secretary for such agency is authorized to act on behalf of that agency in making the written finding in the appropriate language on the appropriate document and in signing such appropriate document. 
(Prior code § 28-21)  
8.24.220 - Commencement of actions. 
Any action or proceeding to attack, review, set aside, void, or annul any determination, decision, or governmental action by the city on the ground of noncompliance with this chapter or with the Environmental Quality Act of 1970 shall be commenced as follows: 
A.  Any action or proceeding alleging that the city is carrying out or has approved a project which may have a significant effect on the environment without having determined whether the project may have a significant effect on the environment shall be commenced within thirty (30) days of the city's decision to carry out or approve the project or, if a project is undertaken without a formal decision by the city, within thirty (30) days after commencement of the project. 
B.  Any action or proceeding alleging that the city has improperly determined whether a project may have a significant effect on the environment shall be commenced within thirty (30) days after the filing of the notice with the county clerk required by the Environmental Quality Act of 1970. 
C.  Any action or proceeding alleging that an environmental impact report does not comply with legal requirements shall be commenced within thirty (30) days after the filing of the notice with the county clerk required by the Environmental Quality Act of 1970. 
D.  Any action or proceeding alleging any other violation of this chapter or of the Environmental Quality Act of 1970 shall be commenced within thirty (30) days of the alleged violation. 
(Prior code § 28-22)  
8.24.230 - Proof of service. 
Proof of prior service by mail upon the city or a written notice of the commencement of any action or proceeding described in Section 8.24.220, identifying the project shall be filed concurrently with the initial pleading in such action or proceeding. 
(Prior code § 28-23)  
8.24.240 - Filing of notices. 
The director of planning shall file any notices required by the Environmental Quality Act of 1970. No project subject to the provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act (contained in Division 13 of the California Public Resources Code) for which a notice of determination or environmental impact report is prepared pursuant to Public Resources Code Section 21808 shall be approved unless the applicant therefor pays, or is required to pay, all fees required by Section 711.4 of the California Fish and Game Code except where the city determines that the proposed project is categorically exempt or whose effect on the environment is de minimis. The planning director may require the fees to be paid directly to the city at any time prior to submitting an application for the project or prior to filing the notice of determination or may require the fees to be paid directly to the county clerk upon the filing of the notice of determination. Only one filing fee shall be paid for each project unless the project is tiered or phased, and separate environmental documents or review by the department of fish and game is required. Unless the project applicant or owner pays such fees, the project application shall be deemed to be incomplete. Further, no project shall be operative, vested, or final until the filing fees have been paid. 
(Prior code § 28-24)  
8.24.250 - Ministerial projects. 
The city manager or any persons designated by him or her, may develop a list of classes of projects which are ministerial. The city manager may recommend to the council the list of ministerial projects. Approval of the list of ministerial projects shall be by motion. Ministerial projects are not subject to the environmental impact procedure specified in this code or to the Environmental Quality Act of 1970. 
(Prior code § 28-25)  
Article III - Categorical Exemption 
 
8.24.260 - Development by the city manager. 
The city manager may develop a list of classes of projects which may be granted categorical exemptions in addition to those classes of projects exempted by the Environmental Quality Act of 1970. 
(Prior code § 28-26)  
8.24.270 - Adoption by motion. 
The city manager may recommend to the city council those classes of projects which should be granted categorical exemptions. The granting or revocation of a categorical exemption for a class of projects shall be by motion. 
(Prior code § 28-27)  
8.24.280 - Effect of a categorical exemption. 
Any project which is within a class of projects granted a categorical exemption and which does not have environmental characteristics significantly different from the other members of such class is deemed to be a project which will not have a significant effect on the environment. No environmental assessment or environmental impact report is required for such a project. 
(Prior code § 28-28)  
Article IV - Preliminary Environmental Assessment 
 
8.24.290 - Data from sponsor. 
The city official who receives a project for processing may require the sponsor to provide all or any part of the base information on the project and its proposed environment necessary for a preliminary environmental assessment of the project. 
(Prior code § 28-29)  
8.24.300 - Recommendation by processing official. 
When a project is submitted to the city for processing, the city official responsible for the processing shall make a preliminary environmental assessment of the project. If it is determined that the project is exempt and does not require an environmental impact report, this determination shall be recorded in writing and the reasons stated thereon. If it is determined that the project does not qualify for an exemption, this recommendation shall be recorded in writing and transmitted to a responsible official for an environmental assessment. 
(Prior code § 28-30)  
8.24.310 - Finding by a decisionmaker. 
If the processing official recommends that a project qualifies for an exemption, each decisionmaker for the project other than the processing official shall confirm or reject this recommendation and record his or her finding in writing. If a decisionmaker finds that a project does not qualify for an exemption, he or she shall transmit the project to responsible official for an environmental assessment. 
(Prior code § 28-31)  
Article V - Environmental Assessment 
 
8.24.320 - Development of procedure by city manager. 
The city manager shall develop a procedure for environmental assessment of projects. Such procedure may be in the form of a questionnaire, a matrix, or other form, that shall be carried out by the city manager or any appropriate officials designated by him or her. 
(Prior code § 28-32)  
8.24.330 - Adoption of procedure by motion. 
The city manager shall recommend to the city council the procedure for environmental assessment of projects. The adoption or revision of such procedures shall be by motion. 
(Prior code § 28-33)  
8.24.340 - Environmental assessment. 
The city manager or appropriate staff member delegated by him or her shall make an environmental assessment for the following after the payment of the appropriate fee: 
A.  Any project which does not qualify for an exemption and which may require an environmental impact report under the Environmental Quality Act of 1970. 
B.  Any project which is submitted by the sponsor to a city for an environmental assessment prior to the submittal of the project to the city for governmental action. 
(Prior code § 28-34)  
8.24.350 - Data from sponsor. 
The responsible official may require the sponsor of a project to provide all or a part of the base data on the project and its proposed environment necessary for an environment assessment of the project. 
(Prior code § 28-35)  
8.24.360 - Recommendation by responsible official. 
If the responsible official finds that a project may have a significant effect on the environment, he or she shall record this recommendation in writing and, after the payment of the appropriate fee, cause an environmental impact report to be prepared for the project. If the responsible official finds that a project will not have a significant effect on the environment, he or she shall record this recommendation in writing and return the project to the appropriate city official or to the sponsor as the case may be. 
(Prior code § 28-36)  
8.24.370 - Finding by the decisionmaker. 
If the responsible official recommends that a project does not have a significant effect on the environment, each decisionmaker for the project shall confirm or reject this recommendation and record his or her finding in writing. If a decisionmaker finds that the project may have a significant effect on the environment, he or she shall transmit the project to the responsible official for an environmental impact report. 
(Prior code § 28-37)  
Article VI - Environmental Impact Report 
 
8.24.380 - Development of procedure. 
The city manager shall develop a procedure for the preparation of environmental impact reports. Such procedure may be in the form of a questionnaire, a matrix, or any other form, and may utilize any member of the staff as the city manager may designate and may include the hiring of outside consultant firms. 
(Prior code § 28-38)  
8.24.390 - Adoption of procedure by motion. 
The city manager shall recommend to the city council the procedure for the preparation of environmental impact reports. The adoption or revision of such procedure shall be by motion. 
(Prior code § 28-39)  
8.24.400 - The environmental impact report. 
The responsible official shall cause to be prepared an environmental impact report for the following after the payment of the appropriate fee: 
A.  Any project which may have a significant effect on the environment and which requires an environmental impact report under the Environmental Quality Act of 1970. 
B.  Any project which is submitted by the sponsor for an environmental impact report prior to submission of the project to the city for governmental action. 
(Prior code § 28-40)  
8.24.410 - Supplemental environmental impact report. 
The responsible official shall prepare a supplemental environmental impact report for a project whenever the same is required by the Environmental Quality Act of 1970, whenever there is any data on the project or its proposed environment which was not previously considered in the environmental impact report, or whenever it appears necessary to revise the original environmental impact report. 
(Prior code § 28-41)  
8.24.420 - Data from sponsor. 
The responsible official may require the sponsor of a project to provide all or a part of the base data on the project and its proposed environment necessary for an environmental impact report or a supplemental environmental impact report on the project. 
(Prior code § 28-42)  
8.24.430 - Recommendation. 
The responsible official shall make a recommendation in the environmental impact report and any supplemental environmental impact report as to the governmental action to be taken on the project, based on the effect of the project on the environment. 
(Prior code § 28-43)  
8.24.440 - Public hearing. 
Before any governmental action may be taken on a project which may have a significant effect on the environment, a public hearing shall be held on the environmental impact report for the project and on any supplemental environmental impact report for the project which differs significantly from the original environmental impact report. If the first governmental action for such a project is to be taken at the administrative level, the responsible official shall hold the hearing. Otherwise, the first agency to take governmental action on the project shall hold the hearing. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be published at least once in a newspaper published and circulated in the city, the publication of which shall be at least seven days prior to the time set for the hearing. Any environmental impact report to be considered shall be available in the planning department for public inspection from the time of publication until the time of the hearing. At the time and place set for the hearing, evidence on the potential effect of the project on its proposed environment shall be received. The hearing may be continued from time to time. No decision on the environmental impact of the project or on the proposed governmental actions is necessary at such a hearing. 
(Prior code § 28-44)  
8.24.450 - Finding by decisionmaker. 
Each decisionmaker for a project shall make a finding on the sufficiency of the environmental impact report and any supplemental environmental impact report for the project and shall record his or her finding in writing. If a decisionmaker finds that the environmental impact report or any supplemental environmental impact report is not sufficient, he or she shall transmit the project to the responsible official for a supplemental environmental impact report. 
(Prior code § 28-45)  
8.24.460 - Use of environmental impact reports. 
Every decisionmaker for a project shall consider all environmental impact reports for the project prior to approving or disapproving the project. The environmental data supplied by these reports and by any other source shall be considered by the decisionmaker and used as follows: 
A.  Authorization of a project may be denied if, in the opinion of the responsible official and the decisionmaker: 
1.  Its adverse environmental effect outweighs its beneficial environmental effect; or 
2.  A feasible alternative exists having a lesser adverse environmental effect. 
B.  A project may be authorized subject to conditions reasonably calculated to: 
1.  Minimize the adverse environmental effect of the project; or 
2.  Maximize the beneficial environmental effect of the project. 
(Prior code § 28-46)  
Chapter 8.32 - FIREWORKS 
Sections: 
 
8.32.010 - Legislative intent. 
The provisions of this chapter are intended to regulate the sale, discharge and storage of fireworks, in the prevention of fires which may result from the improper sale, use or storage of fireworks. This chapter is added to permit the sale, discharge and storage of "safe and sane" fireworks as defined by Section 12529 of the Health and Safety Code of the state of California within the territorial limits of the city during the period beginning at noon on the twenty-eighth day of June and ending at noon on the fifth of July of each calendar year and any other period permitted by law and authorized by the Coachella city council pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and not otherwise. The fees in this chapter are for regulatory purposes only. 
(Ord. 892 § 10, 2003; prior code § 9-30)  
8.32.020 - "Safe and sane" fireworks permitted. 
A.  Except as provided in this chapter, no person shall sell or offer to sell, at retail, any fireworks within the territorial limits of the city without a fireworks permit first being issued to a qualifying Coachella organization as defined in this chapter from the director of finance or designee. 
B.  No organization shall be granted more than one permit or operate more than one stand where fireworks are sold during any one calendar year. 
C.  An organization which has been granted a permit hereunder may enter into a participation agreement with one or more qualifying organization to jointly sell fireworks provided that such organizations shall assume jointly the responsibility for compliance with all city ordinances and regulations and that all participating organizations shall be listed as such on the permit. 
D.  The maximum number of permits that may be issued to organizations to sell fireworks within the territorial limits of the city in one calendar year shall not exceed one permit for every three thousand five hundred (3,500) residents of the city, or fraction thereof, based on the latest estimate of population of the city by the California Department of Finance or the U.S. Bureau of the Census. 
E.  If the number of applications for retail permits exceeds the number of permits available for issuance, the director of finance or designee shall issue the permits according to the following three priorities: 
1.  First, to a qualifying Coachella organization as defined in this chapter which is incorporated as a nonprofit corporation and which has obtained tax exempt status from the Internal Revenue Service and the franchise tax board; 
2.  Second, to a qualifying Coachella organization which was granted a permit hereunder during the preceding year and which complied with all of the requirements of this article and other applicable provisions of this code; 
3.  Third, to a qualifying Coachella organization selected by a random drawing as determined by the director of finance. 
F.  Permits for a qualifying Coachella organization that meets the qualifications set forth in 8.32.050(D) shall be limited to two permits. If more than two applications for retail permits are received, the finance director or designee shall select by random drawing two organizations. 
G.  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any violation of the provisions of this chapter by a permittee organization or its officers or members may be a basis for the denial of a fireworks permit in future years. 
(Prior code § 9-31) 
(Ord. No. 1019, § 1, 6-23-10)  
8.32.030 - Fireworks permit application. 
An organization seeking to sell "safe and sane" fireworks shall submit an application for a fireworks permit hereunder. All applications for a permit to sell fireworks shall: 
A.  Be made in writing and accompanied by a fireworks permit fee as in the amount described in the comprehensive fee schedule resolution, a license issued by the state fire marshal, and a cleanup deposit fee in the amount described in the comprehensive fee schedule resolution. Such deposit shall be refundable upon compliance with the provisions and requirements of this chapter including the removal of the fireworks stand and the cleaning of the site. In the event the permittee fails to comply or to remove the stand or to clean the site in the manner required by the building official of the city, the building official may do so or cause the same to be done by other persons, and the cost over and above the amount of the cleaning deposit shall be charged against the permittee and the deposit shall be forfeited; 
B.  Set forth the proposed location of the fireworks stand, and be accompanied by a letter signed by the owner property, or agent, upon which the fireworks stand is proposed to be located confirming that the owner has given permission for the use of the property for such purpose. No fireworks stand shall be located in any zone other than C and M zones and must conform to other applicable laws and regulations; 
C.  Be accompanied by an assurance that if the fireworks permit is issued to the applicant organization, the applicant organization shall, prior to the receipt of the fireworks permit, submit to the director of finance or designee an insurance certificate and policy with a minimum of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) public liability and one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) property damage coverage which shall also designate the city as an additional insured; 
D.  Include a statement that the officers and agents of the applicant organization shall agree to comply strictly with the terms of this chapter and the terms of a fireworks permit granted in this chapter and to furnish such additional information as requested by the director of finance or designee; 
E.  Applications by organizations shall be submitted between January 2 and January 31 of each year. 
(Prior code § 9-32) 
(Ord. No. 1019, § 2, 6-23-10)  
8.32.040 - Notice of issuance or denial of fireworks permit. 
Applicant organizations for a fireworks permit shall be notified by the director of finance or designee by March 31 each year of the issuance or denial of a fireworks permit. 
(Prior code § 9-33) 
(Ord. No. 1019, § 3, 6-23-10)  
8.32.050 - Prerequisites for issuance of a fireworks permit. 
The following qualifications must be met by each applicant organization for a fireworks permit: 
A.  A fireworks permit shall be issued only to nonprofit organization organized primarily for civic betterment, youth activities, recreational activities, school activities, military or veterans affairs, or other like charitable purposes. 
B.  Each such organization must have its principal and permanent meeting place within the territorial limits of the city; must maintain a bona fide membership of at least twenty (20) members the majority of whom reside in the city; and must have been organized and established for a minimum of two years continuously preceding the filing of the application for a fireworks permit hereunder. 
C.  An organization meeting with these requirements shall be deemed to be a qualifying Coachella organization. 
D.  An organization that is affiliated with a school outside the territorial limits of the city but within the boundaries of the Coachella Valley Unified School District and organized primarily for civic betterment, youth activities, recreational activities, school activities, military or veterans affairs, or other like charitable purposes. Organization must have been organized and established for a minimum of two years continuously preceding the filing of the application for a fireworks permit hereunder. 
(Prior code § 9-34) 
(Ord. No. 1019, § 4, 6-23-10)  
8.32.060 - Operation of firework stands. 
All retail sales of safe and sane fireworks shall be permitted only from within a temporary fireworks stand, and sales from any other building or structure are prohibited. Temporary stands shall comply with the following provisions: 
A.  Fireworks stands shall be erected under the supervision of the building official, who shall require that stands be constructed in a manner that will reasonably assure the safety of attendants and patrons based upon the following criteria: 
1.  No stand shall have a floor area in excess of four hundred (400) square feet. Fireworks stands shall be constructed entirely out of metal and shall have metal flooring attached; 
2.  All weeds and combustible material shall be cleared from the location of the stand, including a distance of at least twenty-five (25) feet surrounding the stand; 
3.  Each stand must have at least two exits, and each stand in excess of forty (40) feet in length must have at least three exits spaced approximate equal distance apart and in no case shall the distance between exits exceed twenty-four (24) feet; 
4.  Each stand shall be provided with two (2) two and one-half-gallon pressurized water type fire extinguishers by each required exit which bears evidence that they have been inspected by a state-licensed agency. Extinguishers shall be in good working order and easily accessible for use in case of fire; 
5.  Each fireworks stand shall have electrical outlets and electrical wiring in conduit and shall have power provided from on-site sources in such a manner as deemed safe by the fire department. Firework stands with power provided by generators shall be inspected and approved by the fire department prior to operation. Portable generators when used for temporary electrical service shall be located a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from the fireworks booth when in operation. All electrical wiring must be three-wire, two conductors and a ground wire. Temporary wiring must be protected from damage and if susceptible to moisture be protected by waterproof components. All extension cords and wiring shall comply with the Uniform Electrical Code. An electrical permit and payment of the fee shall be required. 
B.  No fireworks stand shall be located within twenty-five (25) feet of any building, fifteen (15) feet of a curbline, or within one hundred (100) feet of any gasoline pump. The building official may authorize stands to be located within ten (10) feet of a curbline if it is determined that such placement will not be a hazard to operators or disrupt the normal flow of traffic. No trailer, vehicle, camper, or other object shall be parked within ten (10) feet of the stand. 
C.  A minimum of eight off-street parking spaces each of which shall be, at least, nine feet by nineteen (19) feet in dimension provided and the parking spaces shall not be located less than ten (10) feet from the stand. 
D.  A permit to operate shall be issued from the fire department following an inspection for compliance with this chapter and state fire marshal's requirements. 
E.  "No smoking" signs shall be prominently displayed on and in the stand, and no smoking shall be permitted within twenty-five (25) feet of the stand. In addition, the state license, the city fireworks permit, the temporary sales tax permit; and any Coachella fire department permit shall be displayed in a prominent place in the fireworks stand. 
F.  A maximum of only two signs advertising the stand, not to exceed sixty-four (64) square feet in area, shall be permitted for each stand. 
G.  No person or entity other than the permittee organization shall operate a fireworks stand for which the fireworks permit is issued and no person other than the individuals who are members of the permittee organization or the spouses or adult children of such members shall sell or otherwise participate in the sale of fireworks at such fireworks stands. No such persons shall be paid any consideration for selling or otherwise participating in the sale of fireworks at such stands. 
H.  No person under eighteen (18) years of age shall be permitted in a fireworks stand. I. The consumption of alcoholic beverages or the use of narcotics within one hundred (100) feet of a fireworks stand is prohibited and unlawful. 
J.  Each stand must have an adult in attendance to sell and serve as watchman while fireworks are stored therein. Sleeping or remaining in the stand after close of business each day is forbidden. 
K.  All unsold stock and accompanying litter shall be removed from the location by five p.m. on the fifth day of July. 
L.  The fireworks stand shall be removed from the temporary location by noon on the seventh day of July. 
(Ord. 922 § 1, 2005: prior code § 9-35)  
8.32.070 - Duration of fireworks sales. 
The sale of fireworks shall not begin before noon on the twenty-eighth day of June and shall not continue after noon on the fifth day of July. 
(Ord. 892 § 11, 2003: prior code § 9-36)  
8.32.080 - Financial reporting. 
Each organization operating a fireworks stand pursuant to a fireworks permit shall submit to the director of finance or designee a form showing the gross sales from fireworks by July 15. The director of finance or designee shall be entitled to inspect all financial records of the permittee organization during and up to one year after the sale of fireworks pursuant to a fireworks permit in this chapter. Each permittee organization shall allow such inspection within five days of a notice for inspection issued by the director of finance or designee. Failure to comply with these requirements shall result in a denial of a fireworks permit to such organization for three subsequent years. 
(Prior code § 9-37) 
(Ord. No. 1019, § 5, 6-23-10)  
8.32.090 - Prohibitions on discharge. 
It is unlawful for any person to ignite, explode, project, or otherwise fire or use, or permit the ignition, explosion, or projection of any fireworks upon, over, or onto the property of another, or to ignite, explode, project, or otherwise fire or make use of any fireworks within twenty-five (25) feet of any residence, dwelling, or other structure. 
(Prior code § 9-38)  
8.32.100 - Wholesale permit. 
Except as provided in this chapter, no manufacturer, importer, exporter or wholesaler of fireworks shall offer for sale or sell, at wholesale, any fireworks of any kind without having first applied for and received a wholesale permit therefor from the director of finance or designee. All applications for a wholesale permit to sell fireworks shall: 
A.  Be made in writing, accompanied by the fee charged as stated in the comprehensive fee schedule; 
B.  Be made only between the fifteenth day of February and the fifteenth day of March of each calendar year; 
C.  Be accompanied by or assurance that if the wholesale permit is issued to applicant, applicant shall, at the time of receipt of the wholesale permit deliver to the director of finance or designee of the city, a one million dollar ($1,000,000.00) public liability and one million dollar ($1,000,000.00) property damage insurance certificate with riders attached to the policies designating the city as an additional insured thereunder; 
D.  It shall contain such other information as may be required by the director of finance; 
E.  It shall contain a statement that fireworks will not be furnished, sold, distributed, or placed in the possession of any person or organization in the city, or for sale, use or distribution in the city, unless such person or organization holds a valid and unrevoked fireworks permit from the city to so possess, sell, use, or distribute the fireworks. 
(Prior code § 9-39) 
(Ord. No. 1019, § 6, 6-23-10)  
8.32.110 - Storage of fireworks. 
Safe and sane fireworks may be stored within the city in compliance with the following provisions: 
A.  Buildings or parts of buildings used for the storage of safe and sane fireworks shall be classified as Group H, Division 1, occupancies, as provided in the Uniform Building Code, 1988 edition, and shall meet all requirements for such occupancies. However, under no condition shall any building or parts of buildings be used that are not provided with any automatic sprinkler system that is designed for this type of occupancy and has been inspected and tested by the Coachella fire district. 
B.  Stacks of merchandise shall be limited in size to three thousand two hundred (3,200) cubic feet and each stack shall be separated from other stacks by ten-foot side aisles. Height of stack shall be eight feet, length of stack, fifty (50) feet, and width of stack, eight feet. 
(Prior code § 9-40)  
8.32.120 - Violation and penalties. 
A.  Misdemeanor. Any person violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof is punishable pursuant to Section 1.08.010(C) of this code. 
B.  Seizure of Fireworks. In addition to the penalties in this chapter, the fire chief shall seize, take, remove, or cause to be removed, at the expense of the owner, all stocks of fireworks offered or exposed for sale, or held in violation of this chapter. 
C.  Revocation of License. In addition to the penalties in this chapter, any permittee or organization violating the provisions of this chapter shall forfeit its fireworks permit upon the order of the director of finance and such forfeiture may be the basis to deny that organization a fireworks permit in future years. 
(Prior code § 9-41)  
Chapter 8.36 - FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS AND FACILITIES 
Sections: 
 
8.36.010 - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the inspection and enforcement of this chapter. 
"Enforcement officer" means the Riverside County director of the department of environmental health services and his or her duly authorized environmental health specialists. 
"Food establishment" means food establishment as defined in the California Uniform Retail Facilities Law, Section 113780 of the California Health and Safety Code. These are commonly referred to as restaurants, markets, delis or similar operations. 
"Food facilities" means a food facility as defined in Section 113785 of the California Health and Safety Code. These are commonly referred to as wholesale food facilities, vehicles, vending machines, satellite food distribution facilities, open-air barbecues, certified farmers markets, stationary food preparation units and mobile food preparation units. This definition also includes commercial food establishments. 
"Food preparation" means food preparation as defined in Section 113790 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
"Official inspection form" means the form provided by the Riverside County department of environmental health services. 
(Ord. 856 § 2 (part), 2001)  
8.36.020 - Grading. 
A.  All food establishments and food facilities shall be inspected and graded uniformly using an official inspection form. The grade of each food establishment shall be determined by the enforcement officer using the scoring method provided on the official inspection form. The grade of each food establishment shall be evidenced by the posting of a grade card bearing the letter "A," "B," or "C." 
1.  The letter "A" shall indicate a score of ninety (90) percent or higher, and indicates that the food establishment passed the inspection by meeting those minimum health standards as set forth by the state of California in the California Retail Food Facilities Law, California Health and Safety Code, Chapter 4, Sections 113700, et seq., and interpreted by the Enforcement Officer. Grade "A" cards shall be printed in blue on high impact white styrene plastic. 
2.  The letter "B" shall indicate a score of less than ninety (90) percent but not less than eighty (80) percent and indicates that the food establishment has not passed the inspection and does not meet minimum health standards. Grade "B" cards shall be printed in green on high impact styrene plastic. 
3.  The letter "C" shall indicate a score of less than eighty (80) percent, and indicates that the food establishment has failed the inspection and has conditions existing which may pose a potential or actual threat to public health and safety. The facility may also be ordered closed, with its permit being suspended or revoked by the enforcement officer. Grade "C" cards shall be printed in red on high impact white styrene plastic. 
B.  The grade card shall be provided by the enforcement officer and shall be nine inches by eleven (11) inches in size. The grade letter shall not be more than five inches in height. 
C.  The grade card shall be posted in a conspicuous place selected by the enforcement officer, at or near each entrance to the food establishment used by its patrons, and shall be removed only by the enforcement officer. 
D.  It is unlawful to operate a food establishment unless the grade card is in place as posted by the enforcement officer. 
E.  Private schools and public schools shall not be required to post a grade card. 
F.  Food facilities and food establishments which are not engaged in food preparation shall not be required to post a grade card. 
(Ord. 856 § 2 (part), 2001)  
8.36.030 - Inspections. 
A.  The enforcement officer shall inspect each food facility and food establishment at regular intervals. All food establishments and food facilities shall comply with those requirements set forth in the California Uniform Retail Food Facilities Law, as amended and appearing in California Health and Safety Code Sections 113700 et. seq. 
B.  A signed copy of the official inspection form shall be delivered to the owner, operator or person in charge of the food establishment or food facility who shall sign in receipt thereof. 
C.  Any food establishment or facility that has received a "B" or "C" shall receive a reinspection within five working days of the initial inspection, or as otherwise arranged with the facility operator, to assure that the violations have been corrected. The grade "B" or "C" shall remain posted at the food establishment, indicating to the public that the particular food establishment failed to maintain minimum health standards during its most recent routine inspection performed by the department of environmental health services. 
D.  If, after a reinspection of the food establishment or facility, the score is not ninety (90) percent or higher, any or all of the following legal actions may ensue: 
1.  Administrative hearing offered for the suspension or revocation of the license pursuant to Health and Safety Code Sections 113950, et seq.; 
2.  Issuance of a citation; and 
3.  Initiation of civil, criminal or other legal proceedings. 
E.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the enforcement officer may order immediate closure of a facility or establishment pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 113960 whenever the officer reasonably believes the facility or establishment to present an immediate danger to the public health or safety. 
F.  Any reinspections following legal actions, other than one reinspection following an initial administrative hearing, will result in the operator being charged an hourly on-site fee. 
(Ord. 856 § 2 (part), 2001)  
8.36.040 - Permits. 
No person shall operate a food establishment or facility without holding a valid permit issued by the Riverside County department of environmental health services. Application for a permit shall be made to the department of environmental health services upon a form provided by the department and shall be accompanied by a fee as required by Riverside County ordinance. A permit shall be valid for not more than one year. 
(Ord. 856 § 2 (part), 2001)  
8.36.050 - Criminal penalties. 
Any violation of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 856 § 2 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 1098, § 36, 12-14-16)  
8.36.060 - Public nuisance declaration. 
In addition, any violation of this chapter is deemed to be a public health nuisance and may be abated by the enforcement officer, irrespective of any other remedy provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 856 § 2 (part), 2001)  
8.36.070 - Civil penalties. 
Any person who willfully violates any provision of this chapter or any other rules or regulations adopted by the Riverside County department of environmental health services pursuant to this chapter, in addition to any criminal penalties, shall be liable for a civil penalty of between fifty dollars ($50.00) and two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each day of violation. The enforcement agency shall be authorized to file and maintain an action in a court of appropriate jurisdiction to collect any such civil penalty arising under this section. 
(Ord. 856 § 2 (part), 2001)  
8.36.080 - Right of inspection. 
Pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Section 113925, the enforcement officer shall have the right to inspect any food facility or establishment, or any facility suspected of being a food establishment or facility, at any reasonable time. If inspection is refused, the permit may be suspended or revoked, and/or the owner or operator shall be guilty of an infraction or misdemeanor offense. 
(Ord. 856 § 2 (part), 2001)  
Chapter 8.40 - FOOD HANDLERS 
Sections: 
 
8.40.010 - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to prevent the spread of infectious disease and to attain a uniform standard by requiring all food handlers in the county to demonstrate through process of examination that they possess an adequate knowledge of the sanitary principles and practices within the food industry. 
(Prior code § 10-65)  
8.40.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings: 
"Food worker's certificate" means a statement issued by the health officer certifying that a person is free from active communicable tuberculosis in a manner acceptable to the health officer, and has satisfactorily demonstrated his or her competency in food sanitation principles and practices. 
"Food worker's manual" means the manual prepared and distributed to food handlers by the health officer that describes acceptable procedures and sanitary practices as it pertains to the retail food service industry. 
"Health officer" means the health officer of the county, or his or her designated representative. 
(Prior code § 10-66)  
8.40.030 - Food worker's certificate—Required. 
No person shall engage or serve in any work, occupation or employment which requires or occasions the handling of any food, liquid or material intended for food or drink for human consumption, who does not hold or produce a food worker's certificate as required by this, chapter within fourteen (14) days after engaging or serving in such work, occupation or employment, and no owner, manager or agent of such owner, or person in charge of any establishment or business shall retain in the employ thereof for the performance of such services, any person who does not hold and produce a food worker's certificate as required by this chapter within fourteen (14) days after such person engages or serves in such employment. 
(Prior code § 10-67)  
8.40.040 - Same—Exemption. 
Any person who engages or serves or seeks employment relating to domestic or household work or to temporary, occasional or intermittent functions of bona fide religious, charitable or public service organizations, including fraternal organizations, veterans' organizations, established youth organizations, parent-teacher associations, or students in public or private schools under the age of sixteen (16) engaged in school food operations, and civil or community organizations or groups, the primary purpose of which is the betterment of the cultural, social or economic welfare and environment of the community, shall be exempt from the provisions of Section 8.40.030. 
(Prior code § 10-68)  
8.40.050 - Same—Application. 
Any person who is engaged or intends to engage in an occupation or employment for which a food worker's certificate is required by Section 8.40.030 shall file with the health officer an application for such certificate or a renewal thereof in such form as the health officer may require, which application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee of five dollars ($5.00), provided, however, students sixteen (16) years of age or older engaged in school food operations are exempted from such. 
(Prior code § 10-69)  
8.40.060 - Same—Qualification. 
To qualify for the issuance or renewal of a food worker's certificate required by Section 8.40.030, the applicant shall have demonstrated his or her knowledge or acceptable practices in the sanitary preparation, service, storage, distribution and sale of food and beverages and the proper sanitation of equipment and facilities. Such demonstration of knowledge shall be by satisfactorily passing an examination conducted by the health officer on such subjects, based on the practices and procedures set forth in the food worker's manual. A copy of the latest edition of the manual shall be made available by the health officer to those persons applying for a food worker's certificate or renewal thereof. 
(Prior code § 10-70)  
8.40.070 - Same—Issuance. 
When qualified pursuant to Section 8.40.060, the applicant shall be issued a food worker's certificate containing the following information: certificate number, name, home address, expiration date and attesting signature. Such certificate shall expire one year after the date it was issued. 
(Prior code § 10-71)  
8.40.080 - Same—Duplicate. 
A duplicate food worker's certificate, for good cause, may be issued by the health officer for a fee of one dollar ($1.00). 
(Prior code § 10-72)  
8.40.090 - Same—Revocation. 
The food worker's certificate may be revoked by the health officer upon evidence indicating repeated or continuing violations of accepted practices and procedures in the preparation, service, storage, distribution, or sale of food or beverages, or upon evidence indicating falsification of information required for issuance of such certificate. 
(Prior code § 10-73)  
8.40.100 - Same—Appeal. 
Any person who has an application for a food worker's certificate denied by the health officer, or who has had such a certificate revoked by the health officer, may appeal such denial or revocation by filing with the city clerk within ten (10) days after the date of such denial or revocation, a written notice of appeal briefly setting forth the reasons why such denial or revocation is not proper. The clerk shall give notice of the time and place of the hearing to the appellant. 
Such appeal shall be heard by the city council which may affirm, amend or reverse the decision or take such other action as it deems appropriate. In conducting the hearing, the city council shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. 
(Prior code § 10-74)  
8.40.110 - Same—Display. 
Any person required to have a food worker's certificate shall immediately submit such certificate to his or her employer. It shall be the duty of every such employer to keep on continuous display at the place of employment the food worker's certificates of all such persons employed or engaged therein, and to display therewith a current list of all such persons therein engaged or employed for comparison with such certificates. Upon termination of employment, such unexpired certificate shall be returned to the holder. 
(Prior code § 10-75)  
8.40.120 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first violation; a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the second violation within one year; and a third violation, or more, within one year shall be prosecuted as a misdemeanor. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Prior code § 10-76)  
Chapter 8.44 - GARBAGE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 
Sections: 
 
8.44.010 - Collection by city or agent only. 
All refuse, garbage, rubbish, waste material, salvage, construction material and rubble, horse and poultry manure, toxic and hazardous waste accumulated in the city shall be collected, conveyed and disposed of by the city or by any person with whom the city has a contract or agreement for the collection, removal and disposal of refuse, garbage, rubbish, waste material, salvage, construction material and rubble, horse and poultry manure, and toxic and hazardous waste. Except as otherwise provided in Section 8.44.020, no person, other than the city or its contract agent, shall collect, convey over any of the streets or alleys of the city or dispose of any refuse, garbage, rubbish, waste material, salvage, construction material and rubble, horse and poultry manure, toxic or hazardous waste accumulated in the city. 
(Prior code § 10-16)  
8.44.020 - Exceptions. 
The provisions of Section 8.44.010 shall not apply as set forth in this section: 
A.  Contractors or builders, or their employees, but not their subcontractors, may remove their own debris, rubbish and trash from construction sites. 
B.  Any person holding a valid city business license to engage in the nursery or gardening business may remove shrubbery, grass, tree cuttings, tree trimmings or other agricultural debris from property within the city. Persons may remove garbage, rubbish and normal household refuse, shrubbery, grass, tree cuttings, tree trimmings and/or other agricultural debris from any property owned or occupied by such person. 
(Prior code § 10-17)  
8.44.030 - Rates and charges to be established by resolution or ordinance. 
The rates to be charged for collection of garbage or rubbish shall be established by resolution or ordinance of the city council. Owners, occupants or persons, firms or entities residing in or using residences, dwellings, apartments, hotels, motels, trailer parks, businesses or commercial or industrial establishments shall pay for collection services at the rate and in the manner set by resolution or ordinance from time to time adopted by the city council. In the event the city council wishes to collect charges pursuant to section 8.44.035(B), it shall prepare an annual written report, provide notice and a public hearing of such charges and comply with all applicable procedures as required by Health and Safety Code section 5470 et seq. and other law. 
(Prior code § 10-18) 
(Ord. No. 1011, § 1, 7-8-09)  
8.44.035 - Collection of charges. 
The city may collect charges for the collection of garbage or rubbish by either of the following: 
(A)  The city or its agent may bill and collect such charges directly from the occupant or owner of the premises receiving collection service. 
(B)  The city may collect such charges on the tax roll in the same manner, by the same persons, and at the same time as, together with and not separate from, the city's general taxes. In the event the city wishes to collect charges pursuant to this subsection, it shall prepare an annual written report, provide notice and a public hearing of such charges and comply with all applicable procedures as required by Health and Safety Code section 5470 et seq. and other law. 
(Ord. No. 1011, § 2, 7-8-09)  
8.44.040 - Charges declared lien. 
The service of collection of garbage and rubbish shall be presumed to be for the benefit of the premises from which it is removed, and the occupant of the premises shall be presumed to be the agent of the owner thereof and acting for and on the behalf of the owner in receiving such service, and the charges for such service, if unpaid, shall become a lien on the premises served. Every person receiving garbage and rubbish collection under this chapter shall be personally liable to the city or to the contractor for payment of the rates established pursuant to this chapter, any resolution or ordinance setting rates, or any agreement for collection adopted pursuant to this chapter. Delinquent charges for services rendered to the premises under this chapter may be collected, at the option of the city council or the contractor, by a personal action against the occupant receiving such service, or by an action for foreclosure of the lien on the premises served. 
(Prior code § 10-19) 
(Ord. No. 1011, § 3, 7-8-09)  
8.44.050 - Surety bond required. 
The contractor who contracts with the city for the removal and disposal of garbage, rubbish and swill shall be required to furnish a surety bond to the city in a sum required by the city council, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the contract and compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 10-20)  
8.44.060 - Receptacles—Residential. 
Residential customers shall provide a watertight receptacle for holding garbage, constructed of plastic, metal or other substantial material of sufficient strength to resist breaking under ordinary conditions of use. Such standard containers shall have a close-fitting cover to prevent insects, including flies, rodents and other animals from coming into contact with garbage. No container shall have irregular surfaces or be in a condition which is likely to cause injury to persons moving or lifting them. Such standard containers shall also be provided with a handle or handles on the outside thereof, and shall not exceed thirty-two (32) gallons in volume nor shall the receptacle and contents exceed fifty (50) pounds in weight. Residential customers shall place standard containers at the curb or property line along the street in front of each residential unit, except where a suitable alley, as determined by the administrator of any collection agreement, exists at the rear of the property. Clear access to standard containers shall be provided to enable collection. 
(Prior code § 10-21)  
8.44.070 - Same—Commercial. 
A commercial-type bin shall be of welded steel construction suitable for the storage of refuse, garbage, rubbish, waste material, salvage, construction material and rubble. Commercial-type bins shall be equipped with slots or other devices capable of being engaged by the arms of a front-loading refuse truck designed for that purpose provided by the city's commercial waste collection contractor. Business establishments, including any commercial, industrial or nonresidential unit in a trailer park, in a hotel or motel or any building in which a combination of residential and commercial and/or industrial uses exists, shall use commercial containers. Commercial bins may also include detachable packer receptacles and roll-off boxes. Clear access to commercial containers for collection shall be provided to enable collection. 
(Prior code § 10-22)  
8.44.080 - Storage areas. 
It is unlawful for any person to keep, accumulate or permit to be kept or accumulated any garbage or rubbish in or upon any public or private place unless the same shall be in a residential or commercial container as defined in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 10-23)  
8.44.090 - Deposit of garbage, rubbish or swill in streets or permitting garbage, rubbish or swill to accumulate—Unlawful. 
It is unlawful for any person in the city to throw or deposit any garbage, rubbish, sweepings or debris, or to cause the same to be thrown or deposited upon any street, alley, gutter, curb, park or other public place, or to throw or deposit the same in or upon any vacant lot or backyard, or to store or keep the same other than as set forth in this chapter or any agreement enacted pursuant to this chapter. 
(Prior code § 10-24)  
8.44.100 - Duty of persons served to keep clean and sanitary. 
It shall be the duty of every person served to keep the garbage receptacle used in the service of such person in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(Prior code § 10-25)  
8.44.110 - Disturbing waste placed for collection. 
It is unlawful for any person to dig into, scatter or displace or disturb any garbage or rubbish which has been put out for collection. 
(Prior code § 10-26)  
8.44.120 - Creating vermin harborage. 
It is unlawful to store, deposit or keep garbage or rubbish where rats or other vermin can have access thereto or feed thereon. 
(Prior code § 10-27)  
8.44.130 - Feeding to poultry. 
Provided that all public health laws and regulations and all city ordinances and any agreements adopted pursuant to this chapter are complied with, garbage may be fed to poultry on the premises where such garbage is produced. 
(Prior code § 10-28)  
Chapter 8.48 - GRAFFITI[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1, Exhibit A of Ord. No. 1042, adopted Apr. 11, 2012, amended ch. 8.48 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 8.48 pertained to the same subject matter, consisted of §§ 8.48.010—8.48.060 and derived from the prior code; and Urgency Ord. No. 1041, adopted Mar. 28, 2012. 
 
8.48.010 - Purpose and intent of chapter. 
A.  Graffiti on public and private property is a blighting factor which not only depreciates the value of the property, but also the value of the adjacent and surrounding communities. Government Code Section 53069.3 authorizes this city to enact ordinances to provide for use of city funds to remove graffiti from public and privately owned permanent structures located within the city. The city council finds that graffiti or related inscribed material is obnoxious and pursuant to Government Code Section 53069.3 authorizes that a program be instituted allowing for the use of city funds to remove graffiti on public and private property. It is the intent of the city council to provide for the prohibition of the placement of graffiti on public and private property as set forth in this chapter. 
B.  The city council finds and determines that graffiti is obnoxious and a public nuisance, and, unless promptly removed from public and privately owned properties, tends to remain and to attract more graffiti; other properties are then the target of graffiti, with the results that entire neighborhoods, and, indeed, the community is depreciated in value and becomes a less desirable place to live, shop and visit. The city council therefore determines that it is appropriate that the city develop new procedures to implement the provisions of Section 53069.3 of the Government Code and provide for the expedient removal of graffiti from both public and privately owned property under the circumstances set forth hereinafter. The city council further determines that it is appropriate to provide regulations relating to the display for sale of aerosol paint containers and marking pens and to provide penalties relating to possession of graffiti implements for the purpose of engaging in graffiti vandalism. 
C.  Government Code Sections 38772, 38773.2, and 38773.6 authorize cities to adopt ordinances making the expense of abating graffiti caused by certain minors or other persons: 
(1)  A personal obligation of the minor (and of the parents or guardians having custody and control of the minor) and/or other persons, and 
(2)  A lien or special assessment against property of the minor (and property of the parents or guardians having custody and control of the minor) and/or other persons. 
(Ord. No. 1042, § 1(Exh. A), 4-11-12)  
8.48.020 - Defined. 
"Aerosol paint container." Any aerosol container which is adapted or made for the purpose of spraying paint or other substances capable of defacing property. 
"Abatement and related administrative costs." All city costs associated with damage caused by graffiti, including, but not limited to, court costs, attorney's fees, cost of removal of graffiti or other inscribed material, cost of repair and replacement of property defaced by graffiti that cannot be removed cost effectively, and law enforcement time incurred by or charged to the city for identifying and apprehending the person(s) who caused the graffiti. 
"Felt tip marker." Any indelible marker or similar implement with a tip which at its broadest width is one-eighth inch or greater, containing an ink that is not water-soluble. 
"Glass cutters." Any tools or instruments designed to cut or etch glass surfaces. 
"Graffiti." The unauthorized inscribing, spraying of paint or making of ink, chalk, dye or other similar substances on public or private buildings, structures and places. 
"Graffiti implement." Any implement capable of marking a surface to create graffiti including, but not limited to, any aerosol paint container, paint stick, felt tip marker, marking pen, gum label, marking instrument, drill bit, grinding stone, scribe, glass cutter, or etching tool, or other implements capable of scarring glass, metal, concrete or wood. 
"Graffiti removal costs." Such costs expressly include, but are not limited to, all city staff time, police investigative time, city attorney time and fees, and any court costs incurred in connection with the civil prosecution of any claims for damages. 
"Gum label." Any sheet of paper, fabric, plastic or other substance with an adhesive backing which, when plan [placed on] a surface, is not easily removed. 
"Minor." A person under eighteen (18) years of age. 
"Other persons." Any person eighteen (18) years and older. 
"Owner's representative." Any person or entity expressly authorized by the owner of any property to permit another person to place inscriptions, words, figures or designs upon such property, or any person or entity in lawful possession of any property, whose right of possession includes the authority to permit or allow inscriptions, words, figures or designs to be placed upon such property. 
"Paint or graffiti stick." A device containing a solid form of paint, chalk, wax, epoxy or other similar substance capable of being applied to a surface by pressure and, upon application, leaving a mark. 
"Responsible party." Any party made liable pursuant to this chapter for the city's costs of removing graffiti in the city. Such removal costs include, but are not limited to, all city staff time, police investigative time, city attorney time and fees, and court costs. Responsible parties include, but are not limited to the following: 
(a)  Any person who creates graffiti; 
(b)  Any owner or person legally in possession of real property on which graffiti exists; and 
(c)  In the case of a minor who creates graffiti, any parent or legal guardian of such minor. 
"Spray actuator." An object, such as a spray tip, nozzle, or button, which is capable of being attached to an aerosol paint container for the purpose of spraying the substance contained therein. 
(Ord. No. 1042, § 1(Exh. A), 4-11-12)  
8.48.030 - Prohibited. 
A.  Graffiti Prohibited. 
1.  It is unlawful for any person to paint, chalk or otherwise apply graffiti on public or privately owned structures located on public or privately owned real property within this city. 
2.  It is unlawful for the owner of any private property to permit graffiti to remain so as to be capable of being viewed by a person utilizing any public right-of-way in the city, such as a road, parkway or alley; provided the city has given the property owner written notice to remove the graffiti within a period of three calendar days, and the three-day period has lapsed. 
B.  Possession by Minors. 
1.  It shall be unlawful for any minor to possess any aerosol paint container, spray actuator, felt tip marker, paint or graffiti stick, gum label, or glass cutter while on public or private property without the consent of the property owner or the person in lawful possession of the property. Any law enforcement officer who observes a violation of this section may take immediate possession of the aforementioned graffiti implements. 
2.  The foregoing provision shall not apply while the person is attending or traveling to or from a school at which the person is enrolled, if the person is participating in a class at said school which has as a written requirement of said class, the need to use an aerosol paint container, spray actuator, felt tip marker, paint or graffiti stick, gum label, or glass cutter. 
C.  Possession in Public Places, Parks and Buildings. 
1.  No person shall have in his or her possession any aerosol paint container, spray actuator, felt tip marker, paint or graffiti stick, gum label, or glass cutter capable of defacing property while in any public park, playground, swimming pool or recreation facility, public building or other public place other than a highway, street or alley, except authorized employees or agents of the city or persons having the authorization of the city manager. 
D.  Possession with Intent to Deface, Mark or Damage Property. 
1.  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess any graffiti implement for the purpose of defacing, marking or damaging any public or privately owned property without the express consent of the owner of such property or the owner's representative. 
E.  Sale of Aerosol Containers of Paint and Wide Tip Markers. 
1.  No person shall sell or cause to be sold to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years any aerosol container of paint or wide-tip marker. 
2.  Evidence that a person, his or her employee, or agent, demanded and was shown bona fide evidence of majority and acted upon such evidence of majority in a transaction or sale shall be a defense to any criminal prosecution thereof. 
3.  Any person who owns, manages, or operates a place of business wherein aerosol containers of paint and wide-tip markers are sold shall post in a conspicuous place a sign in letters at least three-eighths of an inch high stating: "Any person who maliciously defaces real or personal property with paint or any other liquid is guilty of vandalism which is punishable by a fine, imprisonment, or both." 
F.  Storage and Display of Aerosol Paint Containers and Marking Pens. 
1.  Every person who owns, conducts, operates or manages a retail commercial establishment selling aerosol paint containers, or felt tip marker or marker pens and paint sticks, or similar implements shall store or cause such containers or pens to be stored in an area viewable by, but not accessible to, the public in the regular course of business without an employee assistance, pending legal sale or disposition of such containers or pens. It is the intent of this section to permit, but not to require, the viewing of aerosol paint containers and felt tip marker or marker pens and paint sticks or similar implements while they are stored or displayed pending retail sale. 
(Ord. No. 1042, § 1(Exh. A), 4-11-12)  
8.48.040 - Removal. 
Whenever the city manager, or his/her designee, determines that graffiti is located on public property the city shall provide for the removal of the graffiti, and/or the use of a an environmentally friendly, cost effective, and aesthetically pleasing way to combat the reoccurrence of graffiti. Whenever the city manager, or his/her designee, determines that graffiti is located on private property so as to be capable of being viewed by a person utilizing any public right-of-way, the city shall be authorized to provide for the removal of the graffiti as follows: 
A.  The city shall provide paint free of charge to any city property owner with the intent to abate graffiti on his/her property. Upon receiving such a request the city will provide the owner of the property with paint in the amount necessary to cover the specific area containing the graffiti. It shall be the owner's responsibility to determine the color of paint necessary and to paint out the graffiti within a twenty-four-hour warning period plus a forty-eight-hour period for enforcement. 
B.  A "Notice to Abate Graffiti" shall be issued to the property owner. The notice shall be entitled, "Notice to Abate Graffiti," and shall cite this chapter as authority for such abatement. The notice shall contain a general description of the graffiti and a general description of the property on which the graffiti is located, sufficient to identify the location of the property. The notice shall inform the owner of the property that the graffiti must be abated within a twenty-four-hour warning period plus a forty-eight-hour period for enforcement, from the date of service on the notice. 
1.  The notice to abate graffiti will be served by posting the notice at a conspicuous place on the premises where the graffiti is located or at the abutting public right-of-way; 
2.  The notice shall be deemed served at the time of posting; 
3.  If graffiti is not voluntarily abated the property shall be fined in accordance with Section 3.24.020 of the city's Municipal Code and the city shall cause the graffiti to be abated. The costs to the city for the abatement will be assessed and recovered by the city in the same manner as set forth in Section 8.48.50 of this code. 
C.  In circumstances where the city is abating graffiti on private property the city shall not authorize nor undertake to provide for the painting or repair of any more extensive area than where the graffiti is located. 
D.  Prior to the removal of graffiti on private property, the city shall obtain written consent of the owner and the owner shall execute an appropriate release prepared by the city attorney. The owner of the property shall be charged only for the actual cost incurred by the city to remove the graffiti as set forth in Section 8.48.50 of this code. 
E.  In circumstances where the city manager, or his/her designee seeks to provide for the use of a an environmentally friendly, cost effective, and aesthetically pleasing way to combat the reoccurrence of graffiti; the use of a synthetic ivy and vine system that creates a realistic and aesthetically true representation of natural foliage will be encouraged. The synthetic ivy and vine system must provide a congruent vegetation facade to closely mimic natural vegetation. The use of artificial ivy must also minimize water use and eliminate the need to water surrounding landscaping. In these circumstances, the following minimum standards will be implemented: 
1.  Artificial vine strands that are fire-retardant and contain ultraviolet blocking chemicals. Artificial vines must be high-strength, plastic coated, and contain integrated wire for support. Artificial vines must utilize low density polyethylene resin — LDPE — One hundred (100) percent recycled. 
2.  Tile ivy squares with leaf clusters that are fire-retardant and contain ultraviolet blocking chemicals. High-strength grid & leaf clusters must be high-strength, plastic coated, and utilize low density polyethylene resin — LDPE — One hundred (100) percent recycled. 
(Ord. No. 1042, § 1(Exh. A), 4-11-12; Ord. No. 1128, § 1, 11-14-18)  
8.48.050 - Cost recovery. 
A.  An invoice for abatement and related administrative costs pursuant to Sections 8.48.40 and 8.48.030(A) of this code shall include all of the following information: 
1.  A statement notifying the recipient that he/she has been determined by the city to be responsible under Chapter 8.48 of the city's Municipal Code for the city's expenses of removing certain graffiti in the city and/or repairing or replacing property damaged by such graffiti; 
2.  The location and description of the graffiti for which abatement cost recovery is sought; 
3.  The date by which the invoice must be paid and the fact that if he or she does not request a hearing or pay the amount of costs owing by the dates indicated, then the city will proceed to collect the debt through any lawful means including, but not limited to, the imposition of a lien or assessment following the procedures of Government Code §§ 38772, 38773, 38773.1, 39773.2, 38773.5, and 38773.6; 
4.  A statement notifying the recipient of his/her right to request an administrative hearing within ten (10) days of receipt of the invoice regarding liability and/or the amount of costs sought, and the fact that the time period to pay the invoice will be tolled pending the outcome of the hearing; 
5.  A statement notifying the recipient that if he/she does not pay the invoice or request a hearing within the time allowed, then the city's determinations regarding liability and costs will become final and not appealable to any other city authority and the city will proceed with lawful collection methods. 
B.  Pursuant to California Civil Code § 1714.1(b), any parent or legal guardian having custody or control of a minor who knowingly permits, or by insufficient control, allows the minor to possess a graffiti implement without supervision thereof shall be jointly and severally liable with such minor for any and all costs incurred in connection with the removal of any graffiti caused by the minor, including all abatement costs, attorney's fees and court costs resulting from the civil prosecution of any claim for damages, not to exceed twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00), pursuant to the amount set by the California Judicial Council in accordance with California Civil Code § 1714.1(c). The city shall be entitled to seek full cost recovery from the parent or legal guardian of a minor found to be guilty of violating any provision of this chapter. 
C.  The city shall serve the invoice in one of the following ways: 
(1)  By personal service; 
(2)  By both regular first class mail and certified mail with return receipt requested; or, if neither of the previous two methods is available or successful in a given case, 
(3)  By some other method reasonably calculated to provide actual notice to the recipient. 
If mail service is used, then the return receipt shall constitute evidence of the date the invoice was received. If the certified mail is not accepted, then the invoice will be deemed to have been received by regular mail three days after its mailing. 
D.  Failure to comply with any of the foregoing requirements shall not render the invoice or other cost recovery proceedings defective if they meet minimum constitutional standards for due process. 
(Ord. No. 1042, § 1(Exh. A), 4-11-12)  
8.48.060 - Hearing. 
A.  Any person sent an invoice for abatement or related administrative costs pursuant to Section 8.48.040 of this code is entitled to an administrative hearing regarding liability and/or the amount of costs sought to be recovered, if timely requested. A request for a hearing shall be timely if it is received by the city no later than the close of business on the tenth calendar day following receipt of the invoice. A timely request for a hearing tolls the time for payment of the invoice until the recipient has been notified of the hearing officer's decision. 
B.  If a hearing is timely requested, the city shall send the party requesting the hearing written notice of the time, date and location of the hearing. The notice shall be served in the same manner as the invoice and shall be reasonably calculated so as to give the recipient at least three days' advance notice of the hearing. Notice of the hearing officer's final decision after the hearing shall be similarly served. 
C.  The scope of an administrative hearing shall be limited to either or both of the following issues: 
(1)  Liability for costs; and 
(2)  The amount of costs sought to be recovered. 
The party requesting the hearing shall be entitled to submit evidence on either or both issues, which shall be duly considered by the hearing officer provided it is either presented during the hearing or received by the city manager or his/her designee no later than the close of business on the day before the hearing. No formal rules of evidence shall apply. The party requesting the hearing shall be entitled to attend the hearing but such attendance shall not be mandatory. 
D.  The hearing officer shall be the city manager or his/her designee. The hearing officer's decision shall be final and nonappealable to any other city authority. Failure to timely request a hearing waives any right to the hearing and renders the determinations reflected in the invoice similarly final and nonappealable. 
(Ord. No. 1042, § 1(Exh. A), 4-11-12)  
8.48.070 - Penalties. 
A.  Pursuant to California Penal Code Section 594, a person convicted for acts of vandalism including defacing property with graffiti may be subject to additional punishment imposed by the court. Such punishment imposed by the court may include the following: 
1.  If the amount of defacement, damage or destruction is four hundred dollars ($400.00) or more, vandalism is punishable by imprisonment for up to one year, or by a fine of up to ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). 
2.  If the amount of defacement, damage or destruction is less than four hundred dollars ($400.00), vandalism is punishable by imprisonment for up to one year, or by a fine of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by both a fine and imprisonment. 
3.  If the amount of defacement, damage or destruction is less than four hundred ($400.00) and the defendant has been previously convicted of vandalism or affixing graffiti, the vandalism is punishable by imprisonment for up to one year, or by a fine up to five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), or by both a fine and imprisonment. 
B.  These remedies are in addition to any other costs incurred or recovered by the city, and payment of these costs shall not in any way limit, preclude or restrict any other right, remedy or action otherwise available to the city. 
(Ord. No. 1042, § 1(Exh. A), 4-11-12)  
8.48.080 - Reward. 
A.  A reward in an amount established by resolution of the city council is authorized, offered and may be paid by the city to any person who provides information leading to the determination of the identify of, and the apprehension of, any person who willfully or maliciously paints, mars or defaces any public or private structure located on private or public property within the city. 
B.  The exact amount of the reward to be paid by the city shall be determined by the city council after receipt of a report from the city manager indicating that information was received leading to the determination of the identity of, and the apprehension of, a person who willfully or maliciously painted, marred or defaced a structure located on public or private property located within the city, and indicating the final disposition of such matter. No law enforcement officer, municipal officer, official or employee of the city shall be eligible for such reward. 
(Ord. No. 1042, § 1(Exh. A), 4-11-12)  
Chapter 8.52 - HAZARDOUS MATERIALS 
Sections: 
 
8.52.010 - Deposits of hazardous materials—Clean-up or abatement—Liability for costs. 
A.  The fire department is authorized to clean-up or abate the effects of any hazardous material deposited upon or into property or facilities of the city; and any person or persons who intentionally or negligently caused such deposit shall be liable for the payment of all costs incurred by the fire department as a result of such clean-up or abatement activity. The remedy provided by this section shall be in addition to any other remedies provided by law. 
B.  For purposes of this section "hazardous materials" shall be defined as any substances or materials in a quantity or form which, in the determination of the fire chief or his or her authorized representative, poses an unreasonable and imminent risk to the life, health or safety of persons or property or to the ecological balance of the environment, and shall include, but not be limited to, such substances as explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum products or gases, poisons, etiological (biologic) agents, flammables and corrosives. 
C.  For purposes of this section, costs incurred by the fire department shall include, but shall not necessarily be limited to, the following: actual labor costs of city personnel, including workers' compensation benefits, fringe benefits, administrative overhead; cost of equipment operation, cost of materials obtained directly by the city; and cost of any contract labor and materials. 
D.  The authority to recover costs under this section shall not include actual fire suppression services which are normally or usually provided by the fire department. 
(Prior code § 10-64)  
Chapter 8.56 - SEWAGE SLUDGE 
Sections: 
 
8.56.010 - Land application of sewage sludge. 
Pursuant to Government Code Section 50022.9, the terms of Ordinance No. 696 of the county of Riverside regulating the land application of sewage sludge and any amendments to it duly adopted by the county of Riverside board of supervisors are hereby adopted, incorporated by reference, and made a part of this code as though fully set forth in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 10-151)  
8.56.020 - Technical standards governing land application of sewage sludge. 
Pursuant to Government Code Section 50022.2, the terms of Resolution No. 91-057 of the county of Riverside establishing technical standards governing land adoption of sewage sludge and any amendments to it duly adopted by the county of Riverside board of supervisors are hereby adopted, incorporated by reference, and made a part of this code as though fully set forth in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 10-152)  
8.56.030 - Fees for land application of sewage sludge. 
Pursuant to Government Code Section 50022.2, the terms of Resolution No. 91-061 of the county of Riverside establishing the approval fees for land application of sewage sludge and any amendments to it duly adopted by the county of Riverside board of supervisors are hereby adopted, incorporated by reference, and made a part of this code as though fully set forth in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 10-153)  
Chapter 8.60 - REGISTRATION AND MAINTENANCE OF ABANDONED PROPERTIES 
Sections: 
 
8.60.010 - Purpose. 
It is the intent of the city council, through the adoption of this chapter, to establish a mechanism to protect residential neighborhoods from becoming blighted through the lack of maintenance and security of abandoned properties; to establish an abandoned property registration program and to set forth guidelines for the maintenance of abandoned properties. 
(Ord. 996 § 1 (part), 2008)  
8.60.020 - Definitions. 
Certain words and phrases in this chapter are defined, when used herein, as follows: 
"Abandoned" means any building, structure or real property that is vacant or occupied by a person without a legal right of occupancy, and subject to a current notice of default and/or notice of trustee's sale, pending tax assessors lien sale and/or any real property conveyed pursuant to a foreclosure sale resulting in the acquisition of title by an interested beneficiary of a deed of trust, and/or any real property conveyed under a deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale. 
"Accessible property" means real property that is accessible to the public, either, in general or through an open and unsecured door, window, gate, fence, wall or entry point. 
"Accessible structure" means a building or structure that is not secured or is open in such a way as to allow public or unauthorized access to the interior. 
"Agreement" means any written instrument that transfers or conveys title to residential real property from one owner to another after a sale, trade, transfer or exchange. 
"Assignment of rents" means an instrument that transfers the beneficial interest under a deed of trust from one lender or entity to another. 
"Beneficiary" means a lender participating in a real property transaction that holds a secured interest in the real property in question identified in a deed of trust. 
"Buyer" means any person, partnership, association, corporation, fiduciary or other legal entity that agrees to transfer anything of value in consideration for real property pursuant to an "agreement" as that term is defined herein. 
"Dangerous building" means any building or structure reasonably deemed by qualified by city staff to represent a violation of any provision specified in this code. 
"Days" means calendar days. 
"Deed of trust" means an instrument whereby an owner of real property, as trustor, transfers an interest in the real property in question to a third party trustee, said instrument relating to a loan issued in the context of a real property transaction. This definition applies to any and all subordinate deeds of trust, including, but not limited to, a 2nd trust deed and 3rd trust deed. 
"Deed in lieu of transfer" means a recorded instrument that transfers ownership of real property between parties to a particular deed of trust as follows - from the trustor, i.e., borrower, to the trustee upon consent of the beneficiary, i.e., lender. 
"Default" means the material breach of a legal or contractual duty arising from or relating to a deed of trust, such as a trustor's failure to make a payment when due. 
"Distressed" means any building, structure or real property that is subject to a current notice of default, notice of trustee's sale, pending tax assessors lien sale and/or any real property conveyed pursuant to a foreclosure sale resulting in the acquisition of title by an interested beneficiary of a deed of trust, and/or any real property conveyed under a deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale, regardless of vacancy or occupancy by a person with no legal right of occupancy. 
"Enforcement official" means the city manager, the building official, code enforcement officer, the chief of police and/or any employee or agent of the city designated and/or charged with enforcing this code, including, but not limited to, applicable codes adopted by reference therein. 
"Evidence of vacancy" means any real property condition that independently, or in the context of the totality of circumstances relevant to that real property would lead a reasonable enforcement official to believe that a property is vacant or occupied by a person without a legal right of occupancy. Such real property conditions include, but are not limited to: overgrown or dead vegetation; accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers or mail; past due utility notices or disconnected utilities; accumulation of trash, junk or debris; the absence of window coverings such as curtains, blinds or shutters; the absence of furnishings or personal items consistent with residential habitation; and/or statements by neighbors, passersby, delivery agents, government employees that the property is vacant. 
"Foreclosure" means the process by which real property subject to a deed of trust is sold to satisfy the debt of a defaulting trustor, i.e., borrower. 
"Local" means within forty (40) driving miles of the building, structure or real property in question. 
"Neighborhood standard" means the condition of real property that prevails in and through the neighborhood where an abandoned building, structure or real property is located. When determining the neighborhood standard no abandoned or distressed building, structure or real property shall be considered. 
"Notice of default" means a recorded instrument that reflects and provides notice that a default has taken place with respect to a deed of trust, and that a beneficiary intends to proceed with a trustee's sale. 
"Out of area" means in excess of forty (40) road or driving miles of the subject property. 
"Owner" means any person, partnership, association, corporation, fiduciary or other legal entity having a legal or equitable title or any interest in real property. 
"Owner of record" means the person holding recorded title to the real property in question at any point in time when official records are produced by the Riverside County recorder's office. 
"Property" means any unimproved or improved real property, or portion thereof, including, but not limited to, buildings or structures located on said real property, regardless of condition. 
"Residential building" means any improved real property, or portion thereof, designed or permitted to be used for dwelling purposes, including buildings and structures located on such improved real property. This includes any real property being offered under any circumstances for sale, trade, transfer, or exchange as "residential," whether or not said property is legally permitted and zoned for such use. 
"Securing" means such measures as may be directed by an enforcement official that assist in rendering real property inaccessible to unauthorized persons, including, but not limited to, repairing fences and walls, chaining or pad locking gates, the repairing or boarding doors, windows or other openings. Such measures shall be implemented in conformance with all applicable standards of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
"Trustee" means any person, partnership, association, corporation, fiduciary or other legal entity holding a deed of trust securing an interest in real property. 
"Trustor" means any owner/borrower identified in a deed of trust, who transfers an interest in real property to a trustee as security for payment of a debt by that owner or trustor. 
"Vacant" means any building, structure or real property that is unoccupied or occupied by a person without a legal right of occupancy. 
(Ord. 996 § 1 (part), 2008)  
8.60.030 - Duty to record assignment of rents. 
Within ten (10) days of a property transaction involving a change in the identity of an owner or the owner of record, or alternatively a transfer or assignment of a loan or deed of trust secured by residential property, each beneficiary and trustee engaged in said transaction or transfer or assignment shall record, with the Riverside County recorder's office, an assignment of rents, or similar instrument. This instrument shall reflect the identity, mailing address and telephone number of the trustee and beneficiary responsible for receiving payments associated with the loan or deed of trust in question. This duty and obligation shall be joint and several among and between all trustees and beneficiaries and their respective agents. 
(Ord. 996 § 1 (part), 2008)  
8.60.040 - Registration. 
A.  Each beneficiary and trustee, who holds a deed of trust on a property located within the city, shall perform an inspection of the property in question prior to recording a notice of default or similar instrument with the Riverside County recorder's office. If the property is found to be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy, as defined by the chapter, it is hereby deemed to be abandoned. 
B.  Within ten (10) days of identification of any abandoned property, the beneficiary and trustee must register the property with the Coachella code enforcement department on specified forms. 
C.  If the property is occupied but distressed, the trustee and beneficiary or a designee shall inspect the property on a monthly basis until: 
1.  The trustor or another party remedies the default; or 
2.  The property is found to be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy, deemed abandoned and rendered subject to subsection B of this section. 
D.  The registration pursuant to subsection B of this section shall contain the identity of the beneficiary and trustee, the direct mailing address of the beneficiary and trustee and, in the case of a corporate or out of area beneficiary or trustee, the local property management company, if any, responsible for the security, maintenance and marketing of the property in question. 
E.  The registration pursuant to subsection B of this section shall be renewed annually. 
F.  An annual registration fee, adopted in conformance with Section 8.60.080, shall accompany the submission of each registration form. The fee and registration shall be valid for one year from the date of registration. Registration fees will not be prorated. 
G.  This section shall also apply to properties that have been the subject of a foreclosure sale wherein title has been transferred to the beneficiary of a deed of trust involved in the foreclosure, and to any properties transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure or sale. 
H.  Properties subject to this chapter shall remain subject to the annual registration requirement, security and maintenance standards of this chapter as long as they remain vacant. 
I.  Any person, partnership, association, corporation, fiduciary or other legal entity that has registered a property under this chapter must make a written report to the Coachella code enforcement department of any change of information contained in the registration within ten (10) days of the change. 
J.  The duties and obligations specified in this section shall be joint and several among and between all trustees and beneficiaries and their respective agents. 
(Ord. 996 § 1 (part), 2008)  
8.60.050 - Maintenance requirements. 
It is declared a public nuisance for any person, partnership, association, corporation, fiduciary or other legal entity, that owns, leases, occupies, controls or manages any property subject to the registration requirement contained in Section 8.60.040, to cause, permit, or maintain any property condition contrary to any provision of this chapter. Consequently, the following maintenance requirements as to any property subject to the registration requirement contained in Section 8.60.040 are adopted. 
A.  Any property subject to this section must comply with the requirements of Title 3 of this code. 
B.  In addition, the property shall be kept free of weeds, dry brush, dead vegetation, trash, junk, debris, building materials, any accumulation of newspaper, circular, flyers, notices (except those required by federal, state or local law), discarded personal items including, but not limited to, furniture, clothing, large and small appliances, printed material or any other items that give the appearance that the property is abandoned. 
C.  The property shall be maintained free of graffiti, tagging or similar marking. Any removal or painting over of graffiti shall be with an exterior grade paint that matches the color of the exterior of the structure. 
D.  Visible front and side yards shall be landscaped and maintained to the neighborhood standard. 
E.  Landscaping includes, but is not limited to, grass, ground covers, bushes, shrubs, hedges or similar plantings, decorative rock or bark or artificial turf/sod designed specifically for residential installation. 
F.  Landscaping does not include weeds, gravel, broken concrete, asphalt, plastic sheeting, mulch, indoor-outdoor carpet or any similar material. 
G.  Pools and spas shall be kept in working order so that water remains clear and free of pollutants and debris, or alternatively shall be drained and kept dry. In either case, properties with pools and/or spas must comply with the minimum security fencing requirements of the State of California. 
H.  Adherence to this section does not relieve the beneficiary, trustee or property owner of obligations set forth in any covenants conditions and restrictions and/or home owners association rules and regulations which may apply to the property. 
I.  The duties and obligations specified in this section shall be joint and several among and between all trustees and beneficiaries and their respective agents. 
The sole exception to these maintenance requirements shall, within the sole reasonable discretion of a duly authorized enforcement official, apply to property subject to the registration requirement contained in Section 8.60.040 that is under construction and/or repair, not less than three business days per week, undertaken in compliance with all applicable law including but not limited to city permitting requirements. 
(Ord. 996 § 1 (part), 2008)  
8.60.060 - Security requirements. 
A.  Properties subject to this section shall be maintained in a secure manner so as not to be accessible to unauthorized persons. 
B.  Generally, "secure manner" means boarding unsecure windows, doors, and other openings with sheeting material in accordance with this section. As used herein, "sheeting material" or "sheeting" means a minimum of .20-inch thick clear or semi-clear shatter-proof polycarbonate material with a strength capable of sustaining impact without breaking or shattering, absent excessive force. For example, such polycarbonate material shall be capable of sustaining a human propelled brick without breaking or shattering. Examples of such sheeting strength yields would include strength yields equal or greater than American Society for Testing and Materials (ASDM) D638 Tensile Strength, Yield value of eight thousand (8000) psi. Sheeting shall be installed in a manner intended to provide an appearance approximating glass in the window casings, and consistent in appearance with the surrounding surface in the case of all other openings that require securing. Unless otherwise granted a variance by the building authority from strict compliance herewith, materials such as particle board, wafer board, Masonite or other similar material shall not be used for boarding up property. 
C.  Boarding Standard—Windows. 
1.  Internal Compression Method. Windows with broken, missing, or removed glass, or that are otherwise unsecure, shall be boarded as follows: 
a.  All remaining broken glass shall be removed from the window opening including damaged frames as to provide a clean opening; 
b.  The sheeting material shall be cut to match the dimensions of the inside of the window casing so that when installed, the sheeting will fit tightly and not permit a tool to be placed behind it; 
c.  A ½-inch hole shall be drilled into each of the four corners of the sheeting material. The holes shall be positioned so they are no more than 1-inch from the window frame at the width and no more than six inches from the window sill and top frame; 
d.  Two solid continuous composite cross-beams shall be cut in sufficient length to be no less than eight inches longer than the horizontal width of the interior window casing. Each cross-beam shall be predrilled with 7/16 -inch holes that are positioned to match the horizontal pattern of the holes in the sheeting; 
e.  The sheeting shall be secured in place over the exterior of the window opening by placing a 3/8 -inch corrosion resistant, smooth-head carriage bolt through each of the holes in the sheeting and then placing one washer onto each of the carriage bolts; the cross-beams shall then be aligned and affixed to such carriage bolts from the interior of the window opening. Another nut and washer shall be placed onto each of the carriage bolts and tightened with a ratchet to achieve sufficient torque and a slight deflection in the cross-beams so that the nuts cannot be loosened by hand. Once secured, no space shall exist between the sheeting and the exterior window casing. 
2.  Exterior Screw Method. Fixed or inoperable windows with intact glass; or windows in which the internal compression method is impractical shall be secured as follows: 
A.  The sheeting material shall be cut to match the dimensions of the inside of the window casing so that when installed, the sheeting will fit tightly and not permit a tool to be placed behind it; 
B.  Drill and countersink holes shall be made along the perimeter of the sheeting material starting with a hole at each of the four corners and adding additional holes at 10-inch increments around the perimeter of the sheeting. Minimum length 2-inch corrosion resistant security head screws shall be used in each hole to affix the sheeting to the window frame or exterior casing. 
C.  In the event the sheeting cannot be secured by cutting the sheeting material so as to neatly fit the inside window casing, the sheeting shall be placed over the exterior window casing such that the sheeting material covers the entire window casing and extends beyond the window casing at least 8 inches on center. The sheeting material shall be secured with minimum length 2-inch corrosion resistant security head screws secured at the corners, and along the sheeting outer edges in 10-inch spaced increments as described in subsection a. above. 
3.  Variance. If circumstances make the foregoing methods of installation impractical such as due to excessive frame, door and wall damage, or windows that are in an arc encasing or other unusual inset or characteristic the window or opening shall still be installed with the sheeting, but may be affixed and secured in any manner approved by the building authority as to achieve substantial compliance with this chapter. 
D.  Boarding Standard—Unsecure Doors; Sliding or Other Doors. 
1.  Exterior Access Door. At least one exterior door shall allow authorized persons access to the interior of the property. Such exterior access door may be secured by: (a) using a solid core wood or steel door with no windows or other openings in the door; (b) or hinged sheeting material. The door shall be securely locked using a padlock and hasp assembly that is bolted through the door or sheeting material. The lock loop portion of the hasp shall be attached to the door frame using a minimum of 3-inch long security screws. 
2.  Sliding Glass Doors and Other Exterior Doors. Sliding glass doors or exterior doors other than the exterior access door shall be secured in the same manner as described in Section 8.60.060(C). 
E.  If the property is owned by a corporation and/or out of area beneficiary, trustee or owner, a local property management company shall be contracted to perform weekly inspections to verify that the requirements of this section, and any other applicable laws, are being met. 
F.  The property shall be posted with the name and twenty-four (24) hour contact phone number of the local property management company. The posting shall be no less than eighteen (18) inches by twenty-four (24) inches, shall be of a font that is legible from a distance of forty-five (45) feet, and shall contain the following verbiage: "THIS PROPERTY MANAGED BY ____________," and "TO REPORT PROBLEMS OR CONCERNS CALL (name and phone number)." 
G.  The posting shall be placed on the interior of a window facing the street to the front of the property so it is visible from the street, or secured to the exterior of the building/structure facing the street of the front of the property so it is visible from the street. If no such area exists, the posting shall be on a stake of sufficient size to support the posting, in a location that is visible from the street to the front of the property, and to the extent possible, not readily accessible to potential vandalism. Exterior posting must be constructed of, and printed with weather resistant materials. 
H.  The local property management company shall inspect the property on a weekly basis to determine if the property is in compliance with the requirements of this chapter. If the property management company determines the property is not in compliance, it is the company's responsibility to bring the property into compliance. 
I.  The duties and obligations specified in this section shall be joint and several among and between all trustees and beneficiaries and their respective agents. 
(Ord. 996 § 1 (part), 2008) 
(Ord. No. 1092, § 2, 9-14-16)  
8.60.070 - Additional authority. 
In addition to the enforcement remedies established in this chapter, the city shall have the authority to require the beneficiary, trustee, owner or owner of record of any property affected by this section, to implement additional maintenance and/or security measures including, but not limited to, securing any and all doors, windows or other openings, installing additional security lighting, increasing on-site inspection frequency, employment of an on-site security guard or other measures as may be reasonably required to secure and reduce the visual decline of the property. 
(Ord. 996 § 1 (part), 2008)  
8.60.080 - Fees. 
The fee for registering and re-registering an abandoned property shall be set, from time to time, by resolution of the city council. The amount of the fee charges shall not exceed the cost of administering the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 996 § 1 (part), 2008)  
8.60.090 - Enforcement. 
A.  Any violation of this chapter shall be treated as a strict liability offense; a violation shall be deemed to have occurred regardless of a violator's intent. 
B.  Any person, partnership, association, corporation, fiduciary or other legal entity, that owns, leases, occupies, controls or manages any property subject to the registration requirement contained in Section 8.60.040, and causes, permits, or maintains a violation of this chapter as to that property, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in this code. 
C.  This section is intended to be cumulative to, and not in place of, other rights and remedies available to the city pursuant to this code. Above and beyond the violation and penalty specified in this section, the city attorney or a duly authorized enforcement official may pursue any other right or remedy permitted by this code, including, but not limited to commencement of any civil action, or administrative action to abate the condition of a property as a public nuisance pursuant to Title 3 of this code. 
D.  In the event the city issues an administration citation pursuant to Title 3 of this code to a party for violating this chapter, the subject party shall be responsible for payment of the following administrative penalties: 
1.  A party issued an administration citation for the first time shall pay an administrative citation of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00); 
2.  A party issued an administration citation for the second time shall pay an administrative citation of five hundred dollars ($500.00); 
3.  A party issued an administrative citation for the third time shall pay an administrative citation of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(Ord. 996 § 1 (part), 2008)  
8.60.100 - Appeals. 
Any person aggrieved by any of the requirements of this chapter may appeal a determination made hereunder in the manner specified with respect to appeals under the Coachella Municipal Code, including, but not limited to, Title 3 of this code. 
(Ord. 996 § 1 (part), 2008)  
Chapter 8.64 - VACANT PROPERTY REGISTRATION 
 
8.64.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the residents, workers, visitors, owners, and proprietors of the City of Coachella and the economic stability and viability of businesses, industries, and neighborhoods in the city by requiring the registration and monitoring of vacant buildings and structures. This program will protect and preserve the livability, appearance, and social fabric of the city and will also protect the public from health and safety hazards and the impairment of property values resulting from the neglect and deterioration of real property and improvements. 
(Ord. No. 1035, § 1, 1-11-12)  
8.64.020 - Definitions. 
Certain words and phrases in this chapter are defined, when used herein, as follows: 
(a)  "Agreement" means any written instrument that transfers or conveys title to residential real property from one owner to another after a sale, trade, transfer or exchange. 
(b)  "Buyer" means any person, partnership, association, corporation, fiduciary or other legal entity that agrees to transfer anything of value in consideration for real property pursuant to an "agreement" as that term is defined herein. 
(c)  "Days" means calendar days. 
(d)  "Director" means the city manager for the City of Coachella or his or her designee. 
(e)  "Enforcement official" means the city manager, the building official, code enforcement officer, the chief of police and/or any employee or agent of the city designated and/or charged with enforcing this code, including, but not limited to, applicable codes adopted by reference therein. 
(f)  "Evidence of vacancy" means any real property condition that independently, or in the context of the totality of circumstances relevant to that real property would lead a reasonable enforcement official to believe that a property is vacant or occupied by a person without a legal right of occupancy. Such real property conditions include, but are not limited to: overgrown or dead vegetation; accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers or mail; past due utility notices or disconnected utilities; accumulation of trash, junk or debris; the absence of window coverings such as curtains, blinds or shutters; the absence of furnishings or personal items consistent with residential habitation; and/or statements by neighbors, passersby, delivery agents, government employees that the property is vacant. 
(g)  "Local" means within forty (40) driving miles of the building, structure or real property in question. 
(h)  "Neighborhood standard" means the condition of real property that prevails in and through the neighborhood where a vacant building, structure or real property is located. When determining the neighborhood standard no vacant building, structure or real property shall be considered. 
(i)  "Out of area" means in excess of forty (40) road or driving miles of the subject property. 
(j)  "Owner" means any person or persons in whom is vested the ownership or title of real property including, but not limited to, the holder of fee simple title, the holder of a life estate, the holder of a leasehold estate for an initial term of five years or more, the buyer in a contract for deed, a mortgagee, receiver, executor, or trustee in control of real property, and/or the named grantee in the last recorded deed. 
(k)  "Person" means any individual, corporation, organization, partnership, association, governmental entity or any other legal entity. 
(l)  "Property" means any unimproved or improved real property, or portion thereof, including, but not limited to, buildings or structures located on said real property, regardless of condition. 
(m)  "Securing" means such measures as may be directed by an enforcement official that assist in rendering real property inaccessible to unauthorized persons, including, but not limited to, repairing fences and walls, chaining or padlocking gates, the repairing or boarding doors, windows or other openings. Such measures shall be implemented in conformance with all applicable standards of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
(n)  "Vacant" means any property that is unoccupied or occupied by a person without a legal right of occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 1035, § 1, 1-11-12)  
8.64.030 - Determination. 
(a)  As of the effective date of this chapter, the director may evaluate all properties in the city he or she believes to be unoccupied and make a determination for each as to whether the property is a vacant property within the meaning of Section 8.64.020 of this chapter. Each determination shall be in writing and shall state the factual basis for the determination. For properties the director determines to be vacant properties, he or she may send notice of his or her written determination with the factual findings to the owner of the vacant property. 
(b)  Said notice may be served by either personal delivery to the owner or by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested. The failure of any such person to receive a copy of the notice shall not affect the validity of any proceedings or actions taken under this chapter. Service by certified mail in the manner herein provided shall be affixed to the copy of the notice and retained by the citing officer. 
(c)  The notice shall specify a date and time on which the owner shall allow for a code compliance inspection of the interior of the vacant property to determine the extent of compliance with city property, building codes, health, fire, water and sewer codes. The owner shall pay the required inspection fee to the city within thirty (30) days of the inspection. An unpaid fee shall be a lien upon the premises. 
(d)  The notice shall contain a statement of the obligations of the owner of a property determined to be a vacant property, a copy of the registration form the owner is required to file pursuant to Section 8.64.040 of this chapter, and a notice of the owner's right to appeal the director's determination. 
(Ord. No. 1035, § 1, 1-11-12)  
8.64.040 - Registration. 
(a)  The owner of a property who knows, or from all the facts and circumstances should know, that his or her property is or has become a vacant property within the meaning of this chapter after the effective date of this chapter or the owner of a property, which the director determines at any time to be a vacant property, or the owner of a property whose appeal from the director's determination has been denied by the city manager shall register his or her property as provided for in this section within ten (10) days after the date: 
(1)  The owner purchased the property; 
(2)  The owner knew or should have known that his or her property was a vacant property; 
(3)  Of the director's notice of determination that the property was a vacant property; or 
(4)  The appeal was denied, whichever is applicable. 
(b)  Registration pursuant to this section does not exonerate the owner from compliance with all applicable codes and ordinances, including this chapter, nor does it preclude any of the actions the city is authorized to take pursuant to this chapter or elsewhere in this code. The owner must register the property with the Coachella code enforcement department on specified forms. 
(c)  The owner must register the vacant property with the Coachella code enforcement department pursuant to subsection (a) on specified forms which shall contain the identity of the owner, the direct mailing address of the owner and, in the case of a corporate or out of area owner, the local property management company, if any, responsible for the security, maintenance and marketing of the property in question. 
(d)  Registration pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall be renewed annually. 
(e)  The annual registration fee, adopted in conformance with section 8.64.040, shall accompany the submission of each registration form. The fee and registration shall be valid for one year from the date of registration. Registration fees will not be prorated. 
(f)  Properties subject to this chapter shall remain subject to the annual registration requirement, security and maintenance standards of this chapter as long as they remain vacant. 
(g)  Any person that has registered a property under this chapter must make a written report to the Coachella code enforcement department of any change of information contained in the registration within ten (10) days of the change. 
(h)  If there are multiple owners of a property subject to this chapter, the duties and obligations specified in this section shall be joint and several among and between all owners and their respective agents. 
(Ord. No. 1035, § 1, 1-11-12)  
8.64.050 - Maintenance requirements. 
It is declared a public nuisance for any person, partnership, association, corporation, fiduciary or other legal entity, that owns, leases, occupies, controls or manages any property subject to the registration requirement contained in Section 8.64.040, to cause, permit, or maintain any property condition contrary to any provision of this chapter. Consequently, the following maintenance requirements as to any property subject to the registration requirement contained in Section 8.64.040 are adopted. 
(a)  Any property subject to this section must comply with the requirements of Title 3 of this code. 
(b)  In addition, the property shall be kept free of weeds, dry brush, dead vegetation, trash, junk, debris, building materials, any accumulation of newspaper, circular, flyers, notices (except those required by federal, state or local law), discarded personal items including, but not limited to, furniture, clothing, large and small appliances, printed material or any other items that give the appearance that the property is vacant. 
(c)  The property shall be maintained free of graffiti, tagging or similar marking. Any removal or painting over of graffiti shall be with an exterior grade paint that matches the color of the exterior of the structure. 
(d)  Visible front and side yards shall be landscaped and maintained to the neighborhood standard. 
(e)  Landscaping includes, but is not limited to, grass, ground covers, bushes, shrubs, hedges or similar plantings, decorative rock or bark or artificial turf/sod designed specifically for residential installation. 
(f)  Landscaping does not include weeds, gravel, broken concrete, asphalt, plastic sheeting, mulch, indoor-outdoor carpet or any similar material. 
(g)  Pools and spas shall be kept in working order so that water remains clear and free of pollutants and debris, or alternatively shall be drained and kept dry. In either case, properties with pools and/or spas must comply with the minimum security fencing requirements of the State of California. 
(h)  Adherence to this section does not relieve the property owner of obligations set forth in any covenants, conditions and restrictions and/or home owners' association rules and regulations which may apply to the property. 
(i)  If there are multiple owners of a property subject to this chapter, the duties and obligations specified in this section shall be joint and several among and between all owners and their respective agents. 
The sole exception to these maintenance requirements shall, within the sole reasonable discretion of a duly authorized enforcement official, apply to property subject to the registration requirement contained in Section 8.64.040 that is under construction and/or repair, not less than three business days per week, undertaken in compliance with all applicable law including, but not limited to, city permitting requirements. 
(Ord. No. 1035, § 1, 1-11-12)  
8.64.060 - Security requirements. 
A.  Properties subject to this chapter shall be maintained in a secure manner so as not to be accessible to unauthorized persons. 
B.  Generally, "secure manner" means boarding unsecure windows, doors, and other openings with sheeting material in accordance with this section. As used herein, "sheeting material" or "sheeting" means a minimum of .20-inch thick clear or semi-clear shatter-proof polycarbonate material with a strength capable of sustaining impact without breaking or shattering, absent excessive force. For example, such polycarbonate material shall be capable of sustaining a human propelled brick without breaking or shattering. Examples of such sheeting strength yields would include strength yields equal or greater than American Society for Testing and Materials (ASDM) D638 Tensile Strength, Yield value of eight thousand (8000) psi. Sheeting shall be installed in a manner intended to provide an appearance approximating glass in the window casings, and consistent in appearance with the surrounding surface in the case of all other openings that require securing. Unless otherwise granted a variance by the building authority from strict compliance herewith, materials such as particle board, wafer board, Masonite or other similar material shall not be used for boarding up property. 
C.  Boarding Standard—Windows. 
1.  Internal Compression Method. Windows with broken, missing, or removed glass, or that are otherwise unsecure, shall be boarded as follows: 
a.  All remaining broken glass shall be removed from the window opening including damaged frames as to provide a clean opening; 
b.  The sheeting material shall be cut to match the dimensions of the inside of the window casing so that when installed, the sheeting will fit tightly and not permit a tool to be placed behind it; 
c.  A ½-inch hole shall be drilled into each of the four corners of the sheeting material. The holes shall be positioned so they are no more than 1-inch from the window frame at the width and no more than six inches from the window sill and top frame; 
d.  Two solid continuous composite cross-beams shall be cut in sufficient length to be no less than eight inches longer than the horizontal width of the interior window casing. Each cross-beam shall be predrilled with 7/16 -inch holes that are positioned to match the horizontal pattern of the holes in the sheeting; 
e.  The sheeting shall be secured in place over the exterior of the window opening by placing a 3/8 -inch corrosion resistant, smooth-head carriage bolt through each of the holes in the sheeting and then placing one washer onto each of the carriage bolts; the cross-beams shall then be aligned and affixed to such carriage bolts from the interior of the window opening. Another nut and washer shall be placed onto each of the carriage bolts and tightened with a ratchet to achieve sufficient torque and a slight deflection in the cross-beams so that the nuts cannot be loosened by hand. Once secured, no space shall exist between the sheeting and the exterior window casing. 
2.  Exterior Screw Method. Fixed or inoperable windows with intact glass; or windows in which the internal compression method is impractical shall be secured as follows: 
A.  The sheeting material shall be cut to match the dimensions of the inside of the window casing so that when installed, the sheeting will fit tightly and not permit a tool to be placed behind it; 
B.  Drill and countersink holes shall be made along the perimeter of the sheeting material starting with a hole at each of the four corners and adding additional holes at 10-inch increments around the perimeter of the sheeting. Minimum length 2-inch corrosion resistant security head screws shall be used in each hole to affix the sheeting to the window frame or exterior casing. 
C.  In the event the sheeting cannot be secured by cutting the sheeting material so as to neatly fit the inside window casing, the sheeting shall be placed over the exterior window casing such that the sheeting material covers the entire window casing and extends beyond the window casing at least eight inches on center. The sheeting material shall be secured with minimum length 2-inch corrosion resistant security head screws secured at the corners, and along the sheeting outer edges in 10-inch spaced increments as described in subsection a. above. 
3.  Variance. If circumstances make the foregoing methods of installation impractical such as due to excessive frame, door and wall damage, or windows that are in an arc encasing or other unusual inset or characteristic the window or opening shall still be installed with the sheeting, but may be affixed and secured in any manner approved by the building authority as to achieve substantial compliance with this chapter. 
D.  Boarding Standard—Unsecure Doors; Sliding or Other Doors. 
1.  Exterior Access Door. At least one exterior door shall allow authorized persons access to the interior of the property. Such exterior access door may be secured by: (a) using a solid core wood or steel door with no windows or other openings in the door; (b) or hinged sheeting material. The door shall be securely locked using a padlock and hasp assembly that is bolted through the door or sheeting material. The lock loop portion of the hasp shall be attached to the door frame using a minimum of 3-inch long security screws. 
2.  Sliding Glass Doors and Other Exterior Doors. Sliding glass doors or exterior doors other than the exterior access door shall be secured in the same manner as described in Section 8.64.060(C). 
E.  If the property is owned by a corporation and/or out of area owner, a local property management company shall be contracted to perform weekly inspections to verify that the requirements of this section, and any other applicable laws, are being met. 
F.  If the property is subject to subsection (E), the property shall be posted with the name and twenty-four-hour contact phone number of the local property management company. The posting shall be no less than eighteen (18) inches by twenty-four (24) inches, shall be of a font that is legible from a distance of forty-five (45) feet, and shall contain the following verbiage: "THIS PROPERTY MANAGED BY ____________," and "TO REPORT PROBLEMS OR CONCERNS CALL (name and phone number)." 
G.  If the property is subject to subsection (E), the posting shall be placed on the interior of a window facing the street to the front of the property so it is visible from the street, or secured to the exterior of the building/structure facing the street of the front of the property so it is visible from the street. If no such area exists, the posting shall be on a stake of sufficient size to support the posting, in a location that is visible from the street to the front of the property, and to the extent possible, not readily accessible to potential vandalism. Exterior posting must be constructed of, and printed with weather resistant materials. 
H.  If the property is subject to subsection (E), the local property management company shall inspect the property on a weekly basis to determine if the property is in compliance with the requirements of this chapter. If the property management company determines the property is not in compliance, it is the company's responsibility to bring the property into compliance. 
I.  If there are multiple owners of a property subject to this chapter, the duties and obligations specified in this section shall be joint and several among and between all owners and their respective agents. 
(Ord. No. 1035, § 1, 1-11-12; Ord. No. 1092, § 3, 9-14-16)  
8.64.070 - Additional authority. 
In addition to the enforcement remedies established in this chapter, the city shall have the authority to require the owner of any property affected by this chapter, to implement additional maintenance and/or security measures including, but not limited to, securing any and all doors, windows or other openings, installing additional security lighting, increasing on-site inspection frequency, employment of an on-site security guard or other measures as may be reasonably required to secure and reduce the visual decline of the property. 
(Ord. No. 1035, § 1, 1-11-12)  
8.64.080 - Fees. 
The fee for registering and re-registering a vacant property shall be set, from time to time, by resolution of the city council. The amount of the fee charges shall not exceed the cost of administering the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1035, § 1, 1-11-12)  
8.64.090 - Enforcement. 
(a)  The owner of a vacant property shall comply fully and in all instances with the provisions of this chapter and with all other applicable requirements of ordinances of the city, regulations of this code, statutes of the State and United States Code of Regulations, and decisions, rulings, and orders of courts of competent jurisdiction. 
(b)  Any violation of this chapter shall be treated as a strict liability offense; a violation shall be deemed to have occurred regardless of a violator's intent. 
(c)  Any person that owns, leases, occupies, controls or manages any property subject to the registration requirement contained in Section 8.64.040, and causes, permits, or maintains a violation of this chapter as to that property, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in this code. 
(d)  This section is intended to be cumulative to, and not in place of, other rights and remedies available to the city pursuant to this code. Above and beyond the violation and penalty specified in this section, the city attorney or a duly authorized enforcement official may pursue any other right or remedy permitted by this code, including, but not limited to, commencement of any civil action, or administrative action to abate the condition of a property as a public nuisance pursuant to Title 3 of this code. 
(e)  In the event the city issues an administration citation pursuant to Title 3 of this code to a party for violating this chapter, the subject party shall be responsible for payment of the following administrative penalties: 
(1)  A party issued an administration citation for the first time shall pay an administrative citation of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00); 
(2)  A party issued an administration citation for the second time shall pay an administrative citation of five hundred dollars ($500.00); 
(3)  A party issued an administrative citation for the third time shall pay an administrative citation of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 1035, § 1, 1-11-12)  
8.64.100 - Appeals. 
Any person aggrieved by any of the requirements of this chapter may appeal a determination made hereunder in the manner specified with respect to appeals under the Coachella Municipal Code, including, but not limited to, Title 3 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 1035, § 1, 1-11-12)  
Title 9 - PUBLIC PEACE AND WELFARE 
Chapters:  
Chapter 9.04 - ALCOHOL RELATED OFFENSES 
Sections: 
 
9.04.010 - Alcoholic beverages. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to protect the health, safety and welfare of the city's residents and visitors and to protect property values from declining due to nuisance related activities associated with alcoholic beverages. 
B.  Alcoholic Beverage. Alcoholic beverage means to include alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer, and which contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with other substances. 
C.  Consumption. 
1.  It is unlawful for any person to drink, use or consume any alcoholic beverage upon any public street, sidewalk, highway, road, lane or alley, or in or upon any park or recreation area, or upon any other publicly owned property which is not licensed for the consumption of such alcoholic beverage on the premises by the Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control of the state of California. 
2.  It is unlawful for any person to drink, use or consume any alcoholic beverage upon privately-owned property, which is open to the use or patronage of the general public at the time, unless the person doing or committing the act has the express or implied permission or invitation to do so from the owner or lessee or other person in charge of the private property or business premises involved. 
3.  The provisions set forth in this subsection are intended to protect all persons, including, but not limited to, adults, teenagers, adolescents, supervised minors and unsupervised minors from causing or suffering from injuries that are proximately caused by acts committed while drinking, using or consuming alcoholic beverages. 
D.  Retail Package Off-Sale Premises and Adjacent Parking Lots and Public Sidewalks. 
1.  All retail package off-sale alcoholic beverage licensees licensed pursuant to Division 9 (commencing with Section 23000) of the California Business and Professions Code shall post on their respective licensed premises, any parking lot (other than a privately owned residential parking lot) located immediately adjacent to such licensed premises, and any public sidewalk situated immediately adjacent to such licensed premises and any posted parking lot signs that contain the following message: 
"It is unlawful for any person who has in his or her possession any bottle, can or other receptacle containing an alcoholic beverage which has been opened, or has its seal broken, or has its contents partially removed, to enter, be, or remain on these premises. All violations will be reported to the Riverside County Sheriffs Department." 
All such signs shall be clearly visible to patrons and members of the public using the subject public sidewalk. 
2.  It is unlawful for any person who has in his or her possession any bottle, can or other receptacle containing an alcoholic beverage which has been opened, or has its seal broken, or has its contents partially removed, to enter, be, or remain on any premises posted pursuant to this subsection. 
E.  Illegal Provision of Alcohol. As set forth in Penal Code Section 11200, every building or place used for the purpose of unlawfully selling, serving or giving away any spirituous, vinous, malt or other alcoholic liquor, and every building or place in or upon which such liquors are unlawfully sold, served or given away, shall be declared a nuisance which permits the city attorney to maintain an action to abate and prevent the nuisance pursuant to Penal Code Section 11200 et seq. 
F.  Infraction Violation. A violation of subsection (C)(1) or (2), and subsection (D)(1) or (2) of this section by the person responsible for committing such violation shall constitute an infraction violation. 
G.  Civil Fines. Any person convicted of an infraction under this section shall, for each violation of this section, be subject to: (a) a civil fine in an amount not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for a first conviction of an offense; (b) a civil fine in an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a second conviction of the same offense within a twelve (12) month period of the date of the first offense; and (c) a civil fine in an amount not to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for the third conviction of the same offense within a twelve (12) month period of the date of the first offense. The civil fine for a fourth and subsequent conviction of the same offense within a twelve (12) month period of the date of the first offense shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
H.  Criminal Fines. Any person convicted of an infraction under this section shall, for each separate violation of this section, be subject to: (a) a criminal fine in an amount not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first conviction of an offense; (b) a criminal fine in an amount not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for a second conviction of the same offense within a twelve (12) month period of the date of the first offense; and (c) a criminal fine in an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the third and any subsequent conviction of the same offense within a twelve (12) month period of the date of the first offense. 
I.  Misdemeanor Violation. A fourth violation and subsequent violations of subsection (C)(1) or (2) of this section within a twelve (12) month period shall be deemed a misdemeanor violation subject to the fines and imprisonment provisions set forth in section 1.08.010 of this code. 
(Ord. 892 § 13, 2003; prior code § 14-11)  
Chapter 9.08 - JUVENILE CURFEW AND TRUANCY* 
Sections: 
 
9.08.010 - Juvenile curfew and truancy. 
A.  Purpose and Intent. The intended purpose of this section is to protect and preserve the public peace, safety and welfare by establishing juvenile curfew and truancy restrictions. 
B.  Definitions. 
"Curfew hours" means the period from ten p.m. any evening of the week, until six a.m. the following day. 
"Emergency" means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, natural disaster, an automobile accident or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. 
"Establishment" means any privately-owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, any place of amusement or entertainment. 
"Guardian" means: (1) a person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or (2) a public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by the court. 
"Minor" means any person under eighteen (18) years of age. 
"Parent" means a person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent of another person. 
"Public place" means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities and shops. 
"Responsible adult" means a person at least eighteen (18) years of age, authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor. 
"Serious bodily injury" means bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. 
C.  Curfew Restrictions. It is unlawful for any minor to be present in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours and for any parent or guardian of a minor to knowingly permit, or by insufficient control to allow, the minor to be present in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours. 
D.  Curfew Defenses. It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the minor was: 
1.  Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian, or by a responsible adult; 
2.  On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian, or the responsible adult, without any detour or stop; 
3.  In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel; 
4.  Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop; 
5.  Involved in an emergency; 
6.  On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence; 
7.  Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and/or sponsored by the city, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor; 
8.  Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution; or 
9.  Emancipated pursuant to law. 
E.  Curfew Defense Determination. Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being in the public place or on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this section unless the police officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any responses and other circumstances, no defense under subsection D of this section is present or applicable. 
(Ord. 961 § 1 (part), 2006)  
9.08.020 - Daytime loitering and truancy restrictions. 
It is unlawful for any minor who is subject to compulsory education or compulsory continuing education to loiter, wander, idle or in any other manner be in or upon the public streets, highways or any public place during the hours in which classes are held at the school, public or private, which the minor is or should be currently enrolled in, and/or is required to attend. This section does not apply: 
A.  When the minor is accompanied by his or her parent, guardian, or other adult person having the care or custody of the minor; or 
B.  When the minor is on an emergency errand directed by his or her parent or guardian or other adult person having care or custody of the minor; or 
C.  When the minor is going to or coming directly from their place of gainful employment or from a medical appointment; or 
D.  When the minor has permission to leave the school campus for lunch or a school-related activity and has in his or her possession a valid, school-issued, off-campus permit to leave the school campus for a designated period of time and purpose or within a designated area; or 
E.  When the minor is enrolled in an alternative education, home school, or other such program of study and possesses verifiable permission from the officials of such alternative education program, school, or his or her parents to be absent from the premises during the time that such program is in session; or 
F.  When the minor is exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution; or 
G.  When the minor is, with parental or guardian consent, engaged in normal inter-state travel through the city or originating or terminating in the city; or 
H.  When the minor is an "emancipated minor" as that term is described in California Family Code Section 7002. 
(Ord. 961 § 1 (part), 2006)  
9.08.030 - Parental duties and obligations. 
It is unlawful for a parent, guardian or other person having the legal care, custody or control of a minor to permit, or to allow by inefficient control, the minor to remain in any public street or any public place in violation of this chapter. It is the intent of the city council by this section to impose strict liability on parents for the acts of minors within their control. 
(Ord. 961 § 1 (part), 2006)  
9.08.040 - Detention of a minor. 
Law enforcement officers are authorized to temporarily detain any minor upon a reasonable suspicion based upon articulable facts that the minor is in violation of any provision of this chapter and to transport that minor to his or her school or place of permanent or temporary residence or to the custody of his or her parents. 
(Ord. 961 § 1 (part), 2006)  
9.08.050 - Minor curfew, loitering or wilful misconduct—Cost recovery. 
A.  Pursuant to the provisions of the California Welfare and Institutions Code Section 625.5(b), the city council adopts the following procedure to recoup the law enforcement costs of identifying, detaining and transporting minors who violate curfew ordinances to their school or residence and to recover those costs from the parents and legal guardians and from the minors involved. 
B.  Cost Recovery. 
1.  The city manager or assistant manager shall prepare a bill or invoice, outlining specific costs of identifying, detaining and transporting minors who violate curfew ordinances to their school or residence, addressed to the parent or legal guardian of any such minor in violation of the loitering and truancy ordinances within this chapter. 
2.  Any person(s) in receipt of a bill or invoice requesting recovery of costs of identifying, detaining and transporting their respective minor due to a violation of this chapter shall remit payment for all costs within the time specified on the bill or invoice. 
3.  Any person who fails to remit full payment by the specified due date is guilty of an infraction punishable by fine pursuant to Section 1.08.010 of this code. 
(Ord. 961 § 1 (part), 2006)  
9.08.060 - Infractions and penalties. 
A.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, each violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. 
B.  When a minor is charged with a violation of this chapter, and any peace officer issues a notice to appear in a juvenile traffic court of competent jurisdiction to such minor as a result thereof, the charge shall be deemed to be an infraction unless the minor requests that a petition be filed under Section 601 or 602 of the Welfare and Institutions Code. 
C.  Any person convicted of violating this chapter is guilty of an infraction punishable by fine pursuant to Section 1.08.010 of this code. 
(Ord. 961 § 1 (part), 2006)  
Chapter 9.12 - LOITERING FOR DRUG PURPOSES 
Sections: 
 
9.12.010 - Loitering for drug activities. 
A.  Acts Prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to loiter on or in premises that have been reported to law enforcement as a place suspected of unlawful drug activity. 
B.  Circumstances. Among circumstances that may be considered in determining whether such purpose is manifested are that the person: 
1.  Is a known unlawful drug user, possessor or seller. For purposes of this chapter, a "known unlawful drug user, possessor or seller" is a person who has, with the knowledge of the arresting officer, been convicted in any court within this state of any violation involving the use, possession or sale of any of the substances referred to in Chapters 6 and 6.5 of Division 10 of the California Health and Safety Code, or such person has been convicted of any violation of any of the provisions of such sections or substantially similar laws of any political subdivision of this state or any other state; or a person who displays physical characteristics of drug intoxication or usage, such as "needle tracks"; or a person who possesses drug paraphernalia; 
2.  Is currently subject to an order prohibiting his or her presence in a high drug activity geographic area; 
3.  Behaves in such a manner as to raise a reasonable suspicion that he or she is about to engage in or is then engaged in an unlawful drug-related activity, including by way of example only, acting as a "look out"; 
4.  Is physically identified by the officer as a member of a "gang," or association which has as its purpose illegal drug activity; 
5.  Transfers small objects or packages for currency in a furtive fashion; 
6.  Takes flight upon the appearance of a police officer; 
7.  Tries to conceal himself or herself or any object which reasonably could be involved in an unlawful drug activity; 
8.  Is in an area that is known for unlawful drug activity; 
9.  Is on or in premises that have been reported to law enforcement as a place suspected of unlawful drug activity; or 
10.  Is in or within six feet of any vehicle registered to a known unlawful drug user, possessor, or seller, or person for whom there is an outstanding warrant for a crime involving drug-related activity. 
C.  Penalty for Violation. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment in jail not exceeding six months or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Prior code § 14-1.1)  
Chapter 9.16 - PROPERTY OFFENSES 
Sections: 
 
9.16.010 - Permitting agricultural wastewater to flow onto or remain upon public ways. 
It is unlawful for any person to cause or allow agricultural water to flow onto or to remain upon any public street or right-of-way. 
(Prior code § 14-9)  
9.16.020 - Trailers outside camps. 
It is unlawful for any person to keep or maintain, or to permit to be placed, kept or maintained, any trailer coach being presently used or being intended for present use for human habitation upon any lot, piece or parcel of land within the city, except in a trailer camp or when all of the following regulations and conditions have been complied with: 
A.  Such trailer coach shall be kept or maintained at the rear of a private residential building, other than an apartment house or hotel; 
B.  Such trailer coach shall not be placed closer than ten (10) feet to any building or closer than five feet to any property line other than a public street or alley line; 
C.  Such trailer coach shall be used only for sleeping quarters, and none of the sanitary and cooking facilities in such trailer coach shall be used; and 
D.  Such trailer coach shall not be kept or maintained for sleeping purposes as permitted in this section for more than three successive nights in any successive ninety (90) days. 
(Prior code § 24-2)  
Chapter 9.20 - WEAPONS 
Sections: 
 
9.20.010 - Discharging weapons. 
A.  No person shall fire or cause to be fired any shotgun, pistol, firearm, air rifle or air pistol within the city, except those persons, who are issued a permit by the chief of police for the use of a twelve (12), sixteen (16), twenty (20) or four hundred ten (410) gauge shotgun for the abatement of the pigeon nuisance problem within the city, to be used in the manner provided in this chapter. 
B.  The chief of police is given the power and authority to issue permits to any property owner, duly authorized agent of a property owner, tenant or lessee of a property owner for the firing of a twelve (12), sixteen (16), twenty (20) or four hundred ten (410) gauge shotgun exclusively within the confines of the property of the holder of the permit. The chief of police is authorized and instructed to issue permits to any of the aforementioned classified persons, who are over the age of twenty-one (21) years. 
C.  All persons issued permits in connection with this section shall use no shells or pellets larger than No. 6 in their shotguns. 
D.  All persons issued permits shall be fully responsible for any and all property damage or personal injuries sustained by anyone in connection with the permittee's use of such shotgun. 
E.  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be subject to a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or to imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or shall be subject both to such fine and imprisonment; provided, further, that the parent or legal guardian of any person under the age of eighteen (18) years who should violate any provision of this section may consent that in lieu of having a criminal complaint filed against them, the chief of police may confiscate a shotgun, pistol, firearm, air rifle or air pistol used by said person in the violation of this section. Such confiscation by the chief of police shall be for a period not to exceed one year. 
(Ord. 892 § 15, 2003; prior code § 14-7)  
Chapter 9.24 - CRIMINAL HISTORY INFORMATION 
Sections: 
 
9.24.010 - Use of criminal history information in certain instances relating to employment and licensing. 
A.  Criminal Conduct—Ineligibility for Employment. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, conviction (including pleas of guilty and nolo contendere) of a felony or a misdemeanor shall be prima facie disqualification of an applicant for employment by the city; provided, however, that the appointing authority may disregard such conviction if it is found and determined by such appointing authority that mitigating circumstances exist. In making such determination, the appointing authority shall consider the following factors: 
1.  The classification, including its sensitivity, to which the person is applying or being certified and whether the classification is unrelated to the conviction; 
2.  The nature and seriousness of the offense; 
3.  The circumstances surrounding the conviction; 
4.  The length of time elapsed since the conviction; 
5.  The age of the person at the time of the conviction; 
6.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation or efforts at rehabilitation; and 
7.  Contributing social or environmental conditions. 
The appointing authority shall give notice of disqualification to an applicant disqualified under this provision. Such notice shall be in writing and delivered personally or mailed to the applicant at the address shown on the application for employment. 
An applicant who is disqualified for employment under this provision may appeal such determination of disqualification. Such appeal shall be in writing and filed with city manager within ten (10) days of the date of the notice of disqualification. The city manager shall hear and determine the appeal within ninety (90) days after it is filed. The determination of the city manager on the appeal shall be final. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, an applicant for a peace officer position shall be disqualified, without right of appeal, from employment if the applicant shall have been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor. 
Pursuant to Section 11105 of the Penal Code of the state of California, the following officers of the city are authorized to have access to and to utilize state summary criminal history information when it is needed to assist them in fulfilling employment duties set forth in this subsection: city manager, assistant city manager, personnel officer and city attorney. 
B.  Same—Ineligibility for City Licenses and Permits. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, conviction (including pleas of guilty and nolo contendere) of a felony or misdemeanor shall be prima facie disqualification of an applicant for the following city licenses or permits: Solicitors, peddlers, taxicab operators and drivers, cabaret operators, carnival and circus operators. 
The city licensing authority, however, may disregard such conviction if it is found and determined by such licensing authority that mitigating circumstances exist. In making such determination, the city licensing authority shall consider the following factors: 
1.  The type of business license or permit for which the person is applying; 
2.  The nature and seriousness of the offense; 
3.  The circumstances surrounding the conviction; 
4.  The length of time elapsed since the conviction; 
5.  The age of the person at the time of the conviction; 
6.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation or efforts at rehabilitation; and 
7.  Contributing social or environmental conditions. 
The city licensing authority shall give notice of disqualification to an applicant disqualified under this provision. Such notice shall be in writing and delivered personally or mailed to the applicant at the address shown on the application. 
An applicant who is disqualified for a city business license or permit under this provision may appeal such determination or disqualification. Such appeal shall be in writing and filed with city council within ten (10) days of the date of the notice of disqualification. The city council shall hear and determine the appeal within ninety (90) days after it is filed. The determination of the city council on the appeal shall be final. 
Pursuant to Section 11105 of the Penal Code of the state of California, the following officers of the city are authorized to have access to and to utilize state summary criminal history information when it is needed to assist them in fulfilling licensing duties set forth in this section: city clerk, city manager, finance directors, city attorney. 
C.  Transmittal to Department of Justice. The city clerk shall forward a certified copy of this section to the department of justice criminal records security unit. 
(Prior code § 14-10)  
Title 10 - VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC 
Chapters:  
Chapter 10.04 - UNIFORM TRAFFIC ORDINANCE ADOPTED 
Sections: 
 
10.04.010 - Uniform ordinance adopted. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, all of the provisions of the uniform traffic ordinance, 1964 edition, adopted by the League of California Cities are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth in this section. Three copies of the uniform traffic ordinance are on file for use and examination by the public in the office of the city clerk. 
(Prior code § 23-1)  
10.04.020 - Uniform ordinance amended. 
The uniform traffic ordinance adopted by this chapter is hereby amended and modified as provided in this section: 
SECTION 10.3 (i) shall be amended to read as follows: 
"(i) At any place within ten (10) feet of a crosswalk at an intersection in any business district when such place is indicated by appropriate signs or red paint upon the curb surface except a bus may stop at a designated bus atop." 
(Ord. No. 248, § 2, 11-15-66) 
SECTION 10.3 (k) shall be amended to read as follows: 
"(k) Within seven and one-half (7½) feet of a fire hydrant, as indicated by signs or markers as required." 
(Ord. No. 442, 8-19-80) 
SECTION 11.5 shall be amended to read as follows: 
"Section 11.5 Time limit parking on city maintained parking facilities. 
"It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to park said vehicle on any public parking facility maintained by the city for a period longer than ten (10) consecutive hours." 
(Ord. No. 248, § 4, 11-15-66) 
SECTION 11.8 shall be amended to read as follows: 
"Section 118 All night parking prohibited. 
"No person shall atop, stand or park a vehicle on streets that shall be designated and posted by the city traffic engineer between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 6 :00 a.m. of any day, provided that this section shall not apply to a vehicle of any regularly licensed physician when actually engaged in making professional calls." 
(Ord. No. 248, § 3, 11-15-66) 
SECTION 11.9 is hereby added to the uniform traffic ordinance, reading as follows: 
"Section 11.9 Parking of house trailers on any street limited to six (6) hours. 
"No person shall stop, stand or park a house trailer on any street within the city for a period longer than six (6) hours." 
(Ord. No. 248, § 7, 11-15-66) 
SECTION 13.2 shall be amended to read as follows: 
"Section 13.2 Horse-drawn vehicles. 
"No person shall drive any animal-drawn vehicle into or within the central traffic district at any time, except during a permitted parade or other type of celebration." 
(Ord. No. 248, § 5, 11-15-66) 
SECTION 16 of the uniform traffic ordinance, "Increasing state speed limit in certain zones," shall include the following streets, with the established prima facie speed: 
City Streets 	Limits 	Speed Limits 
Avenue 48 	Jackson Street to Grapefruit Blvd. 	45 mph 
Avenue 48 	Dillon Road to Harrison Street 	40 mph 
Avenue 49 	Van Buren Street to Grapefruit Blvd. 	40 mph 
Avenue 50 	Calhoun Street to Frederick Street 	40 mph 
Avenue 50 	Frederick Street to Harrison Street 	35 mph 
Avenue 50 	Harrison Street to Tyler Street 	40 mph 
Avenue 50 	Tyler Street to Polk Street 	40 mph 
Avenue 51 	Van Buren Street to Frederick Street 	40 mph 
Avenue 51 	Frederick Street to Harrison Street 	35 mph 
Avenue 52 	Van Buren Street to Frederick Street 	50 mph 
Avenue 52 	Frederick Street to Harrison Street 	40 mph 
Avenue 52 	Harrison Street to Grapefruit Blvd. 	40 mph 
Avenue 52 	Grapefruit Blvd. to Polk Street 	50 mph 
Avenue 53 	Frederick Street to Harrison Street 	40 mph 
Avenue 53 	Harrison Street to Tyler Street 	35 mph 
Avenue 54 	Van Buren Street to Harrison Street 	50 mph 
Avenue 54 	Harrison Street to Polk Street 	50 mph 
Airport Blvd. 	Van Buren Street to Harrison Street 	50 mph 
Calhoun Street 	Avenue 48 to Avenue 49 	45 mph 
Calhoun Street 	Avenue 49 to Avenue 50 	45 mph 
Van Buren Street 	Avenue 48 to Avenue 50 	50 mph 
Van Buren Street 	Avenue 50 to Avenue 54 	50 mph 
Van Buren Street 	Avenue 54 to Airport Blvd. 	45 mph 
Frederick Street 	Avenue 49 to Avenue 50 	35 mph 
Frederick Street 	Avenue 50 to Avenue 54 	35 mph 
Dillon Road 	Grapefruit Blvd. to Vista Del Sur 	45 mph 
Dillon Road 	Vista Del Sur to North City Limit 	45 mph 
Harrison Street 	Avenue 50 to Avenue 52 	40 mph 
Harrison Street 	Avenue 52 to Avenue 54 	45 mph 
Harrison Street 	Avenue 54 to Airport Blvd. 	55 mph 
Grapefruit Blvd. 	Avenue 48 to Harrison Street 	50 mph 
Grapefruit Blvd. 	Harrison Street to Avenue 52 	40 mph 
Grapefruit Blvd. 	Avenue 52 to Avenue 54 	50 mph 
Tyler Street 	Avenue 50 to Avenue 52 	40 mph 
Tyler Street 	Grapefruit Blvd. to Avenue 54 	40 mph 
Polk Street 	Industrial Way to Avenue 54 	40 mph 
Fillmore Street 	Avenue 50 to Avenue 52 	40 mph 
Fillmore Street 	Avenue 52 to Airport Blvd. 	40 mph 
Industrial Way 	Tyler Street to Polk Street 	35 mph 
Palm Avenue 	First Street to Seventh Street 	35 mph 
Orchard Avenue 	First Street to Ninth Street 	30 mph 
Vine Avenue 	First Street to Ninth Street 	30 mph 
Fourth Street 	Harrison Street to Grapefruit Blvd. 	30 mph 
Sixth Street 	Harrison Street to Grapefruit Blvd. 	30 mph 
Seventh Street 	Tripoli Way to Grapefruit Blvd. 	30 mph 
Valley Road 	Harrison Street to Shady Lane 	30 mph 
 
(Ord. 1006 § 1, 2008; Ord. 912 § 1, 2004; Ord. 902 § 1, 2003; Ord. 858 § 1, 2001; prior code § 23-2)  
10.04.030 - Penalties. 
Any person who should be convicted of a violation of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an infraction, unless otherwise specified, and shall be punished for the first such offense by a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00), for the second offense within twelve (12) months from the date of the first offense by a fine not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), and for the third offense within twelve (12) months from the date of the first offense by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. 892 § 16, 2003: prior code § 23-3)  
Chapter 10.08 - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING 
Sections: 
 
10.08.010 - Through highways and streets designated. 
The following highways and streets are designated as through highways and streets within the city and all vehicular traffic shall stop before entering or crossing the same: 
Grapefruit Boulevard (also known as State Highway 111) from Avenue 48 to Ave 54 
Harrison Street (also known as State Highway 86) from the intersection of 
Grapefruit Boulevard to Avenue 50th 
Avenue 50, from Calhoun Street to State 86 Expressway 
Avenue 54, from Van Buren Street to Grapefruit Boulevard 
 
(Ord. 990 § 1, 2008; prior code § 23-14)  
10.08.020 - Stop intersections designated. 
The following intersections are designated as stop intersections and all vehicular traffic on the stop street shall stop before entering the street having the right-of-way: 
Stop Street 	Right-of-way Street 
Seventh Street (west-bound traffic) 	Vine Street 
Seventh Street (west-bound traffic) 	Orchard Avenue 
Seventh Street South 	Palm Avenue 
Orchard Avenue 	Fourth Street 
Orchard Avenue 	Ninth Street 
Vine Street 	Fourth Street 
Seventh Street 	Vine Street 
 
The following intersections are designated as stop intersections in all directions and all vehicular traffic in all directions shall stop before entering the intersection: 
All-Way Stop Intersections 
Avenue 49 and Calhoun Street 
Avenue 54 and Tier Street 
Calle Rojo and Calle Empalme 
Palm Avenue and Seventh Street 
Avenue 52 and Genoa Street 
Avenue 52 and Las Palmas Street 
Avenue 53 and Harrison Street 
Avenue 51 and Frederick Street 
 
(Ord. 981 § 1, 2007; Ord. 972 § 1, 2007; Ord. 936 § 1, 2005; Ord. 917 § 1, 2004; Ord. 916 § 1, 2004; Ord. 876 § 1, 2002; Ord. 864 § 2, 2001; prior code § 23-15)  
10.08.030 - Obedience to stop signs. 
Every person operating a vehicle who shall fail to bring such vehicle to a complete stop before entering any through highway or intersection designated in this section at a point where a stop sign shall be posted shall be guilty of an infraction. 
(Ord. 892 § 17, 2003: prior code § 23-16)  
10.08.040 - Manner of parking. 
A.  Parallel Parking. Every motor vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway, street or highway within the city where there are adjacent curbs shall be stopped or parked with the right-hand wheels of such motor vehicle parallel with and within eighteen (18) inches of the right-hand curb unless otherwise designated. Where no curbs or barriers bound any roadway, street or highway, right-hand parallel parking shall be required unless otherwise designated. 
B.  Angle Parking. It is unlawful for any motor vehicle to be stopped or parked at an angle on any roadway, street or highway within the corporate limits of the city unless the angle parking is designated by white diagonal lines. Designation shall be provided by the city engineer and approval by the planning commission pursuant to Title 17 of this code. 
C.  Commercial Vehicles Prohibited from Parking on Private Property and Public Rights-of-Way. Unless excepted pursuant to subsection (D) of this section, no commercial or construction vehicle, or towed or commercial equipment, shall be parked on any private property unless the vehicle or equipment is screened from public view and from adjacent properties by a block wall or fencing at least six feet high and, if fencing, of an opaque material; nor shall such vehicles or equipment be parked on any public right of way. The term "commercial or construction vehicle, or towed or commercial equipment" includes, but is not limited to, utility and body trucks, construction tractors, construction vehicles and towed equipment, semi-truck tractors, semi-truck trailers, dump trucks, step van delivery trucks, or any parts or apparatus of any of the above. 
D.  Commercial Vehicles Exempted. The following commercial vehicles are exempted from subsection (C) of this section: 
1.  Pick-up trucks, utility vans and similar utility vehicles, each of which does not exceed eight feet in height or twenty-two (22) feet in combined total length; 
2.  All vehicles while being used in actual construction work on a permit-approved construction site; 
3.  All vehicles in the process of making a pick-up or a delivery; 
4.  All vehicles in areas designated as commercial or industrial zones for the purpose of loading or unloading fruit, vegetables, or other produce; 
5.  Government and utility emergency service vehicles; and 
6.  All vehicles used in agricultural, gardening, or landscaping businesses, each of which does not exceed eight feet in height or twenty-two (22) feet in combined total length. 
E.  Parking in Spaces for the Disabled. 
1.  It is unlawful for any person to park, stop, or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, in a stall or space designated for disabled persons and disabled veterans pursuant to Sections 5007, 22511.55, and 22511.59 of the California Vehicle Code, unless the vehicle displays either a distinguishing license plate or a placard issued pursuant to Section 22511.55 of the California Vehicle Code. 
2.  It is unlawful for any person to obstruct, block, or otherwise bar access to those parking stalls except as provided in subsection (A) of this section. 
3.  Subsections (A) and (B) of this section apply to all off-street parking facilities publicly and privately owned. 
4.  No person shall park or stand any vehicle in front of that portion of a curb which has been cut down, lowered, or constructed to provide wheelchair accessibility to the sidewalk and which is designated for wheelchair access by either assigned or red or blue paint on the curb. 
F.  Prohibited Stopping, Standing or Parking. No person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle whether attended or unattended, except repairs necessitated by emergency or in compliance with the directions of a peace officer, in any of the following places: 
1.  Within an intersection; 
2.  On a crosswalk; 
3.  In front of a public or private driveway; 
4.  On a sidewalk; 
5.  On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped, parked or standing at the curb or edge of a highway, except for a school bus when stopped to load or unload pupils in a business or residence district where the speed limit is twenty-five (25) mph or less; 
6.  Upon a bridge, except vehicles of the city being used in repair or inspection of the facility; and 
7.  On any street or highway, or portions thereof, at the times designated for street sweeping. 
G.  Posted "No Parking." No person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle in violation of the restrictions stated on official posted signs. 
H.  Posted Sign or Traffic Control Device. No person shall violate any posted sign or traffic control device which prohibits, regulates or limits the stopping, standing or parking of a vehicle at all times or during specified hours. 
I.  Parking for Seventy-Two (72) Hours. 
1.  No person who owns or has possession, custody or control of any vehicle shall park such vehicle or leave it unattended upon any public right-of-way, street or alley within the city for more than a consecutive period of seventy-two (72) hours in any calendar month. 
2.  Any vehicle left parked or standing upon any public right-of-way, street or alley within the city in violation of subsection (1) of this subsection may be removed by any peace officer or designated employee mentioned in Section 22651 of the California Vehicle Code. 
3.  Whenever a peace officer or designated employee of the city suspects that a vehicle is in violation of this section, the peace officer or designated employee shall post a notice on the vehicle stating that the vehicle must be removed within seventy-two (72) hours of such notice, and if not removed by the date and time indicated on the notice, it will be removed at the owner's expense. 
4.  It is not a defense to a violation of this section that the vehicle noticed under subsection (3) of this subsection has been moved to another public right-of-way, street or alley within the city after such notice. 
J.  Enforcement. 
1.  The city shall, in accordance with Section 40203.5(a) of the California Vehicle Code, provide a schedule of parking penalties for parking violations and late payment penalties. Subject to any limitations imposed by state law, the city council shall, from time to time, by resolution, establish, and modify as necessary, penalties, fines, fees and related charges for parking, traffic and related violations, and any other charge relating to civil procedures for citation resolution, and booting and impounding of vehicles, as required by the Vehicle Code. The penalties specified therein shall be in addition to any state penalties, if applicable, including but not limited to those imposed pursuant to Government Code Section 76100 or Penal Code Section 1464. 
2.  Administrative Adjudication Procedure. 
a.  The purpose of the procedures specified herein is to provide a fair and thorough process for review of citations issued for parking or standing violations within the city. 
b.  Time Limits. Within this Section 10.08.040(J) there are various time limitations established for certain requests, including but not limited to: (1) requests for administrative review; (2) requests for administrative hearings; and (3) requests for copies of documents. The specified time limitations are jurisdictional. Untimely requests will be rejected. Waivers will not be issued. 
c.  Summary of Procedures. There are two stages of review for persons or entities wishing to contest citations: (1) administrative review; and (2) administrative hearing. 
d.  Definitions. The following definitions pertain to terms utilized in this Section 10.08.040(J), regarding enforcement, in order to provide clarity and consistency: 
"Administrative hearing." A hearing process with respect to a citation, conducted in accord with the procedures of this subchapter on parking violation enforcement procedures, initiated by a timely written request of a contestant dissatisfied with the results of the administrative review. 
"Administrative review." The initial citation review process, initiated by a contestant's timely request, and conducted by the reviewing official. 
"Appeal." The action taken by a contestant to request an administrative hearing. 
"Citation." Includes, but is not limited to notice of a stopping, standing, or parking violation, and notice of a delinquent violation. 
"Contestant." Any person or entity who is the registered owner, driver, rentee, bailee or lessee who is liable for parking penalties in accordance with the provisions of Sections 40200, et seq. of the California Vehicle Code, and who contests or disputes liability for the parking penalties. 
"DMV." The state department of motor vehicles. 
"Hearing official." An independent and impartial hearing officer meeting the qualifications specified in Section 40215(c)(4) of the California Vehicle Code, appointed by or contracted with the city or its agent to conduct administrative hearings. 
"Issuing agency." The city department, or its agent, including but not limited to the California Highway Patrol, which issues the parking citation. 
"Parking penalty." Includes the applicable civil penalty for the violation specified on the citation, the late payment penalty, and the department of motor vehicle (DMV) lien fee, if applicable. 
"Parking violation." Any violation of any regulation governing the stopping, standing or parking of a vehicle under the Vehicle Code, under any federal or state statute or regulation, or under this code. 
"Reviewing official." An enforcement official authorized by the chief of police to conduct administrative reviews. 
3.  Administrative Review. 
a.  A request for administrative review must be made within twenty-one (21) days following the issuance of the notice of parking violation, or within twenty-one (21) days following the mailing of the notice of delinquent parking violation. 
b.  The request must be in writing and must include the following: (1) a written statement of reasons explaining why the contestant believes the citation was issued in error; (2) copies of any documents supporting contestant's claim; (3) original citation or reminder notice; (4) contestant's full name; and (5) contestant's mailing address. 
c.  If the required information is not timely provided by the contestant, within the time period specified herein, the request for administrative review will be rejected, and the contestant shall have no further rights to administrative review, or to an administrative hearing. 
d.  Upon the reviewing official's receipt of a timely request for administrative review and the required statement of reasons, the reviewing official will commence a review of the citation and the circumstances surrounding its issuance. The review shall consist of a determination of whether the citation contains all of the items required by Section 40202(a) of the California Vehicle Code and shall focus on the reasons for the request as specified by the contestant. 
(A)  If, based on the results of the review, the reviewing official is satisfied that the citation was not issued in accordance with Section 40202(a) of the California Vehicle Code, or, based on the contestant's statement of reasons, that the violation did not occur or the registered owner was not responsible for the violation, the reviewing official shall cancel the citation and shall specify in writing the reasons for canceling the citation. 
(B)  If, based on the results of the investigation, the reviewing official is satisfied that the citation was issued in accordance with Section 40202(a) of the California Vehicle Code, and that the reasons specified by the contestant do not exist, or do not affect the validity of the citation, the reviewing official shall specify those findings in writing, and include the grounds for the findings. 
e.  The results of the administrative review by the reviewing official will be mailed to the contestant, by first class mail. Service of the notice of result shall be complete upon placement of the notice of result in the United States mail, postage paid. 
4.  Administrative Hearing. 
a.  Initiating Appeal. A contestant dissatisfied with the results of the administrative review may appeal. Any such appeal must be made within twenty-one (21) days of mailing the results of the review. The contestant's appeal shall be initiated by means of a written request, filed by the contestant with the Coachella Police Department. Any appeal shall comply with the following requirements: 
(A)  The contestant shall deposit with the city of Coachella, to the address shown on the notice issued by the reviewing official per Section 10.08.040(J)(3)(e), the full amount of the parking penalty. Pursuant to Section 40215(b) of the California Vehicle Code, the Coachella Police Department or its agent shall provide a written procedure to allow a person to request an administrative hearing without payment of the parking penalty upon satisfactory proof of an inability to pay the amount due. Notice of this procedure shall be provided to all persons requesting an administrative hearing. 
(B)  The contestant's appeal request shall indicate the contestant's preference for a hearing by mail or in person. 
(C)  The contestant shall specify in writing the reasons for contesting the citation. 
(D)  The contestant shall provide a copy of the citation or the notice issued by the reviewing official per Section 10.08.040(J)(3)(e). 
(E)  If different than the record address contained in the parking citation or Coachella Police Department's records, the contestant shall provide the address of the contestant for purposes of mailing notices of hearing and other documents in connection with the appeal. 
In the event that the contestant fails to satisfy any one or more of the above requirements within the time specified herein, the appeal shall be rejected as untimely filed. 
b.  Notice of Hearing. Within twenty-one (21) days following the filing with the Coachella Police Department of a contestant's timely appeal, the Coachella Police Department or its agent shall send a notice of hearing to the contestant via first class mail. The notice shall specify the date and time of the hearing, and the place where the hearing will take occur. An administrative hearing shall be held within ninety (90) calendar days following the receipt of a request for an administrative hearing, excluding time tolled pursuant to Section 40200 et seq. of the California Vehicle Code or this section. 
c.  Continuances. A contestant may, in writing, prior to twenty-four (24) hours before the scheduled administrative hearing time, request that the Coachella Police Department reschedule the administrative hearing. The Coachella Police Department shall grant one (1) continuance not to exceed twenty-one (21) calendar days in accordance with Section 40215(b) of the California Vehicle Code. 
d.  Administrative Hearing Procedures. 
(A)  Procedural Matters. 
(1)  Appearances. The officer issuing the citation shall not be required to appear at the hearing. The contestant shall appear at the hearing, unless a hearing by mail has been designated by the contestant in the appeal request form. If the contestant does not appear at the hearing, the appeal shall be decided by the hearing official based on the citation, the record of the administrative review, and any other relevant material in the record, taking into account the reasons specified by the contestant on the appeal request form. Appearances by minors shall be governed by the provisions of Section 40215(c)(2) of the California Vehicle Code. 
(2)  Hearing Officials. The hearing shall be conducted by a hearing official. 
(3)  Hearing Record. The hearing official shall write pertinent information into the record during the in-person hearing. The hearing record and any supporting documentation will remain with the case file at the city. If the contestant appeals the hearing official's decision to the court, the entire case file will be forwarded to the court. The hearing records for those cases not appealed to the court will be retained by the city for one year. 
(4)  Representation. The contestant may, in his or her discretion, be represented by an attorney in the appeal process, at the administrative hearing. Any such representation shall be at the sole and exclusive cost of the contestant. No contestant shall be entitled to representation at the expense of the city, or any other public agency, irrespective of indigence status. 
(B)  Conduct of the Administrative Hearing. 
(1)  Hearing Official Duties. At the time of the administrative hearing, the hearing official shall: (i) make a pre-hearing statement, briefly explaining the nature of the civil proceedings, the manner of conducting the hearing and the limits on the introduction of evidence, the process of rendering a decision, the effects of the decision in terms of collection remedies available to the Coachella Police Department, the right of the contestant to appeal to the court for a de novo hearing, and any other matters in the hearing official's discretion; (ii) read the citation into the record; (iii) administer an oath to the contestant and any prospective witnesses; (iv) record the name and address of the contestant; and (v) write the registered owner's name and address and the contestant's relationship to the registered owner (if applicable). 
(2)  Proof Requirements; Validity of Citation. The city bears the burden of proof, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the citation meets statutory requirements for validity. Where the citation, or copy thereof, contains all of the items specified in Section 40202(a) of the California Vehicle Code, the issuing agency shall not be required to produce any evidence other than the notice of the parking violation or copy thereof and information received from the department of motor vehicles identifying the registered owner of the vehicle. The documentation in proper form shall be prima facie evidence of the violation. The contestant may introduce relevant evidence relating to the validity of the citation in rebuttal. 
(3)  Proof Requirements; Contestant Defenses. The contestant bears the burden of proof, by the preponderance of the evidence, that although the citation is facially valid, a viable defense exists which would preclude the contestant's liability for the parking penalty, or that a viable defense exists which would limit the contestant's liability for late payment penalties. Nonreceipt of the notice of violation itself, if based on sufficient evidence, may constitute a defense to the late payment penalties based on nonpayment of the notice of violation, however, is not a defense to late response to the notice of delinquent parking violation. The defense of nonreceipt of the notice of violation is not available to the registered vehicle owner, where the person operating the vehicle at the time of the citation was not the registered vehicle owner. Clear proof of timely payment of the citation is a defense to late payment penalties. Defenses relating to the merits of the citation must be established by the contestant by sufficient evidence. Such defenses may include, but are not limited to: (i) signage matters (missing, obscured or defaced signs); (ii) impossibility of knowledge of the applicable parking restrictions (where the contestant demonstrates that it was impossible for him or her to become aware of the applicable parking restrictions); (iii) malfunctioning parking meters; (iv) recent loss of parking permit or placard; and (v) mechanical breakdown of the vehicle (where the vehicle was not illegally parked prior to the breakdown, the violation in fact results from the breakdown and reasonable steps were taken to remove the vehicle prior to the occurrence of the violation). Personal reasons, inconveniences, lack of funds, forgetfulness, failure to observe signs, lack of available parking elsewhere, lack of knowledge of the applicable restrictions, and similar or related matters are not under any circumstances a defense to liability for the parking penalties. Failure to list a defense in the statement of reasons contained in the contestant's appeal request precludes the contestant from utilizing that defense at the time of the appeal hearing. 
(4)  Evidence. The rules of evidence for civil court procedures shall not apply in administrative hearings conducted pursuant to this procedure. Evidence relevant to the issues raised by the contestant's statement of reasons, and to the validity of the citation itself under Section 40202 of the California Vehicle Code, will be received. Weight and reliability of the evidence provided will be determined by of the hearing officer. Other than the citation and the DMV information, the hearing official shall receive into the record the reviewing official's record from the administrative review, together with relevant testimony, documentation and other material which is submitted by either party. Weight and reliability determinations, shall be made by the hearing official. The hearing official may, but is not required to, admit evidence in the form of declarations of witnesses, submitted by the contestant. Such declarations shall not be admitted unless presented in the form required for declarations under California Section 2015.5 of the California Code of Civil Procedure, and shall contain the statements required by Sections 2015.5(a) and 2015.5(b) of the California Code of Civil Procedure. 
(5)  Witnesses. The contestant may present witness testimony as evidence at the discretion of the hearing official. The hearing official, after conducting the initial procedures of the hearing, may exclude witnesses until their turn to testify. The hearing official may limit the number of witnesses to prevent repetitive testimony in the interest of efficiency The hearing official may conduct such cross-examination of the contestant or any witness presented at his or her discretion. 
(C)  Determination of Appeal. The hearing official shall make a written decision on liability for the parking penalties based on the testimony and other evidence in the record. The hearing official shall enter the disposition and the total amount of parking penalties on the hearing record. The decision, including the rationale thereof, shall be placed in written form. Although the hearing official's decision may be personally delivered to the contestant following the completion of the hearing, the written decision shall be sent to the contestant, to the address listed on the contestant's appeal form, via first class mail. Following a determination by the hearing official that a person has committed the violation, the hearing official may in his or her discretion, may allow for deferred payment of the parking penalty, if the person provides evidence satisfactory to the hearing official, of an inability to pay the parking penalty in full. The hearing official's decision shall be the final decision of the city. The decision shall set forth the time limits for the contestant to file for judicial review in the court, and a notice that if no such review is sought within the applicable time limitations, the decision shall be final for all purposes. 
5.  Judicial Review. Within thirty (30) days after the mailing or personal delivery of the final decision described in Section 10.08.040(J)(4)(d)(C), the contestant may seek review by filing an appeal with the court. Such review will be conducted in accordance with the provisions of Section 40230 of the California Vehicle Code. 
6.  Copies of Citations. Upon request by mail or in person, the Coachella Police Department will provide a copy of a citation to any person who has received a notice of delinquent parking violation, or to his or her agent. The copy will be provided within fifteen (15) days of the request, upon payment of the fee established by the Coachella Police Department. The copy can be produced by any reasonable means available to the Coachella Police Department, including printed representation of computer information. 
(Ord. No. 1082, § 2, 1-13-16) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1082, § 2, adopted Jan. 13, 2016, amended § 10.08.040 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 10.08.040, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from prior code, § 23-27; Ord. 869, §§ 1, 2, adopted in 2002; Ord. 873, §§ 1, 2, adopted in 2002; and Ord. 892, §§ 18, 19, adopted in 2003.  
10.08.045 - Parking of commercial vehicles and equipment—Restricted. 
A.  The parking of commercial trucks of more than twenty-two (22) feet in length or more than three tons gross weight or any vehicle containing hazardous materials is prohibited at any time on streets in residential and commercial zones of the city, except as otherwise permitted by this code. 
B.  For the purposes of this section, "hazardous materials" are as defined by the United States Department of Transportation appearing in 49 Code of Federal Regulations under the heading "Hazardous Materials Transportation." 
C.  For the proper administration of this section, notices prohibiting such parking restrictions shall be posted at all major public highway and street entrances into the city. 
D.  For the purposes of this section, the phrase "commercial vehicle" has the meaning ascribed to it in Section 10.08.040 of this code. 
E.  The provisions of this section shall not apply to vehicles owned or operated by the city or its contractors, passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission, moving vans, or any vehicle owned by a public entity or public utility while necessary in construction, installation, or repair of any public utility, vehicles servicing persons or firms located within the area, and recreation vehicles. 
F.  1.  Upon written application of the owner of a truck tractor or other commercial vehicle or equipment, a parking permit may be issued to the owner which shall authorize the parking of such tractor or other commercial vehicle or equipment on the following public streets: 
a.  Harrison Street from the south side of Avenue 48 to its terminus immediately north of Highway I-10; 
b.  The north side of Avenue 54 between Highway 111 and Tyler Street; 
c.  The east side of Highway 111 between the south side of Avenue 50 and the north side of Avenue 52; 
d.  The City Yard on Avenue 52, with an appropriate waiver of liability executed by the permittee in the city's behalf. 
2.  Applications for permits shall be in writing and shall provide factual information, including, but not limited to, the following: the name of the owner of the subject vehicle; the residence address in the city of the owner as shown by the Department of Motor Vehicles registration of such vehicle; a description of the truck tractor or other commercial vehicle or equipment for which the permit is requested, including the make, model year, California license number, and the number, if any, assigned to such vehicle by any state or federal agency regulating or authorizing the operation of such vehicle. 
3.  a.  Permits issued hereunder shall contain the date of issuance, the expiration date, and an identifying number for use in determining whether the vehicle or equipment is parked in conformity with this section. Parking permits shall be displayed in the lower left corner of the truck's windshield or on the lower left corner of the front end of the commercial equipment if it lacks a windshield. Such permit shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of issuance. In the event of a change of residence by the owner or a change of the vehicle for which the permit was issued, the owner shall obtain an amended permit, which shall be valid for the remainder of the initial term. 
b.  Each eligible person may obtain permits for one truck tractor and up to four pieces of commercial equipment. 
c.  Permits shall be available only for sixty (60) days following the effective date of this chapter, and they shall be valid for one year from that date. Permits may be renewed one time only. No permit shall be valid more than two years after the effective date of this chapter. 
d.  In no event shall any person be allowed to obtain more permits in the second year than he or she had the previous year. 
e.  Only persons who can prove, to the satisfaction of the city manager or his or her designee, actual residence in the city of Coachella shall be eligible for parking permits under this section. 
4.  Permits for such parking shall be issued in such form as may be determined by the city manager, at a cost to be determined by the city manager or his or her designee. 
G.  The parking of any truck tractor, trailer, or other commercial vehicle or commercial equipment on any street within fifty (50) feet of a street intersection is prohibited under all circumstances. 
H.  No truck tractor, trailer, or other commercial vehicle or equipment shall be left parked or standing in substantially the same place for more than seventy-two (72) hours. 
I.  A violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for a period not to exceed one year. 
(Ord. 907 § 1, 2004)  
10.08.050 - Private parking facilities. 
A.  Privately Owned and Maintained Facilities—Generally. Pursuant to the authority of Section 21107.8 of the California Vehicle Code, the city council finds and declares that there now exists within the city privately owned and maintained off-street parking facilities as described in subsection B of this section that are generally held open for use of the public for purposes of vehicular parking. California Vehicle Code Sections 22350, 23103, and 23109 and the provisions of Division 16.5 (commencing with Section 38000) shall apply to such facilities provided the owner or operator has caused to be posted in a conspicuous place at each entrance to that off-street parking facility a notice not less than seventeen (17) by twenty-two (22) inches in size with lettering not less than one inch in height, to the effect that the off-street parking facility is subject to public traffic regulations and control. 
B.  Privately Owned and Maintained Facilities—Designated. Those privately owned and maintained off-street parking facilities generally held open for use of the public for purposes of vehicular parking are as follows: 
1.  Privately owned and maintained off-street parking facility at 49765 Harrison Street, Coachella, California. 
(Ord. 863 § 2, 2001: prior code § 23-4)  
10.08.060 - Working on parked vehicles—Penalties for violations. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to repair, dismantle, disassemble or perform any other work upon any vehicle when such vehicle is parked upon any state-operated parking lot or upon any public street or thoroughfare or other public property within the city except to perform emergency repairs. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to repair, dismantle, disassemble or perform any other work upon any vehicle when such vehicle is parked upon privately owned parking lot, where such repairs are specifically prohibited by a notice posted by the owner of the property, except to perform emergency repairs. 
"Repairs," as used in this chapter, means to restore to good condition by replacing parts or putting together something broken. 
"Posting," as used in this chapter, means to affix to a usual place for public notices; to publish or announce by or as if by a public notice; to forbid to trespassers by putting up a notice. 
C.  Any person who shall be convicted of a violation of this section shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be punished by a fine not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00) for a first violation; a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a second violation of this same section within one year; and a fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each additional violation of this section within one year. 
(Prior code § 23-28)  
10.08.070 - No-parking zones. 
It shall be a misdemeanor punishable as established by the adopted schedule of parking penalties as referenced in Section 10.08.040(J) to park or stand any motor vehicle on the following streets or parts of streets or in the following places: 
1.  Cesar Chavez Street (State Highway 86) east side, from the north curb line of Avenue 50 to the south curb line of the junction of Grapefruit Boulevard (State Highway 111). 
2.  Highway 86, east side from Avenue 50 to Avenue 49. 
3.  Dillon Road (east and west side) from Harrison Place to Avenue 44. 
(Prior code § 23-29) 
(Ord. No. 1121, § 1, 4-25-18)  
Chapter 10.12 - TRANSPORTATION OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS 
Sections: 
 
10.12.010 - Vehicles transporting hazardous materials. 
A.  A vehicle transporting a hazardous material or substance as identified in Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations must be attended at all times by its driver or a qualified representative of the motor carrier that operates it, and shall not be parked on any highway, highway shoulder, street, alley, public way or public place, or within five feet of the traveled portion thereof, within a residential zone, or within one thousand (1,000) feet of any school or within three hundred (300) feet of any bridge or tunnel, except for brief periods when mechanical or equipment failure or disablement or malfunction of the vehicle, or the necessities of operation require the vehicle to be parked and make it impractical to park the vehicle in any other place. 
B.  Repair, maintenance, refuse, utility, termite and pesticide vehicles, fuel delivery vehicles, and vehicles delivering life support and health commodities, while servicing residential areas or schools, are exempt from the provisions of subsection A of this section. Additionally, such exempt vehicles need not be attended while the drivers are performing duties that are normally and necessarily performed by the operator of the vehicle or the provider of the service. 
C.  For purposes of this section: 
1.  A motor vehicle is attended when the person in charge of the vehicle is on the vehicle, awake and not in a sleeper berth, or is within one hundred (100) feet of the vehicle and has it within his unobstructed field of view. 
2.  A qualified representative of a motor carrier is a person who: 
a.  Has been designated by the carrier to attend the vehicle; 
b.  Is aware of the nature of the hazardous material or substance contained in the vehicle he or she attends; 
c.  Has been instructed on the procedures he or she must follow in emergencies concerning hazardous materials or substances; and 
d.  Is authorized to move the vehicle and has the means and ability to do so. 
D.  The rules of this section do not relieve a driver from any obligation imposed by federal, state, or local laws relating to the transportation of hazardous materials or explosives, motor carrier safety regulations, or the placement of warning signs or devices when a motor vehicle is stopped on a public street or highway. 
(Prior code § 23-30)  
10.12.020 - Penalty for violations. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine in a sum not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Prior code § 23-31)  
Chapter 10.16 - TERMINAL ACCESS FOR INTERSTATE TRUCKS 
Sections: 
 
10.16.010 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases shall have the meanings set forth, and if any word or phrase used in this chapter is not defined in this section, it shall have the meanings set forth in the California Vehicle Code; provided, that if any such word or phrase is not defined in the Vehicle Code, it shall have the meaning attributed to it in ordinary usage: 
"Caltrans" means the state of California Department of Transportation or its successor agency. 
"Interstate truck" means a truck tractor and semitrailer or truck tractor, semitrailer and trailer with unlimited length as regulated by the Vehicle Code. 
"Terminal" means any facility at which freight is consolidated to be shipped or where full load consignments may be loaded and off loaded or at which the vehicles are regularly maintained, stored or manufactured. 
"Transportation engineer" means the transportation engineer of the city or his or her authorized representative. 
(Prior code § 23-32)  
10.16.020 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish procedures for terminal designation and truck route designated to terminals for interstate trucks operating on a federally designated highway system and to promote the general health, safety and welfare of the public. 
(Prior code § 23-33)  
10.16.030 - Application. 
A.  Any interested person requiring terminal access for interstate trucks from the federally designated highway system shall submit an application, on a form as provided by the city, together with such information as may be required by the transportation engineer and appropriate fees to the city. 
B.  Upon receipt of the application, the transportation engineer will cause an investigation to be made to ascertain whether or not the proposed terminal facility meets the requirements for an interstate truck terminal. Upon his approval of that designation, he will then determine the capability of the route requested and alternate routes, whether requested or not. Determination of route capability will include, without limitation, a review of adequate turning radius and lane widths of ramps, intersections and highways and general traffic conditions such as sight distance, speed and traffic volumes. No access off a federally designated highway system will be approved without the approval of Caltrans. 
C.  Should the requested route pass through the city to a terminal located in another jurisdiction, the applicant shall comply with that jurisdiction's application process. Coordination of the approval of the route through the city will be the responsibility of the entity which controls the terminal's land use. Costs for trailblazer signs shall be as provided in Section 10.16.040. 
(Prior code § 23-34)  
10.16.040 - Fees and costs. 
A.  The applicant shall pay a nonrefundable application fee, as established by the city by resolution, sufficient to pay the cost of the review of the terminal designation and the review of the route and alternate route. 
B.  Upon the approval of the terminal designation and route by the city and by Caltrans the applicant shall deposit with the city sufficient funds as estimated by the transportation engineer to pay for the purpose and installation of terminal trailblazer signs. Trailblazer signs will be required at every decision point in the city on route to the terminal. Upon completion of the installation of the signs, the actual cost shall be computed and any difference between the actual and the estimated cost shall be billed or refunded to the applicant, whichever the case may be. No terminal or route may be used until such signs as may be required are in place. Costs for trailblazer signs may be proportioned in accordance with the procedures in this section. 
(Prior code § 23-35)  
10.16.050 - Retrofitting. 
A.  If all feasible routes to a requested terminal are found unsatisfactory by the transportation engineer, the applicant may request retrofitting the deficiencies. All costs of engineering, construction and inspection will be the responsibility of the applicant. Except when the retrofitting of deficiencies is within the jurisdiction of Caltrans, the actual construction will be done by the city or by a contractor acceptable to it. 
B.  When the work is to be done by the city, the applicant shall deposit with the city the estimated cost of retrofitting. Adjustments between the estimated and actual cost shall be made after completion of the work and any difference between the actual and the estimated cost shall be billed or refunded to the applicant as the case may be. When the work is done by the applicant, the applicant may file with the transportation engineer, on a form satisfactory to the transportation engineer, a statement detailing the actual costs of the retrofitting. 
C.  If at any time within five years from the date of completion of the retrofitting by the applicant, should any applicant seek terminal approval which would use the route upon which such retrofitting was accomplished, any such applicant's fee may include that applicant's proportionate share of the retrofitting, as determined by the transportation engineer, which fee shall be disbursed by the city of to the applicant who paid for the retrofitting as well as to any applicant who contributed to the cost of retrofitting under this subsection. Nothing in this chapter shall require the payment of a proportionate fee if the applicant doing the work failed to file the report with the transportation engineer required by subsection B of this section. 
(Prior code § 23-36)  
10.16.060 - Revocation of route. 
The transportation engineer may revoke any approved terminal or route if the terminal or route becomes a traffic hazard for vehicular traffic. A safety hazard includes the inability of interstate trucks to negotiate the route or if such vehicles cause unsafe driving conditions for other vehicular traffic or pedestrians. 
(Prior code § 23-37)  
10.16.070 - Appeal process. 
A.  If the transportation engineer denies terminal designation, route feasibility or revokes a previously approved terminal or route, the applicant/terminal owner, within ten (10) days following the date of receipt of the decision of the transportation engineer, may appeal such decision to the city council in writing. An appeal shall be made on a form prescribed by the department of public works and shall be filed with the city clerk. The appeal shall state specifically wherein there was an error or abuse of discretion by the transportation engineer or wherein its decision is not supported by the evidence in the record. Within five days of the filing of an appeal, the transportation engineer shall transmit to the city clerk the terminal application, the sketches of the revoked route and all other data filed therewith, the report of the transportation engineer, the finding of the transportation engineer, and his or her decision on the application. 
B.  The city clerk shall make copies of the data provided by the transportation engineer available to the applicant and to the appellant (if the applicant is not the appellant) for inspection and may give notice to any other interested party who requested notice of the time when the appeal will be considered by the city council. 
C.  If Caltrans and not the transportation engineer denies or revokes terminal access from federally designated highways, no appeal may be made to the city council, but must be made to Caltrans as may be permitted by Caltrans. 
(Prior code § 23-38)  
Chapter 10.20 - ABANDONED VEHICLES[1] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1054, § 2, adopted Sep. 11, 2013, amended ch. 10.20 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 10.20 pertained to similar subject matter, consisted of §§ 10.20.010—10.20.140, and derived from prior code §§ 14-21—14-34. 
 
10.20.010 - Findings of fact. 
In addition to and in accordance with the determination made and the authority granted by the state under Section 22660 of the Vehicle Code to remove abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof as public nuisances, the city council makes the following findings and declarations: 
The accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof on (1) private property; or (2) public property; where the vehicle or vehicles can be viewed from or are parked on the public street, is found to create a condition tending to reduce the value of private property, to promote blight and deterioration, to invite plundering, to create fire hazards to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, to create a harborage for rodents and insects and to be injurious to the health, safety and general welfare. Therefore, the presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or parts thereof, on (1) private property; or (2) public property; where the vehicle or vehicles can be viewed from or are parked on any public street, highways, except as expressly permitted in this title, is declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1054, § 2, 9-11-13)  
10.20.020 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, including, but not limited to, shall apply in this chapter: 
1.  "Abandoned Vehicle" means any vehicle left on any highway, public property, or private property in such inoperable or neglected condition that the owner's intent to relinquish all further rights or interest in it may be reasonably concluded. In reaching a reasonable conclusion one must consider the amount of time the vehicle has not been moved, its condition, statements from the owner and witnesses. 
2.  "Dismantled vehicle" mean any vehicle which is partially or wholly disassembled. 
3.  "Highway" means a way or place of whatever nature publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. "Highway" includes "street." 
4.  "Inoperative vehicle" means any motor vehicle from which the engine, wheels, tires or other essential parts have been damaged or removed, or which the engine, wheels, tires, or other essential parts have been altered, damaged or allowed to deteriorate so that the vehicle cannot and/or is incapable of being driven under its own power or rendering the vehicle unsafe to operate on a highway. A vehicle which lacks inflated tires, a working engine, transmission, differential or other essential parts, or if left unattended on jacks, blocks, or elevated in any other way which constitutes a threat to the public health, safety or general welfare, shall be considered an inoperative vehicle for purposes of this chapter. 
5.  "Owner of the land" means the owner of the land on which the vehicle, or parts thereof, is located, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll. 
6.  "Owner of the vehicle" means the last registered owner and legal owner of record. 
7.  "Public nuisance vehicle" means any vehicle that is abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or any inoperative parts thereof that is on public or private property, including highways, and that creates a condition tending to reduce the value of private property, promotes blight and deterioration, invites plundering, creates fire hazards, constitutes an attractive nuisance endangering the health and safety of the general public, harbors rodents, insects and other vermin, or jeopardizes, health, safety and general welfare. 
8.  "Public property" includes "highway" and/or any property owned by the government or one of its agencies, divisions, or entities, to include parks, streets, sidewalks and other property regularly used by the general public. 
9.  "Vehicle" means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved, or drawn upon a highway, except a device moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
10.  "Wrecked vehicle" means any vehicle that is damaged to such an extent that it cannot be operated upon the highway. A vehicle which has been wrecked in a traffic accident and which has been removed from the roadway to a lawful storage facility, but which has not been claimed by its owner, will not be considered an abandoned vehicle for the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1054, § 2, 9-11-13)  
10.20.030 - Exemptions. 
This chapter shall not apply to: 
1.  A vehicle, or parts thereof, which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property; 
2.  A vehicle, or parts thereof, which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with a business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, or a junk yard or when such storage or parking is necessary to the operation of a lawfully conducted business or commercial enterprise; or 
3.  A vehicle, or parts thereof, which is located on private property where the vehicle cannot be viewed from any public street facing property. 
Nothing in this section shall authorize the maintenance of a public or private nuisance as defined under provisions of law other than Chapter 10 (commencing with Section 22650) of Division 11 of the Vehicle Code and this title. 
(Ord. No. 1054, § 2, 9-11-13)  
10.20.040 - Chapter to supplement other regulations. 
This chapter is not the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles within the city. It shall supplement and be in addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes, and ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by the city, the state, or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 1054, § 2, 9-11-13)  
10.20.050 - Administration. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the city manager or designee. In the enforcement of this chapter the city manager or designee may enter upon private or public property to examine a vehicle or parts thereof, or obtain information as to the identity of a vehicle and to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1054, § 2, 9-11-13)  
10.20.060 - Contract. 
When the city council has contracted with or granted a franchise to any person or persons, such person or persons shall be authorized to enter upon private property or public property to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1054, § 2, 9-11-13)  
10.20.070 - Administrative costs. 
The city council shall from time to time determine and fix an amount to be assessed as administrative costs excluding the actual cost of removal of any vehicle or parts thereof under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1054, § 2, 9-11-13)  
10.20.080 - Abatement authorization. 
Upon discovering the existence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle, or parts thereof, on private property or public property within the city, the city manager or designee shall have the authority to cause the abatement and removal thereof in accordance with the procedure prescribed in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1054, § 2, 9-11-13)  
10.20.090 - Notice to owner of land and owner of vehicle. 
A ten-day notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle, or parts thereof, as a public nuisance shall be mailed by registered mail to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle; unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. The notices of intention shall be in substantially the following forms: 
NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE AN ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED, OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE OR PARTS THEREOF AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE 
(Name and address of owner of the land) 
As owner shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the land located at (address) , you are hereby notified that the undersigned pursuant to (section of ordinance or municipal code) has determined that there exists upon said land (or parts of an) abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle registered to ________, license number ________ which constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of (ordinance or municipal code chapter number) . 
You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) within 10 days from the date of mailing of this notice, and upon your failure to do so the same will be abated and removed by the City and the costs thereof, together with administrative costs, assessed to you as owner of the land on which said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) is located. 
As owner of the land on which said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) is located, you are hereby notified that you may, within 10 days after the mailing of this notice of intention, request a public hearing and if such a request is not received by the (hearing body or officer) within such 10-day period, the City Manager shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) as a public nuisance and assess the costs as aforesaid without a public hearing. You may submit a sworn written statement within such 10-day period denying responsibility for the presence of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) on said land, with your reasons for denial, and such statement shall be construed as a request for hearing at which your presence is not required. You may appear in person at any hearing requested by you or the owner of the vehicle or, in lieu thereof, may present a sworn written statement as aforesaid in time for consideration at such hearing. 
      Notice Mailed ________ 
      (date) 
      s/ ___________ 
      (City Manager) 
NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE AN ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE OR PARTS THEREOF AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE 
(Name and address of last registered and/or legal owner or record of vehicle—notice should be given to both if different) 
As last registered (and/or legal) owner of record of (description of vehicle — make, model, license, etc.) , you are hereby notified that the undersigned pursuant to (section of ordinance or municipal code) has determined that said vehicle (or parts of a vehicle) exists as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle at (describe location on public or private property) and constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of (ordinance or municipal code chapter number) . 
You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) within 10 days from the date of mailing of this notice. 
As registered (and/or legal) owner of record of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle), you are hereby notified that you may, within 10 days after the mailing of this notice of intention, request a public hearing and if such a request is not received by the (hearing body or officer) within such 10-day period, the City Manager shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) without a hearing. 
      Notice Mailed ________ 
      (date) 
      s/___________ 
      (City Manager) 
The notices set forth herein shall not be required in the event the property owner and the owner of the vehicle have signed a release authorizing removal and waive further interest in the vehicle or parts thereof. In addition, said notices of intention are not required for removal of the vehicle or part thereof which is inoperable due to the absence of a motor, transmission, or wheels, and incapable of being towed, is valued less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) by a person specified in Section 22855 of the Vehicle Code, and is determined by the city to be a public nuisance presenting an immediate threat to the public health or safety, provided that the property owner has signed a release authorizing removal and waiving further interest or part thereof. 
The vehicle is located upon a parcel that is either zoned for agricultural use or is not improved with a residential structure containing one or more dwelling units. 
If vehicle is removed pursuant to subdivision (c) of California Vehicle Code Section 22661, prior to the final disposition, the registered or legal owner shall be notified of the intent to dispose of the vehicle or part thereof. If the vehicle or part thereof is not claimed and removed from the scrapyard, automobile dismantler's yard or public disposal area within twelve (12) days after the notice to dispose of vehicle is mailed, final disposition may proceed. 
(Ord. No. 1054, § 2, 9-11-13)  
10.20.100 - Hearing. 
Upon request by the owner of the vehicle or owner of the land on which the vehicle is located if received by the city manager within ten (10) days after the mailing of the notices of intention to abate and remove, a hearing shall be held by the city council on the question of abatement and removal of the vehicle or parts thereof as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, and the assessment of the administrative costs and the cost of removal of the vehicle or parts thereof against the property on which it is located. 
If the owner of the land on which the vehicle is located submits a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his or her land within such ten-day period, the statement shall be construed as a request for a hearing which does not require his or her presence. Notice of the hearing shall be mailed, by registered mail, at least ten (10) days before the hearing to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. If such a request for hearing is not received within ten (10) days after mailing of the notices of intention to abate and remove, the city shall have the authority to abate and remove the vehicle or parts thereof as a public nuisance without holding a public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 1054, § 2, 9-11-13)  
10.20.110 - Hearing procedure before council. 
All hearings under this chapter shall be held before the city council which shall hear all facts and testimony it deems pertinent. The facts and testimony may include testimony on the condition of the vehicle or parts thereof and the circumstances concerning its location on the said private property or public property. The city council shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. The owner of the land may appear in person at the hearing or present a sworn written statement in time for consideration at the hearing, and deny responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with his or her reasons for such denial. 
The city council may impose such conditions and take such other action as it deems appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the purpose of this chapter. It may delay the time for removal of the vehicle or parts thereof if, in its opinion, the circumstances justify it. At the conclusion of the public hearing, the city council may find that a vehicle or parts thereof have been abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or that a vehicle is inoperative on private or public property and order the same removed from the property as a public nuisance and disposed of as provided in this chapter and determine the administrative costs and the cost of removal to be charged against the owner of the land. The administrative costs shall include, but not be limited to, a sharing cost of fifty dollars ($50.00) per hearing. The order requiring removal shall include a description of the vehicle or parts thereof and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle, if available at the site. 
If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed on the land without the consent of the owner of the land and that he or she has not subsequently acquiesced in its presence, the city council shall not assess the costs of administration or removal of the vehicle against the property upon which the vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect such costs from such owner of the land. 
If the owner of the land submits a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his or her land but does not appear, or if an interested party makes a written presentation to the city council but does not appear, he or she shall be notified in writing of the decision. 
(Ord. No. 1054, § 2, 9-11-13)  
10.20.120 - Disposal of vehicle. 
Five days after adoption of the order declaring the vehicle or parts thereof to be a public nuisance, five days from the date of mailing of the notice of decision if said notice is required by Section 10.24.110, or fifteen (15) days after such action of the governing body authorizing removal following an appeal, the vehicle or parts thereof may be disposed of by removal to a scrap yard or automobile dismantler's yard. After a vehicle has been removed, it shall not thereafter be reconstructed or made operable unless it is a vehicle which qualifies for either horseless carriage license plates or historical vehicle license plates, pursuant to Section 5004 of the Vehicle Code, in which case the vehicle may be reconstructed or made operable. This section does not apply to those vehicles exempt under Section 22660 of the Vehicle Code of the state. 
(Ord. No. 1054, § 2, 9-11-13)  
10.20.130 - Notice to the Department of Motor Vehicles. 
Within five days after the removal of the vehicle or parts thereof, notice shall be given to the Department of Motor Vehicles either identifying the vehicle or parts thereof removed. At the same time there shall be transmitted to the Department of Motor Vehicles any evidence of registration available, including but not limited to the registration card, certificates of ownership, or license plates. 
(Ord. No. 1054, § 2, 9-11-13)  
10.20.140 - Assessment of costs. 
If the administrative costs and the cost of removal which are charged against the owner of a parcel of land pursuant to Section 10.20.110 are not paid within thirty (30) days of the date of the order, or the final disposition of an appeal therefrom, such costs shall be assessed against the parcel of land pursuant to Section 38773.5 for cities of the Government Code and shall be transmitted to the tax collector for collection. The assessment shall have the same priority as other city taxes. 
(Ord. No. 1054, § 2, 9-11-13)  
10.20.150 - Disposition of low-valued vehicles. 
Prior to final disposition under Section 22662 of a low-valued vehicle or part thereof as defined in Section 10.20.090 for which evidence of registration was recovered pursuant to Section 10.20.130, the city shall provide notice to the registered and legal owner of intent to dispose of the vehicle or part, and if the vehicle or part is not claimed and removed within twelve (12) days after the notice is mailed, a location specified in Section 22622 of the Vehicle Code, final disposition may proceed. The city shall not be liable for damage caused to the vehicle or part thereof by removal pursuant to this section. This section applies only to inoperable vehicles upon a parcel that is: 
1.  Zoned for agricultural use; or 
2.  Not imposed with a residential structure containing one or more dwelling units. 
(Ord. No. 1054, § 2, 9-11-13)  
10.20.160 - Act of abandonment. 
It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to abandon, park, store or leave or permit the abandonment, parking, storing or leaving of any licensed or unlicensed vehicle or parts thereof which is abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or in an inoperative condition upon any private property or public property, including highways, within the city for a period in excess of seventy-two (72) or more consecutive hours unless such vehicle or parts thereof is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not plainly visible from the street or other public or private property, or unless such vehicle is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler or licensed vehicle dealer or a junk yard. 
Upon discovering the existence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle, or parts thereof, on private or public property, a seventy-two-hour notice of intention to abate shall be posted on the vehicle. A follow up inspection shall be conducted within seventy-two (72) hours to verify if such vehicle has been voluntarily abated. Upon determining that such vehicle still exists on the property and a period of seventy-two (72) or more consecutive hours has elapsed, a ten-day notice of intention to abate and remove such vehicle shall be mailed in accordance with section 10.20.090 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1054, § 2, 9-11-13)  
10.20.170 - Refusal to abate. 
It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to fail or refuse to remove an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or part thereof, or refuse to abate such nuisance when ordered to do so in accordance with the abatement provisions of this chapter or state law, where such state law is applicable. 
(Ord. No. 1054, § 2, 9-11-13)  
Chapter 10.24 - BICYCLES 
Sections: 
 
10.24.010 - Title. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the "Bicycle Licensing Ordinance." 
(Prior code § 6-1)  
10.24.020 - Bicycle defined. 
"Bicycle" means any device upon which a person may ride, which is propelled by human power through a system of belts, chains, or gears having either two or three wheels (one of which is at least twenty (20) inches in diameter) or having a frame size of at least fourteen (14) inches, or having four or more wheels. 
(Prior code § 6-2)  
10.24.030 - License and registration requirements. 
A.  The chief of police, or the chiefs designee, is authorized and directed, upon application and payment of the license fee, to issue a bicycle registration form and licensing indicia provided by the California Department of Motor Vehicles, all in accordance with the requirements of Division 16.7, Registration and Licensing of Bicycles, Vehicle Code, Sections 39000 et seq. Licenses must be obtained for: 
1.  Each bicycle first sold as a new bicycle in the State of California after September 20, 1974; 
2.  Any bicycle operated by a resident of the city within the jurisdiction of the city; and 
3.  Any bicycle first sold as a new bicycle on or after September 20, 1974, operated on any street, road, highway, or public property within the jurisdiction of the city, if such bicycle has not been previously licensed and does not bear proof of licensing indicia or registration previously issued in accordance with Division 16.7, Vehicle Code. 
B.  Any bicycle not subject to this chapter may be licensed upon request of the owner. 
C.  Bicycle licenses shall be renewed every third year, commencing with January 1, 1979. Renewal of a bicycle license shall be indicated by a supplementary adhesive device affixed parallel to and above or below the indicia with the expiration date shown. The period of renewal shall be accomplished during the month of January of the renewal year. 
D.  It is unlawful for any person to tamper with, destroy, mutilate, or alter any license indicia or registration form, or to remove, alter, or mutilate the serial number, or the identifying marks of a licensing agency's identifying symbol, or any bicycle frame licensed under the provisions of this chapter and as stipulated in Division 16.7, Vehicle Code. 
E.  Retailers within the city, upon the approval of the chief of police or the chiefs designee, may voluntarily supplement the police department's bicycle licensing activities. Any retailer who wishes to participate must agree to follow police department procedures and proceed as follows: 
1.  Offer purchasers of bicycles the opportunity to license their bicycles at the time of purchase; 
2.  Assist bicycle purchasers in the completion of license registration forms; 
3.  Collect bicycle license fees; 
4.  Issue bicycle licenses and renewals; 
5.  Maintain records of licenses issued and fees collected; 
6.  Remit fees and records in a timely fashion to the police department; and 
7.  In all things pertaining to the licensing of bicycles, submit to the direction of the chief of police, or the chiefs designee. 
F.  The chief of police, or the chiefs designee, shall provide all registration forms, licenses, and instructions as required to support the retailers as they perform bicycle licensing services. 
G.  The chief of police, or the chiefs designee, may at any time compel a retailer to surrender any and all registration forms, fees, and records in possession of the retailer. 
H.  The retailer shall at any time allow the city treasurer to inspect all records of bicycle licenses issued and license fees collected, and shall be financially responsible for the safekeeping of such license and fees as come into the possession of the retailer. 
I.  For purposes of this chapter, the chiefs designee may be a private contractor hired by the city council upon recommendation of the chief of police. 
(Prior code § 6-3)  
10.24.040 - License fees. 
License fees shall be established by resolution of the city council and shall not exceed the amounts provided in Vehicle Code Section 39004. Licensing fees collected in accordance with this chapter shall be retained for use in support of only those reasons enumerated in Vehicle Code Section 39004. 
(Prior code § 6-4)  
10.24.050 - Additional requirements. 
In addition to the standard information and requirements of Vehicle Code Section 39005, the following will be accomplished: 
A.  In addition to the information required on Form 193 (California Bicycle License Application), the following information will be required in the "miscellaneous information" block: 
1.  Purchase price of the bicycle; 
2.  Retailer's name and address whom the bicycle was purchased; and 
3.  Date of birth of the licensee. 
B.  A change of address of the licensee will be accomplished on the original application form when requested. 
C.  The information required for registration of a new bicycle will be verified from the retailer's sales receipt. 
(Prior code § 6-5)  
10.24.060 - Retail sales—Information required. 
A.  In addition to normal business information, retailers within the city must provide the following information upon a sales receipt to purchasers of bicycles: 
1.  Name and address of the retailer; 
2.  The year and make of the bicycle; 
3.  The serial number of the bicycle; and 
4.  The name and address of the purchaser; 
B.  Retailers within the city must comply with the following: 
1.  All bicycles sold by retailers within the city must be permanently stamped or cast with serial numbers in those places required by Vehicle Code, Section 39007, and such retailers are prohibited from selling any bicycle that does not conform with this provision. 
2.  All bicycle retailers must acquire a business license in accordance with licensing provisions of this code. Future issuance of business licenses are to be conditioned upon the retailer's promise to abide by and perform in concert with this chapter. 
(Prior code § 6-6)  
10.24.070 - Recordation of transfer. 
A.  Whenever any person sells or otherwise disposes of a bicycle, he shall endorse upon the registration certificate previously issued for such bicycle a written transfer of same, giving full information required in the "transfer of ownership" block and shall deliver the registration certificate, so endorsed, to the police department within ten (10) days. 
B.  Any person who purchases or otherwise acquires possession of a bicycle shall within ten (10) days of taking possession apply for the transfer of license to his or her own name. 
(Prior code § 6-7)  
10.24.080 - Notification of police department—Required when. 
A.  Any owner of a bicycle licensed pursuant to this chapter who changes his or her address shall within ten (10) days notify the police department. 
B.  In the event that any bicycle license indicia or registration form issued pursuant to this chapter is lost, stolen or mutilated, the licensee of such bicycle shall immediately notify the police department and within ten (10) days the licensee shall apply for a duplicate license; the appropriate fee shall be paid upon receipt of the duplicate license. 
(Prior code § 6-8)  
10.24.090 - Existing licenses. 
Bicycle licenses which have been issued pursuant to previous city ordinance shall remain valid until their assigned expiration dates, but in no case any later than three years after passage of this chapter except that an owner of a previously registered bicycle may apply for license reissue, providing the requirements of this chapter are met. The appropriate fee for relicensing will be paid. 
(Prior code § 6-9)  
10.24.100 - Riding, parking on walkways. 
No person shall ride or park any bicycle in the city on or along any public sidewalk or pathway usually reserved for and used by pedestrian traffic. This section shall not apply to children under thirteen (13) years of age. 
(Prior code § 6-10)  
10.24.110 - Carrying passengers. 
No person operating any bicycle in the city shall carry any passenger on said bicycle. 
(Prior code § 6-11)  
10.24.120 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute an infraction and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as provided in Section 1.08.010 of this code in conformance with Vehicle Code Section 39011; provided, however, that if any person under the age of eighteen (18) years violates any provision of this chapter, he or she, may consent that in lieu of having a criminal complaint filed against him, the chief of police, or the chiefs designee, may impound his bicycle for a period not to exceed five days. 
(Prior code § 6-12)  
Title 12 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES  
Chapter 12.04 - STREET EXCAVATIONS AND OBSTRUCTIONS 
 
12.04.010 - Legislative purpose. 
The city council finds that excavations and obstructions have caused damage and dangerous conditions to the streets in the city. The damage and dangerous conditions to the streets is a detriment to the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city. The city council declares that this chapter is adopted to prohibit excavation and obstructions on or about city streets which cause, or tend to cause, damage or dangerous conditions to the streets in the city. 
(Prior code § 20-14)  
12.04.020 - Definitions. 
The following definitions apply to this chapter: 
"City attorney" means the city attorney of the city of Coachella. 
"City council" means the city council of the city of Coachella. 
"City engineer" means the city engineer of the city of Coachella. 
"City treasurer" means the city treasurer of the city of Coachella. 
"City" means the city of Coachella, a municipal corporation, and "city" shall also mean the area within the territorial limits of the city of Coachella. 
"Excavation" means any cavity, hole, tunnel or other opening which directly or indirectly causes damage to any portion of a street, or to any portion of the city's right-of-way, or any opening which has the potential to directly or indirectly cause such damage. 
"Obstruction" means any material or substance which directly or indirectly blocks, congests, hinders, impedes, slows, or stops any portion of a street, or to any portion of the city's right-of-way, or any act which has the potential to directly or indirectly cause such blockage. 
"Person" means any natural person, association, company, corporation, firm, limited liability company, partnership, or organization of any kind. 
"Street" means the travel portion of any alley, highway, parkway, sidewalk, street or other public way in the city and the city's right-of-way for such purposes or uses. 
(Prior code § 20-15)  
12.04.030 - Permit, deposit required. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to make, or cause to be made, any excavation in or under the surface of any city street or other public place for the installation, repair or removal of any pipe, conduit, duct or tunnel, or for any other purpose, without first obtaining from the city engineer, a written permit to make such excavation and making a deposit to cover the inspection and restoring of such city street or other place to its original condition, together with the incidental expenses in connection therewith, all as provided by this chapter. 
B.  It is also unlawful for any person to make, or cause to be made, any obstruction on any city street or other public place without first obtaining from the city engineer, a written permit to make such obstruction and making a deposit to cover the inspection and restoring of such city street or other place to its original condition, together with the incidental expenses in connection therewith, all as provided by this chapter. 
(Prior code § 20-16)  
12.04.040 - Permit application approval. 
The city engineer, before issuing the permit required by this chapter shall require: 
A.  A written application therefor to be made and filed with the city engineer wherein shall be set forth the name and residence or business address of the person making such an application and shall state in detail the location and area of each excavation or obstruction to be made and used. 
B.  The application shall contain the following statement which shall be signed by the applicant: 
"The applicant acknowledges the duties under Article II, Chapter 20 of the Coachella Municipal Code and agrees to comply with the conditions on a permit issued under Article II, Chapter 20. The applicant also agrees to repair, or to pay the city, for the cost of any damage or removal fees to the city's street or right of way caused, directly or indirectly, by the applicant and also agrees to pay the city's collection costs including actual attorneys' fees." 
C.  The presentation of a plat showing the location of each proposed excavation or obstruction and the dimensions thereof, and such other details as the city engineer may require to be shown upon such plat. 
D.  When the application to excavate or obstruct and the details shown upon the accompanying plat comply with the terms of this chapter and the regulations of the city council, the application and the plat shall be approved or denied by the city engineer. After such approval or denial the application and plat shall be filed in the office of the city engineer as a public record. 
E.  If the application is approved by the city engineer, a deposit shall be made with the city engineer equal to sixty cents ($0.60) per square foot of the surface of each excavation or obstruction to be made in streets or other public places which have been paved and a sum equal to thirty cents ($0.30) per square foot for each foot of each such excavation or obstruction to be made in streets or other public places which are not paved; provided, that no deposit shall be less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00); provided further, that any person intending to make excavations or obstructions in public streets, alleys, or other public places, may make and maintain with the city a general deposit in the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) which general deposit shall be used for the same purpose as the special deposits described in this section, and while such general deposit is maintained at the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) such person shall not be required to make the special deposits as in this section provided, but shall be required to comply with all of the other provisions of this chapter. 
F.  Upon reviewing and approving a written application for the permit required by this chapter and the deposit required by this chapter, the city engineer shall issue a written permit to make such excavation or obstruction and shall open and keep an account thereof; provided, however, that the city engineer shall not issue such permit, unless the applicant has legal authority to occupy and use for the purpose mentioned in the application, the streets, alleys, sidewalks, or other public places covered by the application. 
G.  Excavation or obstruction permits shall specify whether the work or obstruction to be done is covered by a general or special deposit and if a special deposit, shall state the amount thereof. It shall also specify the person to whom the same is issued, the street, alley, or other public place and the particular portion thereof to be excavated or obstructed and the extent of such excavation or obstruction. 
H.  No permit issued under this chapter shall be transferable. 
I.  Every permit issued under this chapter shall become and be void unless the excavation or obstruction to be made pursuant thereto is commenced within ten (10) days from the date of the issuance of such permit and the work diligently prosecuted as in this chapter required. 
(Prior code § 20-17)  
12.04.050 - Permit subject to right of public use. 
Every permit as required by this chapter for an excavation or obstruction in or under the surface of any public street, alley, or other public place shall be granted subject to the right of the city or any other person entitled thereto to use that part of such street, alley or other public place as may be lawfully used. 
(Prior code § 20-18)  
12.04.060 - Description of excavation or obstruction. 
It is unlawful for any person to make, or cause or permit to be made, any excavation or obstruction, or to install or maintain, or cause or permit to be made or to be installed or maintained, any tank, pipe, conduit, duct or tunnel in or under the surface of any city street or other public place at any location other than that described in the application as required by this chapter and shown upon the plat filed by such person as required by the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 20-19)  
12.04.070 - Replacing pavement and supervision. 
A.  The dirt from all excavations shall be replaced and carefully tamped in layers not exceeding two feet in thickness. Each layer shall be flooded with water before the next layer is put on, and the last layer shall be well flooded and tamped although the same may be less than two feet in thickness. 
B.  If the street or place where such excavation is made has been paved, the excavation shall be refilled as this chapter provided, up to the under side of the permanent pavement and when such refilling is in proper condition, the pavement torn up or damaged by such excavation shall be replaced in accordance with the requirements of the city. 
C.  The replacing of pavement shall be done under the supervision of an inspector duly authorized by the city engineer to inspect work and the city engineer shall collect as in this chapter specified, for the cost of replacement and the cost of such inspection at the rate of fifteen dollars ($15.00) per day for each inspector so employed. 
(Prior code § 20-20)  
12.04.080 - Replacement by city and collection of cost. 
A.  If the disturbed pavement from an excavation or obstruction is not replaced by the person making the excavation or the obstruction is not removed within such time as the city engineer may allow therefore in the permit to make such excavation or obstruction, then the city engineer is authorized to collect from such person liable for such work the cost of replacing such pavement or removing such obstruction. If the payment for the replacement or removal work is not made within a reasonable time, then the cost of the replacement or removal work shall be deducted by the city from the deposits retained by the city from the person making the excavation or obstruction. 
B.  All money collected by the city engineer or deducted from the deposits for the cost or placement, removals and the inspection thereon as provided in this chapter shall be paid to the city treasurer and placed in the general fund of the city. 
(Prior code § 20-21)  
12.04.090 - Safe crossings to be maintained. 
A.  It shall be the duty of every person making any excavation or obstruction in any public street, alley, or other public place, to maintain safe crossings for vehicle traffic at all street intersections and safe crossings for pedestrians at intervals of not more than three hundred (300) feet. If any such excavation or obstruction is made across any public street or alley, at least one safe crossing shall be maintained at all times for vehicles and pedestrians. Free access must be provided to all fire hydrants and water gates. 
B.  All materials from the excavation or obstruction shall be laid compactly along the side of the trench and kept trimmed up so as to cause as little inconvenience as possible to public travel. If the street is not wide enough to hold the excavation or obstruction material without using part of the adjacent sidewalk, the person by whom the excavation or obstruction is made shall erect a tight board fence upon and along such sidewalk. All gutters shall be maintained free and unobstructed for the full depth of the adjacent curb and for at least one foot in width from the face of such curb at the gutter line. Wherever a gutter crosses an intersecting street an adequate waterway shall be provided and at all times maintained. 
(Prior code § 20-22)  
12.04.100 - Lights and barriers to be maintained. 
It shall be the duty of every person making any excavation or obstruction in any city street or other public place, to place and maintain barriers at each end of such places as may be necessary along the excavation or obstruction to prevent accidents and also to place and maintain lights at each end of such excavation or obstruction and at distances of not more than fifty (50) feet along the line thereof from sunset each day to sunrise of the next day, until such excavation is entirely refilled or such obstruction entirely removed. It is unlawful for any person to fail, refuse or neglect to comply with any requirement of this section. 
(Prior code § 20-23)  
12.04.110 - Duty to proceed diligently. 
A.  After an excavation or obstruction is commenced, the work of making, refilling or removing the same shall be prosecuted with due diligence and so as not to obstruct the street or other public place of travel thereon more than is actually necessary therefor. If the work is not so prosecuted, or the work of refilling or removing does not, in the judgment of the city engineer, comply with the terms of this chapter, the city engineer shall notify the person named in the permit that the work is not being prosecuted with due diligence or that the refilling of such excavation, or the removal of such obstruction, has not been properly done and shall require such person, within three days after the services of such notice, to proceed with diligent prosecution of such work or properly to complete the same as the case may be. 
B.  Such notice shall be written or printed, and shall be served personally or by leaving same at the residence or place of business of such person. If such person cannot be found in such place of business or residence is unknown or is outside the city, such notice may be served by depositing the same in the United States Post Office in a sealed envelope, postage fully prepaid, addressed to such person at such place of business or residence, if known. If such notice is not complied with the city engineer may do such work as may be necessary to refill such excavation and to restore the street or other public place or part thereof excavated to as good a condition as the same was in before such excavation was made. 
(Prior code § 20-24)  
12.04.120 - Supervision of work. 
All excavations, refilling of excavations, repairing of street surface and removal of obstructions pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be made under the supervision and direction of the city engineer. It shall be the duty of the city engineer to supervise and direct all such making, refilling and repairing of excavations, removal of obstructions and repairing of street surfaces and to require that all such excavations, refilling and repairing, and removal of obstructions comply with the requirements of this chapter and other ordinances of the city. 
(Prior code § 20-25)  
12.04.130 - Exemptions 
A.  None of the provisions of this chapter shall apply to any work done, or to be done along, in or upon any city street other public place pursuant to any law of the estate provided for the improvement thereof, or any work done or to be done along, in or upon any such street, alley or other public place pursuant to any contract for the improvement authorized by the city council; provided, however, that the provisions contained in this chapter shall apply to all such work and to all excavations to be made along, in or upon any public street, alley or other public place. 
B.  The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to excavations made by any officer or under the direction of any officer of this city in the discharge of his or her official duties. 
(Prior code § 20-26)  
12.04.140 - Emergency excavations and obstructions. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent any person maintaining any pipe or conduit in any public street, alley or public place by virtue of any law, ordinance or permit from making such excavations or obstructions as may be necessary for the preservation of life or property when such necessity arises; provided, that the person making such excavation or obstruction shall obtain a permit therefore within six hours thereafter. 
(Prior code § 20-27)  
Chapter 12.08 - STREET DAMAGE PREVENTION REGULATIONS 
 
12.08.010 - Legislative purpose. 
The city council finds that various dangerous activities have caused damage to the streets in the city. The damage to the streets is a detriment to the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city. The city council declares that this chapter is adopted to prohibit dangerous activities on or about city streets which cause, or tend to cause, damage to the streets in the city. 
(Prior code § 20-75)  
12.08.020 - Definitions. 
The following definitions apply to this chapter: 
"Chief of police" means the chief of police of the city of Coachella. 
"City" means the city of Coachella, a municipal corporation, and "city" shall also mean the area within the territorial limits of the city of Coachella. 
"City attorney" means the city attorney of the city of Coachella. 
"City engineer" means the city engineer of the city of Coachella. 
"Dangerous activity" means any activity which directly or indirectly causes damage to any portion of a street, or to any portion of the city's right-of-way, or any act which has the potential to directly or indirectly cause such damage. 
"Equipment" means any tool or machinery operated or designed for any purpose. 
"Motor vehicle" means any vehicle designed or operated for any purpose including tractors, combines and any other such vehicles. 
"Person" means any natural person, association, company, corporation, firm, limited liability company, partnership, or organization of any kind. 
"Street" means the travel portion of any alley, highway, parkway, sidewalk, street or other public way in the city and the city's right-of-way for such purposes or uses. 
(Prior code § 20-76)  
12.08.030 - Prohibited activities—Duties and penalties. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to perform any dangerous activity on or about any street which causes damage, or which has the potential to cause damage, to any portion of any street unless the person has been granted and has in full force and effect an excavation permit issued pursuant to Chapter 12.04 of this code or a permit issued pursuant to this chapter. 
B.  A person performing dangerous activities on private property, or portion thereof, has the duty to refrain from conducting such activities and the duty to perform such dangerous activities so as to prevent damage to any street, or portion thereof. In the event a person causes damage to any street, or portion thereof, such person shall be responsible for the cost to repair such damage. 
C.  It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to violate any provision of this chapter. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of a provision of this chapter is committed, continued, or permitted by such person, and may be punished pursuant to Section 1.08.010 of this code. 
(Prior code § 20-77)  
12.08.040 - Permit to conduct dangerous activities. 
It is unlawful for any person to engage in any dangerous activities or to operate any motor vehicle or equipment constituting a dangerous activity on any street or within ten (10) feet of any street right-of-way, other than normal travel thereon, without a permit under this chapter. 
(Prior code § 20-78)  
12.08.050 - Permit application and approval. 
Prior to issuing a permit under this chapter, the city engineer shall require and determine as follows: 
A.  Each applicant shall submit a written application with the city engineer. The application shall include the name and residence or business address of the person making the application, a description of the proposed activity including the operation of a motor vehicle or equipment on or about a city street, the date of commencement and the date of completion of such activity, the location and area of use of the motor vehicle or equipment, and any other reasonable information the city engineer may need in order to assess whether to deny or grant the permit. After such approval or denial the application shall be filed in the office of the city engineer as a public record. 
B.  The application shall contain the following statement which shall be signed by the applicant: 
"The applicant acknowledges the duties under Chapter 12.08 of the Coachella Municipal Code and agrees to comply with the conditions on a permit issued under Chapter 12.08. The applicant also agrees to repair, or to pay the City, for the cost of any damage to the City's street or right of way caused, directly or indirectly, by the applicant and also agrees to pay the City's collection costs including actual attorneys' fees." 
C.  The city engineer shall investigate the proposed operation and its affect on city streets. The city engineer shall also investigate the accuracy and truthfulness of the information on the application. 
D.  Upon review and investigation of a written application, the city engineer shall grant or deny a written permit to operate such activity; provided, however, that the city engineer may impose reasonable conditions on the permit including the requirement for security of an amount sufficient to pay for any likely damage to the city streets in the form approved by the city attorney. 
E.  The permit shall specify the person to whom the permit is issued, the location where the activity including the operation of a motor vehicle or equipment may occur, and the effective dates of the permit. 
F.  No permit issued under this chapter shall be transferable. 
G.  Every permit issued under this chapter shall become void after the expiration date on the issuance of such permit. 
(Prior code § 20-79)  
12.08.060 - Enforcement. 
The chief of police and all police officers are directed to enforce each and all provisions of this chapter. Such officers shall have the right to demand the exhibition of a valid permit as required by this chapter of any person engaged or employed in any dangerous activity including the operation of a motor vehicle or equipment on any city street to ascertain that the required permit has been procured. 
(Prior code § 20-80)  
Chapter 12.12 - SIDEWALK, DRIVEWAY, CURB AND GUTTER CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR 
 
12.12.010 - Permit required. 
It is unlawful for any person to construct or repair, or cause to be constructed, or repaired, in the city, any sidewalk, driveway, driveway approach, curb or curb and gutter without first obtaining a permit from the superintendent of public works to do so. In no case, however, shall a permit be required or granted to construct sidewalks, curbs or curbs and gutters when the council has instituted improvement proceedings under the general laws of the state relating to such work. 
(Prior code § 20-42)  
12.12.020 - Application for permit. 
Any person desiring a permit for the construction or repair of a sidewalk, driveway, driveway approach, curb or curb and gutter, shall file with the superintendent of public works an application therefor in writing on a form to be furnished by the city for that purpose. Such forms shall specify the following: 
A.  The name and residence of the applicant; 
B.  The location of the property in front of which the proposed construction or repair is to be made; 
C.  The name of the person who will perform the work; 
D.  The nature and dimensions of the proposed work; and 
E.  Such additional information as the superintendent of public works may require. 
(Prior code § 20-43)  
12.12.030 - Display of permit. 
All permits for the construction or repair of sidewalks, driveways, driveway approaches, curbs or curbs and gutters shall be posted conspicuously near the work by the person to whom the permit is granted. 
(Prior code § 20-44)  
12.12.040 - Regulations. 
No permit issued under this chapter shall be in conflict with the following regulations: 
A.  All sidewalk, driveway, driveway approach, curb or curb and gutter work shall be done under the direction, supervision and to the satisfaction of the superintendent of public works, and must be constructed in accordance with the standard plans and specifications for concrete, sidewalks, driveways, driveway approaches, curbs or curbs and gutters on file in the office of the superintendent of public works, reference to which is made for further particulars. 
B.  All prepared subgrades and surfaces shall be inspected and approved by the city before any concrete is poured. All completed work shall be subject to approval by the city. At least twenty-four (24) hours advance notice shall be given to the city by the applicant so that the city may schedule inspections. 
C.  No sidewalk, driveway, driveway approach, curb or curb and gutter shall be constructed other than of concrete unless special permission therefor has first been obtained from the council. 
D.  All debris and surplus materials shall be removed promptly upon completion of the work. 
E.  The applicant shall maintain the premises in a safe manner, and shall provide adequate barricades and lights at his or her own expense to protect the safety of the public using the adjacent streets or sidewalks, and shall hold the city free from any damages incurred by his or her operations. 
(Prior code § 20-45)  
12.12.050 - Duty to maintain sidewalks. 
It is unlawful for any person owning any portion of an improved street or way where a sidewalk is laid, to allow any portion of such sidewalk in front of such building, lot or premises to be out of repair, or to become, be or remain defective, or to become, be or remain dangerous to the users thereof for any reason. Such person must at all times keep each such sidewalk in such condition that it will not endanger persons or property passing thereon, will not interfere with public convenience in the use thereof, or be or remain an obstruction or impediment to normal, customary and usual pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(Prior code § 20-46)  
12.12.060 - Duty to maintain driveways. 
It is unlawful for any person owning property within the city into which is constructed a driveway to fail to keep such driveway or driveway approach in a good state of repair at all times. 
(Prior code § 20-47)  
12.12.070 - Statutory procedures adopted. 
The provisions of Sections 5600 through 5630, inclusive, of the Streets and Highways Code of the state of California, as they now exist or may hereafter be amended, are adopted as the procedure governing the maintenance and repair of sidewalks, driveways and driveway approaches in the city. For the purposes of this chapter, "sidewalk" as defined in Section 5600 of such Streets and Highways Code shall also include a "driveway" and a "driveway approach." 
(Prior code § 20-48)  
Chapter 12.16 - CURB CUTS AND DRIVEWAYS 
 
12.16.010 - Statement of policy. 
A.  It is recognized that, generally, provision must be made for vehicle access to private property from streets and alleys, but in so doing, due consideration must be given to pedestrian and vehicle safety, the need for on-street parking spaces and the resulting interference with the movement of vehicular traffic and interference with public improvements. 
B.  In establishing permissible curb cuts and sidewalk driveway crossings for access to private property, it shall be the policy of the city to authorize the same only where they are necessary and only where they would not unreasonably interfere with the rights of the public in the adjacent street or alley, or unreasonably interfere with vehicular traffic, or unreasonably eliminate on-street parking spaces. 
(Prior code § 20-59)  
12.16.020 - Definition of "curb cut." 
A "curb cut" as used in this chapter shall include the making of an opening in or through an existing curb and the leaving of voids in curbs when the same are constructed in any street or alley. 
(Prior code § 20-60)  
12.16.030 - Permit required. 
It is unlawful for any person to cut, break or remove any curbing or sidewalk, or cause to have cut, broken or removed any curbing or sidewalk, or to install, or cause to be installed, any driveway, on any public street in the city, without first obtaining a permit to do so from the superintendent of public works in accordance with Chapter 12.12 of this title. 
(Prior code § 20-61)  
12.16.040 - Regulations. 
No permit required by Section 12.16.030 shall be in conflict with the following regulations: 
A.  The maximum width of any driveway shall not be more than thirty (30) feet, as measured at the top of the curbing, if, however, in the opinion of the superintendent of public works, the city's interests can best be served by extending the maximum width of driveways to not more than thirty-six (36) feet, as measured at the top of the curbing, for entrances into automobile service stations located on streets officially designated as major city streets, or on state highway routes within the city, then the superintendent of public works shall have the power to modify the provisions of this regulation accordingly. 
B.  The minimum distance between driveways serving the same lot or parcel of land shall be not less than eighteen (18) feet, as measured at the top of the curbing. 
C.  Not to exceed forty (40) percent of the frontage upon any street of the lot or lots or parcel of land to be served thereby shall be devoted to driveways. 
D.  No driveway shall be located so as to interfere with intersecting sidewalks, traffic signals, lampposts, fire hydrants, or other public improvements. 
E.  No permit shall be issued to remove any curbing unless a concrete driveway between curbing and sidewalk is to be installed. 
F.  The necessary adjustments to utility facilities, light standards, fire hydrants, catch basins, street or railway signs, signals, or other public improvements or installations shall be accomplished without cost to the city. 
G.  All work shall be done under the supervision of the superintendent of public works and in accordance with city specifications in effect at the time of such work. Forms shall be inspected by the city before any concrete is poured. All debris and surplus materials shall be promptly removed upon completion of the work. 
H.  The permittee shall maintain the premises in a safe manner, and shall provide adequate barricades and lights at his or her own expense to protect the safety of the public using the adjacent streets or sidewalks, and shall hold the city free from any damages incurred by his operations. 
(Prior code § 20-62)  
12.16.050 - Permit revocation. 
The city council shall have the authority to rescind any permit before or after the effective date granted for a curb cut or sidewalk installation when it finds such action to be in the public interest. 
(Prior code § 20-64)  
12.16.060 - Replacement of curbing when cut no longer necessary. 
A.  When Required. Curb cuts which are no longer required for reasonable vehicular access to the property served shall be replaced by the property owner. When the superintendent of streets finds that curb cuts and driveways which have been constructed are no longer so required he or she may, and upon instructions from the city council shall, notify the owner or person in possession of the property to remove such curb cut and driveway and replace It in accordance with standard plans and specifications of the city. Notice to replace may be given by. delivering a written notice personally to the owner of the property, or by mailing such notice to the owner thereof at his or her last known address as the same appears on the assessment rolls. 
B.  Form of Notice. The notice shall specify what work is required to be done, and what materials shall be used in construction and shall further specify that if construction is not commenced within thirty (30) days after notice is given, and diligently and without interruption prosecuted to completion, the superintendent of streets shall cause the construction to be done and the cost of the same shall be a lien on the property. 
C.  Construction by Street Superintendent. If the construction is not commenced and prosecuted to completion with due diligence, the superintendent of streets shall perform the necessary work to remove the driveway and eliminate the curb cut. 
D.  Collection of Cost of Construction. Upon completion of the work the superintendent of streets shall notify the property owner and the city clerk of the cost of the construction. The city clerk shall bill the property owner for the cost of the work and if the amount thereof is not paid within thirty (80) days from the date of billing, he or she shall record a notice of lien against the parcel of property fronting upon the curb so constructed, which lien shall continue until the cost has been paid. The notice of lien may include claims against one or more, separate parcels of property, whether contiguous or not, together with the amount' due, respectively, from each such parcel. 
E.  Notice of Lien. The notice of lien shall be delivered by the city clerk to the county auditor who shall enter the amount thereof on the county assessment book opposite the description of the particular property and the amount shall be collected together with all other taxes hereon against the property. The notice of lien shall be delivered to the county auditor before the date fixed by law for the delivery of the assessment book to the county board of equalization. 
F.  Manner of Collection of Lien. After the amount of the lien shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary city taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and interest and to the same procedure under foreclosure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary city taxes. 
G.  Exemption. The provisions of this section shall not apply to curb cuts in commercial or industrial zones or areas which are in existence on July 1, 1960. 
(Prior code § 20-66)  
12.16.070 - Appeals. 
A.  In order that the provisions of this chapter may be reasonably applied in instances where practical difficulties are apparent or unnecessary hardship will result from carrying out the strict letter in this chapter, or in cases where the applicant deems himself or herself aggrieved, appeal may be made to the city council and the council shall have the power to vary, by resolution, the mandatory provisions in this chapter, or to modify or reverse the decision of the superintendent of public works in any specific case in such manner that substantial justice is done and the spirit and purpose of this chapter are upheld. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, the right of appeal and power modification thereby authorized shall not apply to the provisions of Section 12.16.060 relating to a replacement fee. 
B.  Such an appeal shall be made in writing to the council by filing with the city clerk a written notice of such appeal, setting forth specific grounds or basis thereof. Such notice must be file within thirty (30) days after such action appealed from. The city clerk shall set such matter for hearing before the council and cause notice thereof to be given to the applicant not less than five days prior to such hearing unless the giving of such notice is waived in writing by applicant. At such hearing the applicant shall show cause, on the grounds specified in the notice of appeal why the action excepted to should not be approved. The council may continue such hearings from time to time, and its findings on appeal shall be final and conclusive in the matter. 
(Prior code § 20-66)  
12.16.080 - Plan check—Permit and inspection fees. 
A fee shall be charged by the administrative authority for plan checking engineering plans, inspecting public works improvements and issuing public works permits. 
A.  A plan check fee in the amount of two and one-half percent of the estimated cost of the improvements shall be collected by the administrative authority prior to commencing with the plan checking process. 
B.  An inspection fee in the amount of two and one-half percent of the estimated cost of the improvements shall be collected by the administrative authority prior to the issuance of any permits or the commencement of any work. 
C.  The administrative authority shall by resolution establish and maintain a list of development improvement unit costs. 
D.  All cost estimates relating to plan check, inspection and bonding shall be based on the list of development improvement unit costs as established by resolution. 
(Prior code § 20-67)  
Chapter 12.20 - PARADES 
 
12.20.010 - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Parade Ordinance of the City of Coachella." 
(Prior code § 15-1)  
12.20.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
"Parade" is any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant, or procession of any kind, or any similar display, in or upon any street, park or other public place in the city 
"Parade permit" is a permit as required by this chapter. 
(Prior code § 15-2)  
12.20.030 - Exceptions. 
This chapter shall not apply to: 
A.  Funeral processions; 
B.  Students going to and from school classes or participating in educational activities, provided such conduct is under the immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities; further, provided notification of same is given to the chief of police; and 
C.  A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions. 
(Prior code § 15-3)  
12.20.040 - Permit required. 
No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any parade, unless a parade permit has been obtained from the chief of police. 
(Prior code § 15-4)  
12.20.050 - Permit application required. 
A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file an application with the chief of police on forms provided by him or her. 
(Prior code § 15-5)  
12.20.060 - Time for filing application. 
An application for a parade permit shall be filed with the chief of police not less than seven days nor more than thirty (30) days before the date on which it is proposed to conduct the parade. 
(Prior code § 15-6)  
12.20.070 - Contents of application. 
The application for a parade permit shall set forth the following information: 
A.  The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct such parade; 
B.  If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization, and of the authorized and responsible heads of such organization; 
C.  The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the parade chairman and who will be responsible for its conduct; 
D.  The date when the parade is to be conducted; 
E.  The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination point; 
F.  The approximate number of persons who, and animals and vehicles which, will constitute such parade; the type of animals, and description of the vehicles; 
G.  The hours when such parade will start and terminate; 
H.  A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed; 
I.  The location by streets of any assembly areas for such parade; 
J.  The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at any such assembly area or areas; 
K.  The interval of space to be maintained between units of such parade; 
L.  If the parade is designed to be held by and on behalf of, or for, any person other than the applicant, the applicant for such permit shall file with the chief of police a communication in writing from the person proposing to hold the parade, authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on his or her behalf; and 
M.  Any additional information which the chief of police shall find reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should issue. 
(Prior code § 15-7)  
12.20.080 - Late applications. 
The chief of police, where good cause is shown therefor, shall have the authority to consider any application hereunder which is filed less than seven days before the date such parade is proposed to be conducted. 
(Prior code § 15-8)  
12.20.090 - Permit fee. 
There shall be paid at the time of filing the application for a parade permit a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(Prior code § 15-9)  
12.20.100 - Standards for issuance of permit. 
The chief of police shall issue a permit as provided for in this chapter when, from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may otherwise be obtained, he or she finds that: 
A.  The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route; 
B.  The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers of the city to properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection in the city; 
C.  The conduct of such parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to portions of the city other than that to be occupied by the proposed line of march and areas contiguous thereto; 
D.  The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such assembly areas; 
E.  The conduct of such parade will not interfere with the movement of fire-fighting equipment enroute to a fire; 
F.  The conduct of the parade is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct or create a disturbance; 
G.  The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays enroute; and 
H.  The parade is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising any product, goods or event, and is not designed to be held purely for private profit. 
(Prior code § 15-10)  
12.20.110 - Time for action on application—Notice of denial. 
The chief of police shall act upon the application for a parade permit within three days after the filing thereof. If the chief of police disapproves the application, he or she shall mail to the applicant within three days after the date upon which the application was filed, a notice of his or her action, stating the reasons for his or her denial of the permit. 
(Prior code § 15-11)  
12.20.120 - Appeal from permit denial. 
Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a parade permit to the city council. The appeal shall be taken within ten (10) days after notice. The city council shall act upon the appeal within ten (10) days after its receipt. 
(Prior code § 15-12)  
12.20.130 - Alternative permits. 
The chief of police, in denying an application for a parade permit, shall be empowered to authorize the conduct of the parade on a date, at a time, or over a route different from that named by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternative permit shall, within ten (10) days after notice of the action of the chief of police, file a written notice of acceptance with the chief of police. An alternative parade permit shall conform to the requirements of, and shall have the effect of a parade permit under this chapter. 
(Prior code § 15-13)  
12.20.140 - Notice of permit issuance to city and other officials. 
Immediately upon the issuance of a parade permit, the chief of police shall send a copy thereof to the following: 
A.  City manager; 
B.  City attorney; 
C.  Fire chief; 
D.  Director of department of public works; 
E.  Postmaster; and 
F.  The general manager or responsible head of each public transportation utility, the regular routes of whose vehicles will be affected by the route of the proposed parade. 
(Prior code § 15-14)  
12.20.150 - Contents of permit. 
Each parade permit shall state the following information: 
A.  Starting time; 
B.  Minimum speed; 
C.  Maximum speed; 
D.  Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of the parade; 
E.  The portions of the streets to be traversed that may be occupied by the parade; 
F.  The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof; and 
G.  Such other information as the chief of police shall find necessary to the enforcement of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 15-15)  
12.20.160 - Permittee to carry permit. 
The parade chairman or other person heading or leading such activity shall carry the parade permit upon his or her person during the conduct of the parade. 
(Prior code § 15-16)  
12.20.170 - Compliance with permit—Regulations. 
A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances. 
(Prior code § 15-17)  
12.20.180 - Interference with parade. 
No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct, or impede, or interfere with any parade or parade assembly or with any person, vehicle or animal participating or used in a parade. 
(Prior code § 15-18)  
12.20.190 - Driving through parade. 
No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or persons comprising a parade when such vehicles or persons are in motion and are conspicuously designated as a parade. 
(Prior code § 15-19)  
12.20.200 - Parking on parade route. 
The chief of police shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a highway or part thereof constituting a part of the route of a parade. The chief of police shall post signs to such effect, and it is unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. No person shall be liable for parking on a street unposted in violation of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 15-20)  
12.20.210 - Revocation of permit. 
The chief of police shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit issued hereunder upon application of the standards for issuance as this chapter set forth. 
(Prior code § 15-21)  
Chapter 12.24 - STREET TREES 
 
12.24.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Street Tree Ordinance of the City of Coachella." 
(Prior code § 25-14)  
12.24.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning given in this chapter. 
"Street tree" or "tree" is a tree in a public place, except where otherwise indicated. 
"Superintendent of public works" is the superintendent of public works of the city. 
(Prior code § 25-15)  
12.24.030 - Powers, duties of superintendent of public works. 
The superintendent of public works shall have exclusive jurisdiction and supervision over all trees, other plants, and grassy areas planted or growing in public places. 
A.  Preserve or Remove. The superintendent of public works shall have the authority and it shall be his or her duty to plant, trim, spray, preserve and remove trees, other plants and grassy areas in public places to insure safety or preserve the symmetry and beauty of such public places. 
B.  Order to Preserve or Remove. The superintendent of public works shall have the authority and it shall be his or her duty to order the trimming, preservation or removal of trees or plants upon private property when he or she shall find such action necessary to public safety or to prevent the spread of disease or insects to public trees and places. 
(Prior code § 25-16)  
12.24.040 - Duties of private owners. 
It shall be the duty of any person growing a tree within a public highway or responsible for trees growing on property abutting on public places supporting trees or plants: 
A.  Trim. To trim his or her trees so as not to cause a hazard to public places or interfere with the proper lighting of public highways by the street lights, and so that minimum clearance of any overhanging portion shall be nine feet. 
B.  Treat or Remove. To treat or remove any tree or plant so diseased or insect-ridden as to constitute a hazard to trees or plants in public places. 
(Prior code § 25-17)  
12.24.050 - Procedure upon order to preserve or remove. 
When the superintendent of public works shall find it necessary to order the trimming, preservation or removal of trees or plants upon private property as authorized in Section 12.24.030(B) he or she shall serve a written order to correct the dangerous condition upon the owner, operator, occupant or other person responsible for its existence. 
A.  Method of Service. The order required in this chapter shall be served in one of the following ways: 
1.  By making personal delivery of the order to the person responsible; 
2.  By leaving the order with some person of suitable age and discretion upon the premises; 
3.  By affixing a copy of the order to the door at the entrance of the premises in violation; 
4.  By mailing a copy of the order to last known address of the owner of the premises, by certified mail; or 
5.  By publishing a copy of the order in a local paper once a week, for three successive weeks. 
B.  Time for Compliance. The order required in this chapter shall set forth a time limit for compliance, dependent upon the hazard and danger created by the violation. In cases of extreme danger to persons or public property, the superintendent of public works shall have the authority to require compliance immediately upon service of the order. 
C.  Appeal From Order. A person to whom an order hereunder is directed shall have the right, within forty-eight (48) hours of the service of such order, to appeal to the city manager, who shall review such order within three days and file his or her decision. Unless the order is revoked or modified it shall remain in full force and be obeyed by the person to whom directed. No person to whom an order is directed shall fail to comply with such order within five days after an appeal shall have been determined. 
D.  Failure to Comply. When a person to whom an order is directed shall fail to comply within the specified time, the superintendent of public works shall remedy the condition or contract with others for such purpose and charge the cost thereof to the person to whom the order is directed. The person remedying a condition under a contract made in this chapter shall be authorized to enter premises for that purpose. 
E.  Special Assessment. If the cost of remedying a condition is not paid within thirty (30) days after receipt of a statement therefor from the superintendent of public works such costs shall be levied against the property upon which such hazard exists, as a special assessment. The levying of such assessment shall not affect the liability of the person to whom the order is directed to fine and imprisonment for violation of this code. Such special assessment shall be certified by the superintendent of public works to the county tax collector and shall become and be a lien upon such property, shall be included in the next tax bill rendered to the owner or owners thereof unless paid before, and shall be collected in the same manner as other taxes against such property. 
(Prior code § 25-18)  
Chapter 12.28 - PALM TREES 
 
12.28.010 - Trimming palm trees—Required. 
Every person owning real property in the city on which there are standing or growing palm trees shall, at least annually, remove or cause to be removed, by trimming or cutting, from the palm trees standing or growing on the property so owned by such person all dead leaves and/or fronds adhering to the trunks of such palm trees. 
(Prior code § 25-1)  
12.28.020 - Same—Notice requiring. 
Upon discovery of any violation of Section 12.28.010, the city clerk shall cause to be served on the person owning the real property which is being maintained in violation of such section, a written notice addressed to such person at their last known address, advising of such violation and demanding correction within ten (10) days. 
(Prior code § 25-2)  
12.28.030 - Same—By city. 
If owner shall fail to comply with the provisions of Section 12.28.010 within ten (10) days after the mailing of the notice as provided in Section 12.28.020 above, the city shall have the right to immediately enter upon any real property in the city which is maintained in violation of Section 12.28.010 and cause the removal, by trimming or cutting of any dead leaves or fronds from any or all palm trees standing or growing on said real property; and all expenses of such removal shall be a direct charge against the person owning said property, and all expenses of such removal may be recovered together with costs in an action by the city against such person in the municipal court or in any other court having jurisdiction of such action. 
(Prior code § 25-3)  
Chapter 12.32 - PARK USE REGULATIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1070, § 2, adopted Dec. 10, 2014, amended Ch. 12.32 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 12.32, §§ 12.32.010—12.32.170, pertained to park use regulations, and derived from prior code, §§ 16-16—16-32. 
 
12.32.010 - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Coachella Ordinance Regulating Use of the Public Parks." 
(Ord. No. 1070, § 2, 12-10-14)  
12.32.020 - Park defined. 
As used in this chapter, "park" is a park, reservation, playground, recreation center or any other area in the city, owned or used by the city, and devoted to active or passive recreation. 
(Ord. No. 1070, § 2, 12-10-14)  
12.32.030 - Permit required. 
No person or persons may engage in any commercial activity in a city park and no person or persons may conduct any assembly, dance, meeting, or picnic for more than twenty-four (24) persons unless and until a permit for such activity or conduct is obtained from the city manager, or the city manager's designee, and upon the payment of the fee as provided for in this chapter. An application for permit for an activity or conduct involving any right alleged to be protected by the First Amendment of the United States Constitution shall describe the activity or conduct so protected; and a permit therefor shall be issued or denied within five days of the filing of a fully completed application provided that such time period may be extended for an additional five days to request and obtain further information about the activity or conduct so as to determine its entitlement to First Amendment protection and to fashion reasonable time, place and manner restrictions and provided further that the permit may impose reasonable time, place and manner restrictions on the exercise of the activity or conduct subject to First Amendment protections. 
(Ord. No. 1070, § 2, 12-10-14)  
12.32.040 - Application for permit. 
A.  Park—Field/Picnic Areas. 
1.  Time for Application. An application for a permit must be submitted not less than two business days nor more than thirty (30) regular business days prior to the event. 
2.  The application shall state: 
a.  The name and residence address of the person signing the application; 
b.  The position held by the person signing the application when representing a group or organization; 
c.  That the person signing the application is an authorized representative of the applicant, if the applicant is a group or organization; 
d.  The name and address of the applicant; 
e.  The day or days and hours for which the permit is desired. Permits may be issued for weekly use increments up to a month within a six month period. Permits are issued on a first come first serve basis. Sport league use and other recreational programming will be permitted as allowed by existing city agreements such as the memorandum of understanding between the city and sports leagues. 
f.  The park or portion thereof for which such permit is desired; 
g.  An estimate of the anticipated attendance; 
h.  Any other information which the city council shall find reasonably necessary to make a fair determination as to whether a permit should be issued in this chapter. 
B.  Park—Community Center. 
1.  Time for Application. An application for a permit must be submitted not less than two weeks nor more than six months prior to the event. 
2.  The application shall state: 
a.  The name and residence address of the person signing the application; 
b.  The position held by the person signing the application where the applicant is a group or organization; 
c.  That the person signing the application is an authorized representative of the applicant, if the applicant is a group or organization; 
d.  The name and address of the applicant; 
e.  The day or days and hours for which the permit is desired. Permits may be issued for one day only if the day requested is a Saturday or Sunday, within a three-month period. Permits may be issued for multiple days, to a maximum of five days Monday through Friday, within a three-month period; 
f.  The park or portion thereof for which such permit is desired; 
g.  An estimate of the anticipated attendance; and 
h.  Any other information which the city council shall find reasonably necessary to make a fair determination as to whether a permit should be issued by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1070, § 2, 12-10-14; Ord. No. 1102, § 2, 4-26-17)  
12.32.050 - Permit fee. 
The fee for a permit required by this chapter shall be established by the council. 
(Ord. No. 1070, § 2, 12-10-14)  
12.32.060 - Standards of permit issuance. 
The city manager or his or her designee shall authorize issuance of a permit when he or she finds: 
A.  That the proposed activity or use of the park will not be unlawful; 
B.  That the proposed activity and use will not present a hazard to public health; 
C.  That the proposed activity or use, is not reasonably anticipated to incite violence, crime or disorderly conduct; and 
D.  That the facilities have not been reserved for other use on the day required in the application; except that the city council may, on recommendation of the city manager, authorize multiple permits for nonconflicting hours on any given day. 
(Ord. No. 1070, § 2, 12-10-14)  
12.32.070 - Obedience to regulations. 
A permittee shall be bound by all park rules and regulations and all applicable ordinances as fully as though the same were inserted in the permit. 
(Ord. No. 1070, § 2, 12-10-14)  
12.32.080 - Liability of permittee. 
The person to whom a permit is issued shall be liable for any loss, damage or injury sustained by any person whatever by reason of the negligence of the person to whom such permit shall have been issued. 
(Ord. No. 1070, § 2, 12-10-14)  
12.32.090 - Permit revocation. 
The city manager, or the chief of police, or their duly authorized designees may revoke any permit issued upon the finding that such permit was issued upon false or misleading information, the permittee has violated the conditions imposed upon the permit, the permittee has violated a material provision of this chapter, or the permittee has or is engaged in conduct that is dangerous to the public health or safety. In the case of permits issued for commercial activity where the permit has acquired a vested interest or for activity or conduct subject to First Amendment protection, the official seeking to revoke the permit shall provide the permittee with written notice of the official's intent to revoke the permit, the reasons therefor and provide for an immediate hearing prior the revocation of the permit except where the circumstances require a summary revocation provided that a hearing is provided the permittee as soon as practicable after the revocation of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 1070, § 2, 12-10-14)  
12.32.100 - Hours. 
Except for unusual and unforeseen emergencies, parks shall be open to the public every day of the year during hours designated by the council. The opening and closing hours for each individual park shall be posted for public information. 
(Ord. No. 1070, § 2, 12-10-14)  
12.32.110 - Declaration of event as an unlawful assembly. 
Any event, which requires a permit pursuant to this chapter, held without a permit, may be declared by the chief of police to be an "unlawful assembly." 
(Ord. No. 1070, § 2, 12-10-14)  
12.32.120 - Appeal. 
If the city manager refuses to authorize the issuance of a permit, the applicant may at the next regularly scheduled council meeting, appeal the managers ruling to the city council. The council may for good cause shown overrule the manager and order the permit issued. 
(Ord. No. 1070, § 2, 12-10-14)  
12.32.130 - Operating, parking motor vehicles, including motorcycles, in parks prohibited. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person or persons to operate or park any motor vehicle, including motorcycles, upon any park within the city. 
B.  Any person who shall be convicted of a violation of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall make restitution and reimbursement to the city for any damage caused by any such operation of a motor vehicle or a motorcycle and shall be punished by fine, not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00) for a motor vehicle other than a motorcycle and a fine not exceeding twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for violation with a motorcycle. 
(Ord. No. 1070, § 2, 12-10-14)  
12.32.140 - Activities and conduct prohibited in city parks. 
The following activities and conduct are prohibited in all parks within the city by all persons: 
A.  To hitch, fasten, lead, drive or let lose any animal or fowl of any kind, except for dogs when they are led by a cord or chain not in excess of six feet in length. 
B.  To ride or drive any horse or animal, or to propel any vehicle, cycle or automobile within the park area except on roadways posted for such use. 
C.  To cut, break, injure, deface, or disturb any tree, shrub, plant, rock, building, cage, pen, monument, fence, bench, or other apparatus, or property; to pluck, pull up, cut, take or remove any shrub, plants, bush or flower; or to make or write upon or graffiti, paint or deface in any manner, any building, monument, fence, bench, or other structure. 
D.  To cut or remove any wood, turf grass, soil, rock, sand, gravel or fertilizer. 
E.  To make or kindle a fire except in picnic stoves, braziers, or fire pits provided for that purpose. 
F.  To wash dishes or to empty saltwater or other waste liquid elsewhere than in the receptacles provided for such purposes. 
G.  To leave garbage, cans, bottles, papers, or other refuse anywhere other than the receptacles provided for that purpose. 
H.  To indulge in riotous, boisterous, threatening, or indecent conduct, not protected by the First Amendment of the United States Constitution, or abusive, threatening, profane, or indecent language not protected by the First Amendment of the United States Constitution. 
I.  To use, throw, or release any arrows or crossbows, unless permit issued for recreational purposes. 
J.  To take, seize or hunt any nondomestic bird or animal. 
K.  To disturb, in any manner, any picnic, meeting, service, concert; or other private events. 
L.  To sell or offer for sale any merchandise, article, or anything whatsoever. 
M.  To remain, stay, or loiter in any public park between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following day. 
N.  To ride bicycles in any area except roadways, and in each case shall be parked in racks when provided. 
O.  To assemble, collect, or gather together on any walk, passageway, or roadway, or in any other place set apart for travel of persons in or through any park or to occupy the same so that the free passage or use by other persons is obstructed in any manner. 
P.  To occupy any part of any park by a group in excess of twenty-four (24) persons unless a permit has been obtained. 
Q.  To enter any pool, dressing room, or structure at any time when a person lawfully in control is not in attendance. 
R.  To enter or use any restrooms designated for a member of the opposite gender by any person over the age of eight years of age. 
S.  To take, carry, force or persuade, by any means, a person, over the age of eight years, into a restroom designated for a person of the opposite gender. 
T.  To camp or lodge, unless permit issued for a special event. 
U.  To conduct any carnival, exhibition, theater, tent or open air, public dance or other business or activity except by a permit duly issued for that purpose. 
V.  To drink any malt, spirituous or vinous liquor containing more than one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume or be intoxicated. 
W.  To possess any bottle, can, or other receptacle, containing any beverage containing more than one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume, which has been opened, or seal broken, or contents of which have been partially removed. 
X.  To fail to obey the lawful orders of any employee of the city or the Coachella Valley Park and Recreation District designated as having authority over the management of the park who requests any person to cease and desist from any activities prohibited by this chapter or any other law applicable to parks. 
Y.  To fail to leave the park premises when directed to do so by any employee of the city or the Coachella Valley Park and Recreation District designated as having authority over the management of the park because of violation of any provision of this chapter, or to return to the park on the same calendar day after having complied with a direction to leave park pursuant to this subsection. 
Z.  To bath, disrobe, or fully undress. 
AA.  To smoke any tobacco, smoke any legal/illegal products, use of any drugs, or other legal/illegal substances. 
BB.  To urinate in public. 
CC.  To park a vehicle/commercial vehicle/towing equipment outside of the marked parking lines; no person shall park or leave standing any vehicle so that it extends across any such line or markings, or is in such position that it is not entirely within the space designated by such lines or markings. 
DD.  It is unlawful for any person to repair, dismantle, disassemble or perform any other work upon any vehicle when such vehicle is parked upon any city park operated parking lot or upon any public street or thoroughfare or other public property within the city except to perform emergency repairs. 
EE.  To carry discharge any firecracker, rocket, torpedo or any other fireworks, provided that this subsection shall not be deemed to prohibit the possession or use of safe and sane fireworks not otherwise prohibited by law, at places designated or provided for such purpose. 
FF.  To play or bet at or against any game which is played, conducted, dealt or carried on with cards, dice or other device, for money, chips, shells, credit or any other representative value, or maintain or exhibit any gambling table or other instrument of gambling or gaming. 
GG.  To place barricades, ropes, tape or other restricting device for the purpose of limiting the use of any park amenity from persons or groups. 
HH.  To bring into or use inflatable jumpers, inflatable slides and similar outside equipment. 
II.  No person shall skateboard or skate on curbs, planters, benches, steps, railings, fences, playground equipment, driveways or areas intended for uses other than skating. 
(Ord. No. 1070, § 2, 12-10-14; Ord. No. 1102, § 2, 4-26-17)  
12.32.150 - Officials exempted. 
Officers, agents, or employees of the City or Coachella Valley Recreation and Park District or their agents are exempt from the prohibited activities or conduct described in Section 12.32.130 to the extent that the performance of their official duties may require such activities or conduct. 
(Ord. No. 1070, § 2, 12-10-14)  
12.32.160 - Violations and punishment. 
Violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute an infraction and conviction thereof shall be punishable pursuant to Section 1.08.010 of this code except that violations of the subsections B, H, I, O, P, V, W, X, and Y of Section 12.32.140 shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1070, § 2, 12-10-14)  
12.32.170 - Standard for waiver of permit fee. 
The city manager or his or her designee may waive the required permit fee for groups or organizations that provide proof of bona fide tax exempt status from the Internal Revenue Service under Section 501(c)(3), Section 501(c)(4), Section 501(c)(8) and (10), or Section 501(c)(19) and demonstrate the proposed event is open to all residents. 
(Ord. No. 1070, § 2, 12-10-14)  
Chapter 12.34 - BASIN USE REGULATIONS 
 
12.34.010 - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Coachella Ordinance Regulating Use of the Basins." 
(Ord. No. 1068, § 2, 9-24-14)  
12.34.020 - Basin defined. 
As used in this chapter, "basin(s)" are the Retention Basins that are maintained and are part of the City's Landscaping and Lighting Maintenance Districts, which were established pursuant to the Landscaping and Lighting Act of 1972, Part 2 of Division 15 of the California Streets and Highways Code. 
(Ord. No. 1068, § 2, 9-24-14)  
12.34.030 - General requirements. 
No person or persons may engage in any commercial activity in a city basin and no person or persons may conduct any assembly, dance, meeting, or picnic for more than twenty-four (24) persons. 
(Ord. No. 1068, § 2, 9-24-14)  
12.34.040 - Use of basins. 
Any activity or use of the basins by any person shall not: 
A.  Be unlawful. 
B.  Present a hazard to public health; 
C.  Be reasonably anticipated to incite violence, crime or disorderly conduct. 
(Ord. No. 1068, § 2, 9-24-14)  
12.34.050 - Obedience of regulations. 
Any person who uses any basins shall be bound by all basin rules and regulations and all applicable ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 1068, § 2, 9-24-14)  
12.34.060 - Hours. 
Except as noted in Section 12.34.070, basins shall be open to the public between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. every day of the year unless otherwise designated by the city manager or their designee. The opening and closing hours for each individual basin shall be posted for public information. 
(Ord. No. 1068, § 2, 9-24-14)  
12.34.070 - Authority to close basins. 
A.  In an emergency or when the city manager, chief of police, fire chief or the director of public works, emergency services manager (or an appropriately designated representative of any such official) shall determine that the public, safety, or public health, or public morals, or public interest demands such action, any basin, or portion thereof, may be closed against the public and all persons may be excluded therefrom until such emergency or other reason upon which determination of the city manager, chief of police, fire chief or the director of public works is based has ceased, and upon the cessation thereof the basin or part or portion thereof so closed shall again be reopened to the public by order of proper authority. 
B.  No person having knowledge of or having been advised of any closure order issued pursuant to subsection A of this section, shall refuse or fail immediately to remove himself from the area or place so closed, and no such person shall enter or remain within any such area or place known by him to be so closed, until such area or place has been reopened to the public by order of the proper authority. 
(Ord. No. 1068, § 2, 9-24-14)  
12.34.080 - Operating, parking motor vehicles, including motorcycles, in basins is prohibited. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person or persons to operate or park any motor vehicle, including motorcycles, upon any basin within the city. 
B.  Any person who shall be convicted of a violation of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall make restitution and reimbursement to the city for any damage caused by any such operation of a motor vehicle or a motorcycle and shall be punished by fine, not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00) for a motor vehicle other than a motorcycle and a fine not exceeding twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for violation with a motorcycle. 
(Ord. No. 1068, § 2, 9-24-14)  
12.34.090 - Activities and conduct prohibited in city basins. 
The following activities and conduct are prohibited in all basins within the city by all persons: 
A.  To hitch, fasten, lead, drive or let loose any animal or fowl of any kind, except for dogs when they are led by a cord or chain not in excess of six feet in length. 
B.  To ride or drive any horse or animal, or to propel any vehicle, cycle or automobile within the basin area except on roadways posted for such use. 
C.  To cut, break, injure, deface, or disturb any tree, shrub, plant, rock, building, cage, pen, monument, fence, bench, or other apparatus, or property; to pluck, pull up, cut, take or remove any shrub, plants, bush or flower; or to make or write upon, paint or deface in any manner, any building, monument, fence, bench, or other structure. 
D.  To cut or remove any wood, turf grass, soil, rock, sand, gravel or fertilizer. 
E.  To make or kindle a fire. 
F.  To wash dishes or to empty saltwater or other waste liquid elsewhere than in the receptacles provided for such purposes. 
G.  To leave garbage, cans, bottles, papers, or other refuse anywhere other than the receptacles provided for that purpose. 
H.  To indulge in riotous, boisterous, threatening, or indecent conduct, not protected by the First Amendment of the United States Constitution, or abusive, threatening, profane, or indecent language not protected by the First Amendment of the United States Constitution. 
I.  To use, throw, or release any arrows or crossbows, except in those areas where such activities are specifically permitted. 
J.  To take, seize or hunt any nondomestic bird or animal. 
K.  To disturb, in any manner, any picnic, meeting, service, concert; or other private events. 
L.  To sell or offer for sale any merchandise, article, or anything whatsoever. 
M.  To remain, stay, or loiter in any public basin between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following day. 
N.  To ride bicycles in any area except roadways, and in each case shall be parked in racks when provided. 
O.  To assemble, collect, or gather together on any walk, passageway, or roadway, or in any other place set apart for travel of persons in or through any basin or to occupy the same so that the free passage or use by other persons is obstructed in any manner. 
P.  To occupy any part of any basin by a group in excess of twenty-four (24) persons. 
Q.  To enter any dressing room, or structure at any time when a person lawfully in control is not in attendance. 
R.  To enter or use any restrooms designated for a member of the opposite gender by any person over the age of eight years of age. 
S.  To camp or lodge. 
T.  To conduct any carnival, exhibition, theater, tent or open air, public dance or other business or activity. 
U.  To bring into, consume, or have in their possession in any basin any beer, wine, whiskey, bourbon, any distillant of wine or any beverage, brew or distilled liquid containing any portion of alcohol as one of its contents. 
V.  To engage or participate in any organized sport, including but not limited to soccer, football and soccer, that is part of an association, league or similar organization. 
W.  To carry or discharge any firearm, air gun, slingshot or other device designed or intended to discharge, or capable of discharging any dangerous missile, provided that this subsection shall not apply to any peace officer or other person lawfully licensed to carry a concealed weapon or who regularly carries a weapon in connection with private employment protecting property or persons (e.g., private patrol services and bodyguards). 
X.  To carry or discharge any firecracker, rocket, torpedo or any other fireworks, provided that this subsection shall not be deemed to prohibit the possession or use of safe and sane fireworks not otherwise prohibited by law, at places designated or provided for such purpose. 
Y.  To leave garbage, cans, bottles, papers or other waster liquids elsewhere than in facilities provided for such use. 
Z.  To play or bet at or against any game which is played, conducted, dealt or carried on with cards, dice or other device, for money, chips, shells, credit or any other representative of value, or maintain or exhibit any gambling table or other instrument of gambling or gaming. 
AA.  To place barricades, ropes, tape or other restricting device for the purpose of limiting the use of any basin amenity from persons or groups. 
BB.  To fail to obey the lawful orders of any employee of the city or agent of the city designated as having authority over the management of the basin who requests any person to cease and desist from any activities prohibited by this chapter or any other law applicable to basins. 
CC.  To fail to leave the basin premises when directed to do so by any employee of the city or agent of the city designated as having authority over the management of the basin because of violation of any provision of this chapter, or to return to the basin on the same calendar day after having complied with a direction to leave basin pursuant to this subsection. 
DD.  To carry or possess any lit tobacco product. 
EE.  To bring into or use inflatable jumpers, inflatable slides and similar outside equipment in any basin. 
FF.  To bring into or use a generator. 
(Ord. No. 1068, § 2, 9-24-14)  
12.34.100 - Duty to care for animals. 
A.  Dogs or cats must be led by a cord or chain not more than six feet long or properly confined within the interior of a vehicle, except when dogs which have been specifically trained and are being used by blind or disabled persons to aid and guide them in their movements; 
B.  It is the mandatory duty of all persons owning, possessing, in control of, or otherwise responsible for a dog, cat or an equine animal in a city park or other recreation area of the city to promptly collect, pick up and remove all fecal matter left behind by said animal in or upon the basin; but this section shall not apply to guide dogs for blind or disabled persons. 
(Ord. No. 1068, § 2, 9-24-14)  
12.34.110 - Officials exempted. 
Officers, agents, or employees of the city are exempt from the prohibited activities or conduct described in Section 12.32.090 to the extent that the performance of their official duties may require such activities or conduct. 
(Ord. No. 1068, § 2, 9-24-14)  
12.34.120 - Violations and punishment. 
Violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute an infraction and conviction thereof shall be punishable pursuant to Section 1.08.010 of this code except that violations of the subsections B, H, I, O, P, U, W, BB, and CC of Section 12.32.090 shall constitute a misdemeanor." 
(Ord. No. 1068, § 2, 9-24-14)  
Chapter 12.36 - SKATEBOARD PARK REGULATIONS 
 
12.36.010 - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of this chapter are: (1) to establish regulations for the use and enjoyment of a skateboard park at an area designated by the city manager in the interest of public safety; (2) to comply with Health and Safety Code Section 115800 by adopting an ordinance requiring use of safety equipment and the posting of signs; and (3) to satisfy the conditions of Section 115800 for qualified immunity from liability for skateboarding as a hazardous recreational activity. 
(Ord. 859 § 1 (part), 2001)  
12.36.020 - Definitions. 
A.  For the purposes of this chapter only, the following definitions shall apply: 
"Skateboard" means a board of any material upon which any person may ride, which has wheels attached and such wheels may be used for moving or propulsion. 
"Skateboard park area" means that area in the city of Coachella, California which is designated for use as a skateboard park by the city manager or his or her designee. 
B.  All other terms used in this chapter shall have the meanings assigned in common usage, except as otherwise defined by the Health and Safety Code or any other applicable law. 
(Ord. 859 § 1 (part), 2001)  
12.36.030 - Designation of skateboard park area and hours of operation. 
The skateboard park area designated by the city manager pursuant to this chapter shall operate during those hours and those days designated by the city manager or his or her designee. 
(Ord. 859 § 1 (part), 2001)  
12.36.040 - Rules for use of skateboard park area. 
The following regulations shall be posted for public notice at the skateboard park area (the "designated skating area"): 
A.  No person shall skate or skateboard within a skateboarding park area at times other than those established as the hours of operation. The hours of operation shall be six a.m. to ten p.m.; 
B.  No person under the age of twelve shall use the skateboard park area unless supervised by a person at least twenty-five (25) years of age. The supervising person must assume full responsibility for the person under the age of twelve (12) using the skateboarding park area; 
C.  No person shall skate or skateboard when the skateboarding park area is wet or when hazardous conditions, such as irregularities in the skating surface or skateboarding park area exist; 
D.  No person shall cause or initiate any act of violence or harass another person inside or around the skateboard park area; 
E.  Only skateboards and in-line skates can be used in the skateboarding park area. Use of other equipment, such as bicycles or scooters within the skateboarding park area is prohibited; 
F.  No person shall use the skateboarding park area unless they wear proper safety equipment including a helmet, elbow pads, and knee pads properly sized and designated for the intended use; 
G.  No person shall consume food or drink in the skateboarding park area; 
H.  No person shall use alcohol, drugs or smoke in the skateboarding park area or surrounding areas; 
I.  All persons using the skateboarding park area must place trash in cans provided by the city; 
J.  No person shall cause graffiti or tagging in or around the skateboarding park area; 
K.  No person shall skateboard or skate on curbs, planters, benches, steps, railings, fences, playground equipment, driveways or areas intended for uses other than skating within the area surrounding the skateboarding park area; 
L.  No unauthorized pieces of equipment, obstacles or apparatus may be brought into the skateboarding park area; 
M.  No spectators are permitted within the area designated for skateboarding; 
N.  Reckless or destructive skating that jeopardizes the safety or persons or property is prohibited; 
O.  Glass containers are prohibited in the skateboarding park area; 
P.  All organized events shall have prior written approval from the city of Coachella parks and recreation department; 
Q.  Animals are not allowed in the skateboarding park area; and 
R.  Any violation of any section in this chapter is deemed to be an infraction and is punishable as such according to the provisions of this code and law. 
(Ord. 1004 § 1, 2008: Ord. 1003 § 2, 2008: Ord. 859 § 1 (part), 2001)  
12.36.050 - Hazardous recreational activity. 
As provided by Health and Safety Code Section 115800, performing stunts, tricks or luge skateboarding in the designated area by persons age twelve (12) years and older is deemed a hazardous recreational activity within the meaning of Government Code Section 831.7 and the city may not be liable for injuries incurred by persons participating in such activities. 
(Ord. 1004 § 2, 2008: Ord. 1003 § 3, 2008: Ord. 859 § 1 (part), 2001)  
12.36.060 - Posted signs. 
A.  The city shall post an official sign at the entry of designated skating area and additional signs therein as needed to provide reasonable notice of this chapter. 
B.  The sign(s) shall provide notice to the public of: 
1.  The regulations of Section 12.36.040(A) through (H) of this chapter; 
2.  The caution: "Skateboarding is a hazardous recreational activity and the City may not be liable for injuries"; and 
3.  The caution: "Violators will be subject to citation, a monetary fine and removal." 
(Ord. 859 § 1 (part), 2001)  
12.36.070 - Record keeping. 
The parks department shall develop a system for recording skateboarding injuries occurring at the skateboard park and claims arising from its use and shall report those incidents to the judicial council in accordance with Health and Safety Code Section 115800. 
(Ord. 859 § 1 (part), 2001)  
12.36.080 - Infraction violation. 
A violation of Section 12.36.040(A) through (H) of this chapter by the person responsible for committing such violation shall constitute an infraction violation which shall be subject to the provisions set forth in Title 3 of this code, including but not limited to the imposition of any and all criminal penalties set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. 859 § 1 (part), 2001)  
12.36.090 - Civil fines. 
Any person convicted of an infraction shall, for each separate violation of Section 12.36.040(A) through (H) and in addition to any infraction penalty imposed pursuant to Title 3 of this code, be subject to: (a) a fine in an amount not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for a first conviction of an offense; (b) a fine in an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a second conviction of the same offense within a twelve (12) month period of the date of the first offense; and (c) a fine in an amount not to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for the third conviction of the same offense within a twelve (12) month period of the date of the first offense. The fine for a fourth and subsequent conviction of the same offense within a twelve (12) month period of the date of the first offense shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(Ord. 859 § 1 (part), 2001)  
12.36.100 - Administrative citation. 
The city may issue an administrative citation, pursuant to Title 3 of this code, to any person responsible for committing a violation of Section 12.36.040(A) through (H) of this chapter. Nothing in this section shall preclude the city from also issuing an infraction citation upon the occurrence of the same offense on a separate day. 
(Ord. 859 § 1 (part), 2001)  
12.36.110 - Other remedies. 
Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the city from pursuing all appropriate remedies identified in Title 3 of this code, to any person responsible for committing a violation of Section 12.36.040(A) through (H) of this chapter. 
(Ord. 859 § 1 (part), 2001)  
Chapter 12.38 - SKATEBOARDING AND ROLLER SKATING 
 
12.38.010 - Prohibited in commercial districts. 
Pursuant to the codes, the city council prohibits any person from operating, propelling, rig on any skateboard, roller skate or similar device upon any roadway, including any street, highway, bikeway, sidewalk, mall or plaza walkway areas, in any commercial and/or office professional districts within the city. 
(Ord. 1005-(2) § 1 (part), 2008)  
12.38.020 - Penalty. 
It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any requirement of this chapter. Any person violating any provision of this chapter or failing to comply with any requirement is deemed guilty of an infraction in accordance with Chapter 1.08 of the municipal code. 
(Ord. 1005-(2) § 1 (part), 2008)  
Chapter 12.40 - TRANSPORTATION DEMAND MANAGEMENT PROGRAM 
 
12.40.010 - Purpose and intent. 
This chapter is intended to protect the public health, welfare and safety by reducing air pollution caused by vehicle trips and vehicle miles traveled. This chapter is intended to accomplish emission reductions by meeting requirements of AB 1791, Section 65089(b)(3) which requires development of a trip reduction and travel demand element to the congestion management plan (CMP), and Section 65089.3(b) which requires adoption and implementation of trip reduction and travel demand ordinances by local agencies. 
(Prior code § 31-1)  
12.40.020 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the definitions for the following terms shall apply: 
"Alternative transportation modes" means any mode of travel that serves as an alternative to the single occupant vehicle. This can include all forms of ridesharing such as carpooling or vanpooling, as well as public transit, bicycling or walking. 
"Applicable development" means any new development project that is determined to meet or exceed the employment threshold using the criteria contained in this chapter. An applicable development also includes developments which are owned and/or managed as one unit, such as a business park or shopping center, that also meet or exceed the employment threshold. 
"Bicycle facilities" means any capital improvements which would benefit an employee who rides a bicycle to their worksite, including shower facilities, locker facilities, bicycle parking, etc. 
"Change of use" means a development or facility space of a lessee which has altered its initial use to another use not related to the previous. (Example: Office space changes its use to commercial space.) 
"Developer" means the builder who is responsible for the planning, design and construction of an applicable development project. A developer may be responsible for implementing the ordinance codified in this chapter as determined by the property owner. 
"Employee" means any person employed by a firm, person(s), business, educational institution, nonprofit agency or corporation, government agency or other entity which employs one hundred (100) or more persons at a single worksite. 
"Employment generation factors" refers to factors developed for use by the jurisdiction for protecting the potential employment of any proposed development project. 
"Employer" means any person(s), firm, business, educational institution, government agency, nonprofit agency or corporation, or other entity which employs one hundred (100) or more persons at a single worksite, and may either be a property owner or tenant of an applicable development project. 
"Employment threshold" refers to the number of employees which an applicable development must have for the TDM ordinance to be required of that employer. 
"Minimum standards" means the minimum changes made to establish a transportation demand management and trip reduction plan at an applicable development project to a level which satisfies this chapter. 
"Mixed-use development" means new development projects that combine any land uses one with another. 
"New development permit" means any nonresidential project being processed where some level of discretionary action by a decision-making body is required. 
"Peak period" means those hours of the business day between seven a.m. and nine a.m. inclusive, Monday through Friday, which TDM strategies such as this chapter identify as the priority period for reducing work related vehicle trips. 
"Property owner" means the legal owner of the applicable development. 
"Rideshare facilities" means any capital improvements which would benefit an employee who rideshares to the worksite, including on-site amenities, preferential parking, and rideshare drop-off areas at the entrance of the worksite. 
"Site development plan/permit" means a precise plan of development that is subject to review and approval by the planning commission including a conditional use permit and architectural review. 
"Transit facilities" means any capital improvements which would benefit an employee who uses any form of transit to travel to the worksite, including transit stops, shelters, bus turnouts, park and ride lots, and other transit amenities. 
"Transportation management association" means a voluntary entity of employers, property owners and other interested parties who share a mutual concern for local transportation problems. TMAs have the ability to collectively pool participants' resources to address these issues. A TMA must still meet a ten percent reduction in work related trips for each individual applicable new development. 
"Transportation demand management" means the implementation of programs, plans or policies designed to encourage changes in individual travel behavior. TDM can include an emphasis on alternative travel modes to the single occupant vehicle such as carpools, vanpools, and transit; reductions or elimination of the number of vehicle trips, or shift in the time of vehicle commutes to other than peak period. 
"Worksite" means a building, grouping of buildings located within the jurisdiction which are in physical contact or separated solely by a private or public roadway or other private right-of-way, and which are owned or operated by the same employer (or by employers under common control). 
(Prior code § 31-2)  
12.40.030 - Applicability. 
A.  This chapter shall apply to all new development projects and/or change of use projects that are estimated to employ a total of one hundred (100) or more persons as determined by the methodology outlined in subsection B of this section. 
B.  For purposes of determining whether a new development project is subject to this chapter, the total employment figure will be determined as follows: 
1.  Employment projections developed by the project applicant, subject to approval by department of community development; or 
2.  Employment projections developed by department of community development using the following employee generation factors by type of use: 
Land Use Category 	Gross Sq. Ft. / Employee 
Retail/Commercial 	500 
Office/ Professional 	250 
Industrial/ Manufacturing 	525 
Hotel/Motel 	.8-1.2 employees / room 
Hospital 	300 
 
The employment projection for a development of mixed use or multiple uses shall be calculated on a case by case basis based upon the proportion of development devoted to each type of use. 
(Prior code § 31-3)  
12.40.040 - Exemptions. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions, the following uses and activities shall be specifically exempt from this chapter: 
A.  Development projects expected to employ fewer than one hundred (100) persons. 
B.  Temporary construction activities on any affected project, including activities performed by engineers, architects, contact subcontractors and construction workers. 
C.  Other temporary activities, as defined in the city development code, or as authorized by the city when such temporary activities shall discontinue at the end of the designated time period. 
(Prior code § 31-4)  
12.40.050 - Minimum standards. 
A.  All applicable new developments (nonresidential developments which employ one hundred (100) or more persons) which are owned and managed as one unit shall submit a transportation demand management plan prepared by a traffic engineer, transportation planner or other qualified professional identifying traffic impacts associated with a proposed project and including design recommendations and mitigation measures, as appropriate, to address on and off-site project impacts. Such TDM plan shall implement a trip reduction plan to reduce work-related vehicle trips by ten (10) percent from the expected number of trips related to the project (as indicated on the Trip Generation Handbook published by the Institute of Traffic Engineers). The plan shall also indicate specific strategies and guidelines to reduce the amount of trips and increase the amount of nonvehicular transportation. 
B.  All developers of applicable new developments and/or change of use shall be subject to required capital improvement standards as specified in this section. These standards must all be addressed to realize if they are applicable to their development. These required standards may be used to achieve the mandatory reduction of ten (10) percent in the expected number of trips related to the project. Developers of all applicable developments shall include in their project site development plan's provisions to address each of the following capital improvements: 
1.  Transit facilities (on and off site); 
2.  Bicycle facilities; and 
3.  Rideshare facilities. 
C.  Operational standards are standards which employers, TMAs or a managing office of a development administered as one unit are subject to require to achieve the mandatory ten (10) percent reduction in trips related to the project. These standards must be established sixty (60) days after occupancy of the development by an employer. 
Those employers required to submit operations plans to the South Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD) as imposed by Regulation XV shall not have any additional requirements for reviews of operational standards under this chapter. The TDM plan shall include a copy of the SCAQMD submittal for the city's information. 
D.  The following options may be included in the developer's TDM plan to fulfill both the capital improvement standards and the operational standards: 
1.  Alternate Work Schedules/Flex-Time. Incorporate alternate work schedules and flex-time programs (such as 9/80 or 4/40 work schedule); 
2.  Telecommuting. Establishing telecommuting or work at home programs to allow employees to work at home or at a satellite work center; 
3.  Bicycle Facilities. Provide bicycle parking facilities equal to five percent of the total required automobile parking spaces; and preserve two percent of the gross floor area for employee locker and shower facilities; 
4.  On-Site Employee Housing and Shuttles. Provide affordable on-site housing and shuttles to and from residential and work areas; 
5.  Preferential parking for carpool vehicles; 
6.  Information center for transportation alternatives; 
7.  Rideshare vehicle loading areas; 
8.  Vanpool vehicle accessibility; 
9.  Bus stop improvements; 
10.  On-site child care facilities; 
11.  Availability of electrical outlets for recharging of electrical vehicles; 
12.  On-site amenities such as cafeterias and restaurants, automated teller machines, and other services that would eliminate the need for additional trips; 
13.  Airport shuttle service to hotels and spas; 
14.  Contributions to funds providing regional facilities such as park and ride lots, multi-modal transportation centers and transit alternatives in the area; 
15.  Incentives for mass transit usage including provision of a bus pass, additional pay, flex time or others; 
16.  Implementation of increased parking fees or new fees; 
17.  Restriction of business hours; 
18.  Restriction of delivery hours; 
19.  Provide a direct pedestrian path from the closest transit stop into the facility; 
20.  Provide [or] contribute up to one dollar ($1.00) per square foot to a housing subsidy fund so that affordable housing can be created closer to employer sites; 
21.  Develop rideshare and shuttle programs at resorts/hotels; 
22.  Create golf cart circulation system; 
23.  If an applicable development is on a current transit route, provide a transit stop, shelter, trash barrels, benches, shade and wind protection, and bus turnouts; 
24.  If an applicable development is not located on a current transit route, contribute to fund which will be used to provide transit amenities; 
25.  If an applicable development is located on a major arterial, statements 23 and 24 should be considered; 
26.  Provisions for the implementation of bicycle lanes; and 
27.  Provide other creative or innovative strategies to reduce vehicle trips. 
(Prior code § 31-5)  
12.40.060 - Processing time limits. 
It shall be the responsibility of the director of community development, or designee to inform the applicant of a transportation demand management review application that the completeness of such an application must be within thirty (30) days of receipt. Once the application is complete, the director of community development shall either approve or deny the application within sixty (60) days or forward the application to the planning commission for their approval, assuring that the application is processed expediently (no more than ninety (90) days). 
(Prior code § 31-6)  
12.40.070 - Filing procedure and evaluation. 
A.  A request for TDM approval shall be made through application forms provided by the director of community development. The application for such approval shall be filed with the director of community development within thirty (30) days of receipt. 
B.  A processing fee shall be paid at the time the completed application is filed with the director of community development. The fee shall be as stated in Section 12.40.090. 
C.  An application for TDM Review shall be supplemented by plans and other pertinent information to adequately address all applicable aspects of a proposal. 
D.  The director of community development shall review applications and arrive at recommendations or approvals as appropriate, by considering aspects of conformance with this chapter. 
(Prior code § 31-7)  
12.40.080 - Renewal/review for compliance. 
A.  The department of community development shall review approved TDM plans annually for compliance to this chapter by sampling twenty-five (25) percent of implemented TDM programs. This sampling will result in either renewal of a TDM program if the TDM plan is reducing work related trips by ten (10) percent, or denial of a renewal due to noncompliance with this chapter. If a TDM plan is not renewed, an updated plan must be submitted by the applicable development (developer, owner, employer or managing office) within thirty (30) days of the denial of renewal. A follow-up review for compliance of the updated TDM plan will take place within ninety (90) days. 
B.  The department of community development shall also review any approved TDM plan for compliance if complaints about a TDM plan and its noncompliance are recorded to the city. 
(Prior code § 31-8)  
12.40.090 - Fees for initial review and program monitoring. 
For purposes of meeting its obligations under this chapter, the city council of the city may set fees deemed necessary to review and monitor TDM plans. (See Ordinance No. 657). The following fees shall be imposed on the subject property owner(s): 
A.  A trip reduction/TDM plan review fee of one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00) at the time of initial project application submission to the director of community development; 
B.  A trip reduction/TDM plan renewal/review for compliance fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) at the time of initial review by the city. 
This shall be a fixed fee charged to all applicable developments for the purpose of defraying the costs of processing and review of individual trip reduction/TDM programs. 
(Prior code § 31-9)  
12.40.100 - Enforcement and penalties. 
For purposes of ensuring that applicable developments comply with the provisions of this chapter, the city shall, following written notice to subject property owner(s), initiate enforcement action(s) against such property owner(s), or designee(s) which may include, but not be limited to, the following: 
A.  Withholding issuance of a building permit or certificate of use and occupancy; 
B.  Noncompliance infraction; and 
C.  Issuance of a stop work order. 
The city may also penalize for noncompliance in other ways [as] they may deem necessary. 
(Prior code § 31-10)  
12.40.110 - Appeals. 
A.  An appeal may be made by the property owner(s) or designee(s) of any applicable development regarding decisions made by the director of community development on provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Such appeals may be reviewed by the city council of the city for resolutions, who must act on such appeals within thirty (30) days of such filing. 
(Prior code § 31-11)  
Chapter 12.42 - CAMPING WITHIN CITY LIMITS 
 
12.42.010 - Purpose and intent. 
This chapter is intended to protect the public health, welfare, and safety by reserving open spaces and facilities within the city limits for their intended purposes. Public property within the city should be readily accessible and available to residents and the public at large. The use of these areas for camping purposes or storage of personal property interferes with the rights of others to use the areas for their intended purposes and is deleterious to the public peace, health, safety, and welfare. The use of these areas for camping obstructs the intended uses for the public at large, contributes to blight, and can cause damage to public property. This chapter is intended to avoid unsafe and potentially disorderly conditions, unsanitary and unhealthful conditions, and the degradation or destruction of open spaces and facilities within the city. 
(Ord. No. 1085, § 1, 2-10-16)  
12.42.020 - Definitions. 
A.  "Camping" means residing in or using any public property for one (1) or more nights for living accommodation purposes, such as sleeping activities or making preparations to sleep (including the laying down of bedding for the purpose of sleeping), or storing personal belongings (including but not limited to clothing, sleeping bags, bedrolls, blankets, sheets, luggage, backpacks, kitchen utensils, cookware, and similar material), or making any fire or using any tents, or regularly cooking meals. These activities constitute camping when it reasonably appears, in light of all the circumstances, that a person is using public property as a living accommodation for one (1) or more nights, with the intent to camp. 
B.  "Camp facilities" include, but are not limited to, tents, huts, or temporary shelters. 
C.  "Camp paraphernalia" includes, but is not limited to, tarpaulins, cots, beds, sleeping bags, hammocks, or non-city designated cooking facilities and similar equipment. 
D.  "Public property" means any publicly owned property in the city, whether improved or unimproved, including, but not limited to, any of the following: public alleyways; public parking lots; public passageways; public streets; public rights-of-way; publicly owned, maintained, or operated parks; publicly owned, maintained, or operated landscaped areas or greenbelts; publicly owned, maintained, or operated open spaces including, but not limited to, public facilities or buildings of any kind; public sidewalks, curbs, and gutters; public educational institutions; or other government owned, maintained, or operated properties located within the city. 
E.  "Store" means to put aside or accumulate for use when needed, to put for safekeeping, to place or leave in a location. 
(Ord. No. 1085, § 1, 2-10-16)  
12.42.030 - Unlawful camping. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to camp, occupy camp facilities, or use camp paraphernalia on any public property within the city, except as otherwise provided herein or mandated by applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 1085, § 1, 2-10-16)  
12.42.040 - Storage of personal property on public property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to store personal property, including camp facilities and camp paraphernalia, on any public property within the city, except as otherwise provided herein or mandated by applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 1085, § 1, 2-10-16)  
12.42.050 - Exemption for necessity. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any individual camping by necessity, including, for example, those instances in which every shelter in the local area is at capacity and the individual in question is involuntarily homeless. 
(Ord. No. 1085, § 1, 2-10-16)  
Chapter 12.44 - AGGRESSIVE SOLICITATION 
 
12.44.010 - Purpose and intent. 
This chapter is intended to protect the public health, welfare, and safety by prohibiting aggressive forms of solicitation in or near roadways or other sensitive locations. This chapter is enacted for the purposes of protecting the privacy and safety of residents in roadways or where they may be actively operating a motor vehicle and thus to ensure the safe and orderly flow of traffic throughout the city. 
(Ord. No. 1086, § 1, 2-10-16)  
12.44.020 - Definitions. 
A.  "Aggressive manner" shall mean any of the following: 
1.  Approaching or speaking to a person, or following the person before, during, or after soliciting, asking, or begging, if that conduct is intended or is likely to cause a reasonable person to 
(a)  Fear bodily harm to oneself or to another, damage to or loss of property, or 
(b)  Otherwise be intimidated into giving money or other thing of value; 
2.  Intentionally touching or causing physical contact with another person or an occupied vehicle without that person's consent in the course of soliciting, asking, or begging; 
3.  Intentionally blocking or interfering with the safe or free passage of a pedestrian or vehicle by any means, including unreasonably causing a pedestrian or vehicle operator to take evasive action to avoid physical contact; 
4.  Using violent or threatening gestures toward a person solicited either before, during, or after soliciting, asking, or begging; 
5.  Persisting in closely following or approaching a person after the person solicited has been solicited and has informed the solicitor by words or conduct that such person does not want to be solicited or does not want to give money or any other thing of value to the solicitor; or 
6.  Using profane, offensive, or abusive language which is inherently likely to provoke an immediate violent reaction either before, during, or after solicitation. 
B.  "Automated teller machine" shall mean any electronic information processing device which accepts or dispenses cash in connection with a credit, deposit, or convenience account. 
C.  "Automated teller machine facility" shall mean the area comprised of one or more automated teller machines, and any adjacent space which is made available to banking customers after regular business hours. 
D.  "Bank" means any member bank of the Federal Reserve System, and any bank, banking association, trust company, savings bank, or other banking institution organized and operated under the laws of the United States, and any bank the deposits of which are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. 
E.  "Check cashing business" means any person that customarily provides the services as a check seller, bill payer, or prorate pursuant, including, but not limited to, any such person licensed pursuant to Division 3 of the California Financial Code, commencing with Section 12000. 
F.  "Credit union" means any federal credit union and any state-chartered credit union the accounts of which are insured by the Administrator of the National Credit Union Administration. 
G.  "Public place" shall mean a place to which the public or a substantial group of persons has access, and includes, but is not limited to, any street, highway, sidewalk, parking lot, plaza, transportation facility, school, place of amusement, park, playground, and any doorway, entrance, hallway, lobby, or other portion of any business establishment, an apartment house, or hotel not constituting a room or apartment designed for actual residence. 
I.  "Savings and loan association" means any federal savings and loan association and any "insured institution" as defined in Section 401 of the National Housing Act, as amended, and any federal credit union as defined in Section 2 of the Federal Credit Union Act. 
J.  "Solicit, ask, or beg" shall include using the spoken, written, or printed word, or bodily gestures, signs, or other means with the purpose of obtaining an immediate donation of money or other thing of value or soliciting the sale of goods or services. 
(Ord. No. 1086, § 1, 2-10-16)  
12.44.030 - Aggressive solicitation prohibited. 
No person shall solicit, ask, or beg in an aggressive manner in any public place. 
(Ord. No. 1086, § 1, 2-10-16)  
12.44.040 - All solicitation prohibited at banks. 
No person shall solicit, ask, or beg inside of, or within fifteen (15) feet of any entrance or exit of, any bank, savings and loan association, credit union, or check cashing business during its business hours, or within fifteen (15) feet of any automated teller machine during the time it is available for customers' use. Provided, however, that when an automated teller machine is located within an automated teller machine facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the automated teller machine facility. Provided further, that no person shall solicit, ask, or beg within an automated teller machine facility where a reasonable person would or should know that he or she does not have the permission to do so from the owner or other person lawfully in possession of such facility. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prohibit the lawful vending of goods and services within such areas. 
(Ord. No. 1086, § 1, 2-10-16)  
12.44.050 - Motor vehicles and parking lots. 
A.  Motor Vehicles. No person shall approach an operator or occupant of a motor vehicle for the purpose of soliciting, asking, or begging while such vehicle is being operated in any public place. 
B.  Parking Lots and Gas Stations. No person shall solicit, ask or beg in any parking lot, parking structure, or gas station. 
C.  Exemptions. This section shall not apply to any of the following: 
1.  To solicitations related to business that is being conducted on the subject premises by the owner or lawful tenant; or 
2.  To solicitations related to emergency repairs requested by the operator or other occupant of a vehicle; or 
3.  To solicitations that apply to vehicles lawfully parked within a public street; or 
4.  To solicitations on any sidewalk or walkway unless located within ten feet of the vehicular entrance or exit of any parking lot or structure. 
(Ord. No. 1086, § 1, 2-10-16)  
12.44.060 - Demand for services. 
This chapter is not intended to proscribe any demand for payment for services rendered or goods delivered. 
(Ord. No. 1086, § 1, 2-10-16)  
12.44.070 - Free speech. 
This chapter is not intended to restrict the exercise of protected free speech, and is intended to leave open ample alternative means of communication for all members of the community and for all protected speech activities. 
(Ord. No. 1086, § 1, 2-10-16)  
12.44.080 - Violation—Penalty. 
A violation of this section is punishable as a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1086, § 1, 2-10-16)  
12.44.090 - Nonexclusivity. 
Nothing in this section shall limit or preclude the enforcement of other applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 1086, § 1, 2-10-16)  
Title 13 - PUBLIC SERVICES 
Chapters:  
Chapter 13.01 - SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Sewers generally, Health and Safety Code § 4600 et seq.; authority of City to regulate construction of sewers, Government Code §§ 38660, 38900. 
 
Article I - In General 
 
13.01.001 - Area served. 
The city of Coachella municipal code Title 13, Public Utilities, provides for the regulatory framework for sewer and water services for the city of Coachella and the recognized sphere of influence in Riverside County, California. This title may be referred to as the public utilities ordinances. The public utilities ordinance pertains to water, sewer, and electric system service to land or improvements, or both, lying within the boundaries of the city, unless specific provision is made by agreement with the city for service outside of city limits. If sewer and water do not exist in the immediate area, the applicant, owner, or the customer shall provide or finance such facilities and/or capacity. The owner of the property outside of a then-existing city limit, which property has adequate sewer and water facilities and/or capacity or funds therefore, must cause all such facilities and/or capacity or funds to be transferred to the city. 
Property not within the incorporated boundaries of the city and which is to be provided with service by the city, is subject to annexation to the city of Coachella. Annexation to the city may, in turn, be subject to annexation to other agencies, except as otherwise provided by agreement. 
The city, at its discretion, may from time to time contract with an applicant, owner, or customer to initiate and pursue to completion the establishment of a financing district and the sale of bonds to provide the funds to construct the necessary sewer, water, and/or recycled water facilities or system capacity necessary for service to collection and distribution facilities that are required to provide the applicant, owner or customer as a condition of obtaining service from the city. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-13)  
13.01.002 - Service conditions. 
A.  Sewer and water system service shall be provided by the city only if a permit for such sewer and/or water system service is obtained in the manner hereinafter provided, unless otherwise determined by the city council. 
B.  Sewer and water system service shall be available only in accordance with the rules and regulations, as well as applicable federal, state, and local statutes, ordinances, regulations, and contracts, and other requirements including, but not by way of limitation, the California Water Code, and other state statutes and regulations imposed by the California Regional Water Quality Control Board - Colorado River Region, and State and local health departments, as well as the terms of any service agreement and permit issued by the city. Any such permit may be revoked by the city and thereupon all such sewer and water system service shall cease in the manner provided for in the city Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-13)  
13.01.003 - Application procedure. 
A.  Sewer and Water Permit Application. An application for sewer and water must be made in writing, signed by the applicant, and the owner or customer, if they are not one in the same. The utilities general manager in his/her discretion may provide an abbreviated form of the application for permits when no unusual facts are determined in his/her discretion to exist. Other than specified above, the form of application shall be furnished by the city. 
1.  An applicant for sewer and water service permit under this chapter must comply with the requirements of any and all applicable federal, state, and local statutes, ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations and other requirements. 
B.  Discharge Permit Application. An applicant for sewer service may be required to obtain a discharge permit for use of the city's sewerage facilities in addition to the permit required for all applicants for sewer service. The conditions under which a discharge permit may be required are based on the quantities and constituents of wastewater discharged into the city's sewerage facilities. The applicant shall comply with all federal and state requirements including, but not by way of limitation, any and all requirements of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and any commitments for reimbursements required by the EPA in excess of the charges of the city. These requirements are set forth in the Federal Water Pollution Control Act and the Code of Federal Regulations, which by this reference are herein incorporated as though set forth in full. 
C.  The city may, at its discretion, require specific prior approval of any permit by any federal, state, and or local agency having jurisdiction over an interest in the operation of the city's facilities. 
D.  The utilities general manager review applications and shall render a decision on completed applications. The utilities general manager shall review the application and make such investigation relating thereto as deemed necessary. The utilities general manager may prescribe requirements in writing to the applicant as to the facilities necessary to be constructed, manner of connection, the financial requirements, and the use of service including the availability of adequate water and sewerage system facilities, and in cases of sewer service pretreatment facilities, if necessary, to insure initial and future continued compliance with the city's ordinance and rules and regulations and any other applicable requirements. 
E.  An applicant may appeal the utilities general manager's decision on an application by following the procedures in Sections 13.02.780 and 13.02.785. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-13)  
13.01.004 - Size, location, and installation of service line or lateral sewer. 
A.  Water Service Lines. The city reserves the right to determine the size of the water service lines, the service connections, and the meters and shall also have the right to determine the kind and size of backflow protection devices for potable water services, in accordance with Title 13 Public Utilities, and any and all other appurtenances to service. The water service lines shall be installed to a curb line or property line of the customer's property, abutting upon a public street, highway, alley, easement, lane, or road other than a freeway in which are installed water mains of the city. 
B.  Lateral Sewer and Lateral Connections. The city shall determine and specify in the permit the size, location, and manner of installing the sewer lateral. Such design shall be in accordance with the city's Standard Details manual. If a lateral sewer is installed by the applicant, owner, or customer, the lateral sewer joints shall remain exposed until they are inspected and approved by the city. The size, slope, alignment, and materials of construction of the customer's building sewer and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling of the trench shall conform to the city's Standard Detail Manual up to the city's jurisdiction and from there on to applicable plumbing codes enacted and enforced by the city of Coachella. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-13)  
13.01.005 - Limitations on service connections. 
A.  Water Service Connections - Each residence and/or building under separate ownership must be provided with a single and separate water service connection and water meter except under special conditions as determined by the city. Except as provided below, two or more buildings under one ownership and on the same parcel of land shall be supplied by a single water meter. 
1.  The city reserves the right to limit the number of buildings, such as apartments or the area of land under one ownership to be supplied by one water service connection and meter. 
2.  Except for a condominium building, not more than one water meter for domestic or commercial supply shall be installed for one building, except under special conditions as determined by the city. 
3.  A water service connection and water meter shall not be used to supply adjoining property of a different property owner, or to supply property of the same owner across the street or alley. 
4.  When property provided with a water service connection and water meter is subdivided, such connection and meter shall be considered as serving the lot or parcel of land that it directly or first enters. Additional water mains and/or service lines will be required for all subdivided areas in accordance with this ordinance. 
5.  All water used on any premises where a meter is installed must pass through the meter. Customers shall be held responsible and charged for all water passing through their meters. 
6.  Every water service shall be equipped with an angle curb stop or wheel valve on the inlet side of the meter; such valve or angle curb stop being intended exclusively for the use of the city in controlling the water supply through the service line. If the curb stop or wheel valve is damaged by the customer's use to an extent requiring replacement, such replacement shall be at the customer's expense. 
7.  If the customer's rate of consumption results in excessive wear of the meter, or is such that the meter is unable to measure the flow of water accurately, the city may increase the size of the meter and require payment of the actual cost of installing the new meter. 
B.  Lateral Sewer. 
1.  For single family detached unit residential development, a separate and independent lateral sewer shall be provided for every individual parcel or building under individual ownership. 
2.  For condominium developments the following minimum number of lateral sewer shall be provided: 
a.  Non-Stacked: One lateral per every two units - Four inch size. 
b.  Two Story Stacked: One lateral per every four units - Six inch size. 
c.  Multi-Story: Two laterals per building - Six inch size. 
3.  For apartment developments the following minimum number of lateral sewers shall be provided, one lateral per building - Six inch size. 
C.  The city reserves the right to limit the number of buildings or the area of land under one ownership to be connected to one lateral sewer. 
D.  When property provided with a lateral sewer is subdivided, such lateral shall be considered as serving the lot or parcel of land that it directly first enters. Additional sewer and/or lateral sewers may/will be required for all subdivided areas in accordance with the city ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-13)  
13.01.006 - Illegal connections. 
No person shall make connection to the city's sewer and water system facilities without a permit or except as provided in the permit issued by the city. Specifically, but not by way of limitation as to any connection to the city's sewerage facilities, no roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, carwash pads not covered by a roof, or other sources of runoff or groundwater shall be connected to a city sewer facility or to a building sewer or drain that in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a city sewer facility. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-13)  
13.01.007—01.009 - Reserved.  
13.01.010 - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
"Applicant" means the person making application for a permit for a sewer or plumbing installation and shall be the owner of premises to be served by the sewer for which a permit is requested, or his authorized agent. 
"Bedroom" means any room exclusive of a living room, kitchen, dining room, laundry room or bathroom which is either regularly used for sleeping purposes regardless of size, or which may be used for sleeping purposes and has a floor area of not less than sixty (60) square feet, and shall include any study, den, rumpus room or family room which has a floor area of not less than sixty (60) square feet. 
"BOD" or "biochemical oxygen demand" is the measurement of the dissolved oxygen used by microorganisms in the biochemical oxidation of the organic matter. 
"Building" means any structure used for human habitation or a place for business, industry, recreation or any other purpose containing sanitary plumbing facilities. 
"Building sewer" means that portion of any sewer beginning at the plumbing or drainage outlet of any building and running to the property line or to a private sewage disposal facility. Unless otherwise provided for, building sewers are not the property or responsibility of the city, but remain in the ownership of and responsibility of the private property owner. 
"City" means the city of Coachella. 
"Commercial users" includes all retail stores, restaurants, office buildings, laundries and other private business and service establishments, schools, churches and all public and private institutions. 
"Depositor" means the person making a deposit with the city. 
"Direct costs" means any costs that are directly attributable to and for the sole benefit of a fund. Such costs include but are not limited to salaries and related benefits and departmental expenses for supplies, communications, utilities, rents and leases, equipment maintenance, professional services, insurance, memberships, conferences, training and employee educational requirements. 
"District" means the Coachella Sanitary District. 
"Floatable hydrocarbon oil" means hydrocarbon oil floating to the surface of a sample of water when it is retained for one hour in a quiescent condition in a vessel with vertical walls filled to a depth of thirty (30) centimeters. 
"Floatable oil and grease" means oil and grease floating to the surface of a sample of water when it is retained for one hour in a quiescent condition in a vessel with vertical walls filled to a depth of thirty (30) centimeters. 
"General and departmental overhead." 
1.  "Maintenance and operating fund." Rental costs attributable to building occupancy shall be allocated based on the pro rata share of floor space used. 
2.  "Sewer capital fund." Costs attributable to the expenditure of such funds not directly chargeable to a construction project. Such costs are to be limited to a fixed percentage of the construction cost of a construction project not to exceed ten (10) percent. Such percentage is to be deemed for the purpose of paying for the project's general and departmental administrative costs of the city. 
"House connection sewer" means the portion of a sewer lying within a public street connecting a building sewer to the main sewer. Industrial users means all users classified as industrial under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 USC § 1251 et seq.), and shall include all fruit/produce and or agricultural processes. 
"Lateral sewer" means the same as building sewer. 
"Local sewer system" means a sewer system consisting of but not limited to sewer lines, manholes, stub-outs, and/or house connection sewer laterals designed and intended to serve a particular tract or group of dwellings. 
"Multiple-family residence" means a structure or group of structures, separate or connected, on one parcel of land, occupied or intended for occupancy by more than one family or living group. 
"Nondomestic wastewater" means wastewater arising from or associated with a nondomestic operation. Such operation shall be understood to include the following: production or refining of petroleum; production, processing, packing or canning of fruits, vegetables, meat or beverages; laundering of clothes in public laundries; public self-service laundries; hospitals; restaurants; vehicle service facilities, wash racks and garages; production of fertilizer; keeping of livestock or poultry and operation of dairies; production or dyeing of textiles; production of soap and other detergents or chemicals; production and processing of plastic; cleaning of tanks, tank cars or barrels; plating or processing of metals; processing or reclamation of refuse; the washing of equipment or spaces used in nondomestic operations; and any other similar manufacturing, processing and servicing operations. Nondomestic wastewater does not include the following: wastewaters from the operation of hotels, schools, single or multiple residences and places engaged exclusively in retail business. 
"Owner" means the person having legal title to a property or the person having an interest in a property through a contract of sale, long-term lease or similar agreement. 
"Permit" means any written authorization required pursuant to this chapter or any other regulation of the city for the installation or use of any part of the sewer system. 
"Pollution" means the manmade or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological and radiological integrity of water, dredged soil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor). 
"Private sewage disposal facility" means an independent sewage disposal system not connected with a public sewer and which accommodates one or more structures, buildings or industries. 
"Property" means a parcel of land together with any buildings or appurtenances. 
"Public sewer" means a sewer lying within a street and which is controlled by or under the jurisdiction of the city. 
"Residential users" mean any single-family home, apartment or condominium unit or mobile home park for the purpose of sewer use charge determination. 
"Sanitary sewer" means a sewer which carries sewage and to which stormwater, surface water and groundwater are not intentionally admitted. 
"Service unit (SU)." The service unit is derived from a mathematical formula in which daily flow, biochemical oxygen demand and suspended solids are converted to a numerical value in proportion to residential levels for the same three variables. 
"Service unit rate" is the monthly charge per service unit. 
"Sewage" means a combination of water-carried wastes from residences, structures, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments. 
"Sewage factor (SF)" is an assigned percentage used to calculate sewage flows from water meter readings derived statistically using methods established by the public works department. 
"Sewer connection permit" means a permit used for the connection of a property to the sewer system. 
"Sewer deposits" means funds provided by property owners pursuant to Section 13.01.312 for guarantee of payment of sewer service charges. These funds are recorded and accounted for in the maintenance and operating fund and only the interest earnings may be used for maintenance and operating expenses. 
"Sewer service charge" is the product of service units and the service unit rate. 
"Sewer system" means all facilities owned and operated by the city or owned or operated by others for the benefit of the city for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage. 
"Single-family residence" means a single structure together with any garage, guestroom, servant's quarters or similar appurtenant structure on a parcel of land designed for use by one family or living group. 
"Source" means a point of discharge to the sewer system. 
"Special sewer permit" means a permit issued for a special use of the sewer system. 
"SS" or "suspended solids" means that fraction of the total solids with particle size greater than one micron as determined by passing a known volume of liquid through a filter. 
"Street" means any public highway, road, street, avenue, alley, way, public place, public easement or right-of-way. 
"Stub-out" means a partial house connection sewer extending laterally from the sewer main to a point just beyond the edge of the pavement or curbing which is within the right-of-way adjoining the properties which will be served by the sewer main. 
"Trailer space" means an area within a trailer court designated for use by a trailer, whether the space is occupied or not, provided the space is served by plumbing connected to the sewer system. 
"User" means the recipient of wastewater collection and treatment services. 
"Utility" means an enterprise operated for the benefit of the citizens of the city. 
"Utilities general manager" means the person in charge of the sewer, water, and other city owned utilities, appointed by the city manager. 
"Water supply" means the water supply serving the area tributary to the city's community sewer system. Water supply to an individual establishment shall be interpreted as meaning specifically a composite analysis over a 12-month period of samples of the water served to an establishment or location as determined by testing and compositing samples and analyses approved by the sewer superintendent. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-13)  
13.01.011 - Applicability. 
A.  This chapter shall apply only to sewer facilities constructed with the proceeds of the sewer revenue of the city and Coachella Sanitary District, and additions, extensions and improvements thereto. 
B.  This chapter is intended to provide rules and regulations for the construction and use of sanitary sewer facilities installed, altered or repaired within the city after the formation of the Coachella Sanitary District and the city of Coachella. This chapter shall not apply retroactively except that it shall apply to bills, deposits and guarantees outstanding. In the event of an alteration or repair is hereafter made, it shall apply only to the new materials and methods used therein. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-13)  
13.01.012 - Compliance. 
A.  All work with respect to sewer construction and disposal of sewage and drainage of buildings and connection to the sewer system of the city shall be done in conformity with this chapter and not otherwise. 
B.  No person shall connect to, construct, install, provide, maintain or use any means of sewage disposal from any building in the city other by connection to a public sewer, or inhabit or produce any sewage in any building not connected to a public sewer, except in the manner provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-13)  
13.01.013 - Utilities general manager. 
A.  The city manager shall appoint a utilities general manager, which office shall be under the terms and subject to the provisions of Title 13. The salary of the utilities general manager shall be fixed by the council from time to time by resolution. 
B.  The utilities general manager shall have power and it shall be his/her duty to enforce all rules and regulations concerning the sanitary sewer system and publicly owned treatment works (POTW) and any other utilities owned, operated, and maintained by the city, to supervise the maintenance and operation of the system and to make necessary repairs thereto. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-13)  
13.01.014 - Connection required for certain premises. 
A.  The owner of any building occupied by humans situated within the city and abutting on any street or easement in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sewer of the city which will serve the building is hereby required, at their expense, to connect the building directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within ninety (90) days after the date of official notice to do so, provided the public sewer is within two hundred (200) feet of the nearest point of the building and that the property's onsite septic system has failed. For purposes of this section, the house connection sewer shall be considered a portion of the public sewer. 
B.  Commercial, industrial and public buildings or institutions as well as residential buildings shall be required to connect to the sewer system upon notice as provided in this section. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-13)  
13.01.015 - Unlawful disposal of waste. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited upon public or private property within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-13)  
13.01.016 - Pollution of waters. 
It shall be unlawful to discharge into any stream or watercourse any sewage, wastes or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-13)  
13.01.017 - Compliance required prior to occupancy. 
No building, industrial facility or other structure shall become occupied until the owner of the premises has complied with all applicable rules and regulations of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-13)  
13.01.018 - Septic tanks, privies, etc. 
Except as provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful to construct any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, seepage pit or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-13)  
13.01.019 - Notice of violation. 
A.  Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter or any other ordinance, rule or regulation of the city pertaining to the sewer system shall be served by the utilities general manager or other authorized person with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. Service shall be in person or by certified mail. 
B.  The time for correction shall be not less than two and not more than seven working days. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. 
C.  All persons shall be held strictly responsible for any and all acts of agents or employees done under the provisions of this chapter or any other ordinance, rule or regulation of the city. Upon being notified by the utilities general manager of any defect arising in any sewer or of any violation of this chapter, the person having charge of such work shall immediately correct the defect. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-13)  
13.01.020 - Use of noncomplying building. 
A.  Continued habitation of any building or continued operation of any industrial facility in violation of the provisions of this chapter or any other ordinance, rule or regulation of the city is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. The city may cause proceedings to be brought for the abatement of the occupancy of the building or industrial facility during the period of such violation. 
B.  In addition to abatement proceedings, the city may elect to pursue any enforcement mechanism in Chapter 13.02. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-13)  
13.01.021 - Disconnection of service. 
As an alternative method of enforcing the provisions of this chapter or any other ordinance, rule or regulation of the city pertaining to the sewer system, the utilities general manager shall have the power to disconnect the user from the sewer mains of the city. Upon disconnection, the utilities general manager shall estimate the cost of disconnection from and reconnection to the system and such user shall deposit the cost, as estimated, of disconnection and reconnection before such user is reconnected to the system. Any part of the deposit remaining after payment of all costs of disconnection and reconnection shall be refunded. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-13)  
13.01.022 - Occupation of building while service disconnected. 
During the period of disconnection as provided for in Section 13.01.021, habitation of such premises by human beings shall constitute a public nuisance, whereupon the city may utilize any enforcement mechanisms available, including but not limited to causing proceedings to be brought for the abatement for the occupancy of such premises by human beings during the period of such disconnection. In such event, and as a condition of reconnection, there is to be paid to the city a reasonable attorney's fee and cost of suit arising in such action. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-13)  
13.01.023 - Liability of city. 
The city and its officers, agents and employees shall not be answerable for any liability or injury or death to any person or damage to any property arising during or growing out of the performance of any work by any applicant for sewer service. The applicant shall be answerable for and shall save the city and its officers, agents and employees harmless from any liability imposed by law upon the city or its officers, agents or employees, including all costs, expenses, fees and interest incurred in defending such action or in seeking to enforce this provision. The applicant shall be solely liable for any defects in the performance of his work or any failure which may develop therein. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-13)  
13.01.024 - Liability for damage caused by violations. 
A.  Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter and other ordinances, rules or regulations of the city pertaining to the sewer system shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage sustained by the city by reason of such violation. 
B.  Nonpayment of amounts due under subsection (a) may become a lien on the property on recording a notice of lien against the property with the county recorder's office. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-13)  
13.01.025—13.01.040 - Reserved.  
Article III - Building Sewers and Connections 
 
13.01.251 - Connection permit required; payment of fees. 
In accordance with Article IV of this chapter, no person shall connect to the sewer system without first obtaining a written permit from the city and paying all fees and connection charges as required therein. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-13)  
13.01.252 - Separate connection required for each building; exception. 
A.  No owners of separate properties shall be permitted to join in the use of the same building sewer. Every property on which structures are situated and are to be connected with a public sewer shall be separately connected except as provided in this section. 
B.  Adjacent properties owned by the same property owner may be served by the same house connection sewer or building sewer so long as the properties remain under the ownership of the same property owner. If a property owner sells a portion of his property and any buildings on the property so sold are not separately connected with a public sewer, they shall be so connected at no expense to the city. Following the sale of a portion of a property owner's property it shall be unlawful for the owner of the portion sold or the original property owner to continue to use or maintain a common building sewer or a connection to a common house connection sewer. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-13)  
13.01.253 - Cleanouts. 
Cleanouts in building sewers shall be provided where the building sewer joins the house connection sewer and in accordance with the rules, regulations and ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-13)  
13.01.254 - Sewage pump. 
If any building sewer is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building sewer shall be lifted by artificial means approved by the city, and discharged to the public sewer at the expense of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-13)  
13.01.255 - Location of connection. 
A.  If a public sewer is available in a street adjoining the property to be served, the connection of the house connection sewer to the public sewer shall be made at the public sewer main. The property owner shall construct one house connection sewer from the existing public sewer main to the property to be connected. The property owner shall obtain proper excavation/encroachment permits and work is to be completed by a properly licensed contractor. 
B.  The house connection sewer shall be constructed in accordance with the standard specifications of the city which are in effect at the time of construction. If the applicant desires or requires an additional house connection sewer or any special construction, the owner shall pay for the cost of the additional sewer connection or additional cost of the special construction in accordance with city specifications, at no cost to the city. 
C.  If a public sewer is not available in a street adjoining the property to be served, the owner shall either construct private sewage disposal facilities in accordance with Article VII of this chapter or shall extend the existing sewer system in accordance with Article VI of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-13)  
13.01.256 - Maintenance of house connection sewer. 
A.  Any stub-out and, following connection by the property owner to the city's sewer system, the house connection sewer shall be maintained and repaired by the city's utilities department from the point of connection with the sewer main line to the property line closest to the sewer main; provided, however, it shall be the property owner's responsibility to repair such house connection sewer which is damaged as a result of the negligent or intentional acts of the property owner, its tenants, lessees, subcontractors, agents, or employees. 
B.  The property owner shall defend, indemnify, save and hold harmless the city, its elected officials, officers, employees, agents and subcontractors from any and all fines, attorneys' fees, claims for loss, damage or personal injury, including wrongful death, which arise out of the city's maintenance and repair of the house connection sewer pursuant to subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-13)  
13.01.257 - Construction of local sewer systems. 
The city may, in its absolute discretion, construct a local sewer system, which shall be placed, designed, and constructed in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the city engineer. At the time that a property owner elects to connect to the city's sewer system, the property owner shall be required to use the stub-out constructed as part of the local sewer system for connection to the city's sewer system unless the city's utilities general manager, or designee, determines using reasonable discretion that connection to the city's sewer system may be made by alternate means. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-13)  
13.01.258 - Construction of partial house connection sewer lateral. 
At the time of the construction of any addition to or extension of the city's master plan sewer system, the city may, in its absolute discretion, construct a stub-out, which shall be placed, designed, and constructed in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the city engineer. At the time that a property owner elects to connect to the city's sewer system, the property owner shall be required to use the stub-out constructed by the city for connection to the city's sewer system unless the city's utilities general manager, or designee, determines using reasonable discretion that connection to the city's sewer system may be made by alternate means. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-13)  
13.01.259 - Record of local sewer system construction costs. 
The city shall keep a record of the costs of construction for a local sewer system constructed pursuant to Section 13.01.257 and shall identify such record with each parcel of property to be served by such system. Costs of construction shall include, without limitation, the costs of construction directly attributable to the construction of the local sewer system and the amount of indirect engineering, design and administrative costs, all of which shall be proportionally attributed to the property to be served in a manner determined in the reasonable discretion by the city's utilities general manager, or his designee. The city shall maintain such records until such time as the property owner reimburses the city for such costs in accordance with Section 13.01.261. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-13)  
13.01.260 - Record of partial house connection sewer lateral construction costs. 
The city shall keep a record of the costs of construction for each stub-out constructed pursuant to Section 13.01.258 and shall identify such record with each parcel of property to be served by such stub-out. Costs of construction shall include, without limitation, the costs of construction directly attributable to the construction of the stub-out and the amount of indirect engineering, design and administrative costs proportionally attributed to the property to be serviced, as determined in the reasonable discretion by the city's community development director, or his designee. The city shall maintain such records until such time as the property owner reimburses the city for such costs in accordance with Section 13.01.262. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-13)  
13.01.261 - Local sewer system construction costs reimbursement and escalation. 
A.  If the property owner connects to the city's sewer system at any time within one year following the city's completion of a local sewer system serving that particular property, the property owner shall pay the amount determined pursuant to Section 13.01.259. If the property owner connects to such system at a point past one year following the completion of the system serving that particular property, the owner shall pay an additional amount over and above the amount determined pursuant to Section 13.01.259. The additional reimbursement shall be a percentage of the construction costs determined pursuant to Section 13.01.259, which percentage reflects the change in the engineering news record construction cost index between the time that local sewer system construction is completed for the particular property to be served and the date that the property owner applies to the city for a permit to connect to the city's sewer system. If the engineering news record construction cost index ceases to be published, the city may, in its reasonable discretion, use a similar construction cost index to ascertain the additional reimbursement required. 
B.  The reimbursement required by this section shall be in addition to all other fees and charges imposed by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-13)  
13.01.262 - Partial house connection sewer lateral construction cost reimbursement and escalation. 
A.  If the property owner connects to the city's sewer system at any time within one year following the city's completion of the stub-out for that particular property to be served, the property owner shall pay the amount determined pursuant to Section 13.01.260. If the property owner connects to the city's sewer system at a point past one year following the completion of the stub-out for the particular property to be served, the owner shall pay an additional amount over and above the amount determined pursuant to Section 13.01.260. The additional reimbursement shall be a percentage of the construction costs determined pursuant to Section 13.01.260, which percentage reflects the change in the engineering news record construction cost index between the time that stub-out construction is completed for the particular property to be served and the date that the property owner applies to the city for a permit to connect to the city's sewer system. If the engineering news record construction cost index ceases to be published, the city may, in its reasonable discretion, use a similar construction cost index to ascertain the additional reimbursement required. 
B.  The reimbursement required by this section shall be in addition to all other fees and charges imposed by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-13)  
13.01.263—13.01.280 - Reserved.  
Article IV - Permits 
 
13.01.281 - Connection Permit—Generally. 
A.  No unauthorized person shall uncover, alter or disturb any portion of the sewer system without first obtaining a written permit from the city. 
B.  Connection permit. No person shall connect any property to the sewer system until after a sewer connection permit shall have been issued. The sewer connection permit shall specify the property to be connected, and only the property so specified shall be connected. 
C.  Special permit. No person shall place, discharge or dispose of any material, solid or liquid, into the sewer system or any part thereof, except by means of authorized connections; and no substance shall be placed, discharged or disposed of in the sewer system except substances or waste materials originating on the premises for which a sewer connection permit has been issued; except that authorized substances may be placed in the sewer system at places designated by the utilities general manager when a special permit shall have been issued by the utilities general manager. Special permits shall specify the terms and conditions under which substances may be placed in the sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-13)  
13.01.282 - Connection permit—Application; issuance. 
A.  Any person legally entitled to apply for and receive a connection permit shall make such application on forms provided by the city for that purpose. The applicant shall describe the location, ownership, occupancy and use of the premises to be connected. The utilities general manager may require plans, specifications or drawings and such other information deemed necessary. 
B.  If the utilities general manager determines that the plans, specifications, drawings, descriptions or information furnished by the applicant is in compliance with this code and other ordinances, rules and regulations of the city, the permit applied for shall be issued upon payment of the required deposit and fees as fixed in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-13)  
13.01.283 - Connection permit—Compliance with terms. 
After approval of an application for a connection permit, evidenced by the issuance of a sewer connection permit, no change shall be made in the location of the sewer, the grade or other details from those described in the sewer connection permit or as shown on the plans and specifications for which the permit was issued, except with written permission from the utilities general manager. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-13)  
13.01.284 - Special sewer permits—Application; issuance. 
A.  Any person legally entitled to apply for and receive a special sewer permit shall make application on forms provided by the city for that purpose. He shall give a description of the character of the work proposed to be done or the use proposed to be made of the sewer, and the location, ownership, occupancy and use of any premises in connection with the special sewer permit. The utilities general manager may require plans, specifications or drawings and such other information as he may deem necessary. 
B.  If the utilities general manager determines that the plans, specifications, drawings, descriptions or information furnished by the applicant is in compliance with the provisions of this code and other ordinances, rules and regulations of the city, the permit applied for shall be issued upon payment of the required fees as fixed in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-13)  
13.01.285 - Same—Compliance with terms. 
After approval of an application for a special sewer permit, evidenced by the issuance of the special sewer permit, no change shall be made in the conditions agreed to in the permit or as shown on the plans and specifications for which the permit was issued except with written permission from the city, the utilities general manager or other authorized representatives. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-13)  
13.01.286 - Permit for connections outside city. 
A.  No lot or parcel of land located outside the corporate limits of the city shall be connected to the sewer system unless a permit therefor is obtained. The applicant shall first enter into a written contract binding the applicant, heirs, successors and assigns to abide by all of the provisions of this code and other ordinances, rules and regulations in regard to the manner in which the sewer system shall be used and the manner of connecting therewith, and also shall agree to pay all fees required for securing the permit and a monthly charge in the amount set by the city council or the district. 
B.  The city council must approve an agreement with any applicant for permit fees, sewer connection charges, deposits and monthly charges for properties or users located outside the corporate limits of the city for service, but in no case shall the amounts be less than the fees, deposits or charges made within the corporate limits of the city. 
C.  The granting of permission for the connection to or use of the sewer system by properties or users located outside the corporate limits of the city, in any event, shall be optional with and in the discretion of the council. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-13)  
13.01.287 - Agreement by permittee. 
A.  The applicant's signature on an application for any permit shall constitute an agreement to comply with all of the provisions, terms and requirements of this chapter and other ordinances, rules and regulations of the city pertaining to the sewer system, and with any plans and specifications filed with the application, together with any corrections or modifications as may be made or permitted by the city. 
B.  Such an agreement shall be considered a guarantee that the bills for service to the property or to the occupant thereof will be paid and shall be binding upon the applicant and may be altered only by the city upon the written request for the alteration from the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-13)  
13.01.288—13.01.310 - Reserved.  
Article V - Fees, Charges and Billing  
Division 1 - Generally 
 
13.01.311 - Connection charges established; purchase of connection rights. 
A.  Permit fee. The fee for a sewer connection permit or special sewer permit shall be in an amount adopted by ordinance of the district. After this fee has been paid, it shall not be refunded. 
B.  Residential sewer capacity connection charge. There shall be a connection charge in an amount adopted by ordinance of the district. Sewer capacity connection charges shall not be refundable. 
C.  Commercial sewer capacity connection charges. There shall be a connection charge in an amount adopted by ordinance of the district for commercial connections. Flow estimates and strength factors may be based on comparisons to similar existing users or on engineering estimates. The flow assignments will be revised as consumption records become available to the city. 
D.  Industrial sewer capacity connection charges. There shall be a connection charge in an amount adopted by ordinance of the district for industrial connections. Service units shall be assigned based on a separate environmental review prepared for each industry prior to their connection to the system. This information would normally be part of the environmental review required of any industry by planning and other governmental agencies. Sewer capacity connection charges shall not be refundable. 
E.  Non-refundable. Sewer capacity connection charges shall not be refundable. Residential, commercial and industrial sewer capacity connection charges shall be reviewed annually in accordance with the ENR 20 Cities Construction Cost Index and the Consumer Price Index. 
F.  Use of sewer revenue. In order that sewer service is self-supporting, any revenues from the fees collected over and above city council or district approved expenses or transfers shall be placed in a restricted reserve account in the sewer fund, to be used to offset any possible future increase in sewer charges. 
G.  Timing of payment of sewer connection fees. The sewer connection charges required under subsections (b), (c), and (d) of this section shall be due as required by the utilities general manager. 
H.  Construction in-lieu option. The city may allow partial or complete satisfaction of the sewer connection fees required by subsections (b), (c) and (d) of this section through execution of an agreement requiring the construction of public improvements and/or dedication of property. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-13)  
13.01.312 - Deposits. 
A.  Each property owner shall deposit with the finance director an amount equal to three times the monthly charge set forth in Section 13.01.317. The deposit shall be retained by the city and, in case of delinquency, it shall be applied as necessary to liquidate the cumulative amount of the delinquent charges plus penalties and the cost of collection. 
B.  If, because of change of classification or for any other reason, the monthly rate is increased or decreased, the owner shall be required to make a supplementary deposit equal to three times the increase in monthly rate in the case of an increase, and the city shall refund to the owner an amount equal to four times the decrease in the monthly rate in the case of a decrease. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-13)  
13.01.313 - Transfer of ownership of property. 
A.  Upon sale of the property, the former owner shall furnish the finance director with the correct name and mailing address of the new owner. The former owner shall be entitled to a refund of the unused portion of his deposit only after all bills and penalties and other charges have been paid and after the new owner has effected transfer of sewer service by applying for service, by guaranteeing that the bills for service to the property or to the occupant thereof will be paid, and by making the required deposit, which four actions shall constitute transfer of sewer service. Bills will continue to be sent to the former owner, or to the occupant in case the occupant is being billed, until the sewer service has been transferred or until such other date as may be agreed upon between the former owner and the new owner. 
B.  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, a former owner who has sold a property shall be entitled to a refund of any unused portion of the deposit after all bills, penalties and other charges for which the former owner is responsible have been paid and after providing proof that the sale has been completed. For the purpose of this subsection, the former owner shall be responsible for bills, penalties and charges until the end of the month of the sale, except that under unusual circumstances and upon written appeal by the former owner the city council may determine some other appropriate date for the cessation of such responsibility. 
C.  If a new owner fails for one month to apply for service or make the guarantee or deposit required, the accounting officer shall post notice on the property and mail a copy thereof to the new owner that sewer service will be discontinued unless the new owner does apply for service and make the guarantee and required deposit. If, after the notice has been posted for fifteen (15) days, the new owner has not applied for service and made the guarantee and deposit, sewer service shall be discontinued. 
D.  If service has been disconnected or terminated it shall not be reconnected or restored until all charges, including penalties, have been paid as provided in Section 13.01.356 or in Section 13.01.357, except that, when the responsibility for the payment of delinquent charges plus penalties or accrued charges is in bona fide dispute, a new owner may obtain temporary service by paying the reconnection charge or restoration charge and by applying for service, guaranteeing that the bills for service to the property or to the occupant thereof will be paid, and making the required deposit. Temporary service shall be for a period not to exceed four months, by the end of which time all charges remaining unpaid shall have been paid or service shall be disconnected or terminated. Bills for temporary service shall be rendered in the same manner as for ordinary service. All rules and regulations pertaining to bills, delinquencies and disconnections shall apply to temporary services in the same manner as they apply to ordinary services. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-13)  
13.01.314 - Change of classification. 
A.  Whenever the utilities general manager finds that the use of a property has changed so that the classification to be used as a basis for determining monthly sewer charges has changed, the utilities general manager shall change the classification accordingly and notify the Finance Director and property owner of said change. The effective date of change in classification shall be the first day of the month following the change. 
B.  If an owner believes property is improperly classified, the owner may request a change in classification. This request shall be filed in writing with the utilities general manager and shall state the reasons why the owner believes the classification should be changed. Upon receipt of a request for change of classification, the utilities general manager shall investigate the request and either change the classification as provided in this section or, if a change is not justified, notify the owner of this fact. 
C.  If the use of the property has changed so that the monthly sewer charge will be decreased, the responsibility for notifying the city of the change shall rest with the owner and the owner shall not be entitled to a refund of sewer charges paid in excess of the proper charges as a result of a failure to notify the city of the change in use. If a change in use results in an increase in monthly sewer charge the responsibility for determining the change in use shall rest with the city and the owner shall not be liable for any back charges for increased sewer charges except where it can be shown that the owner has concealed the fact of the change in use or knowingly withheld information which could have been used in determining the true circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-13)  
13.01.315 - Reserved.  
13.01.316 - Calculation of equivalent dwelling units for purposes of determining connection charges. 
A.  All sewer connection charges for residential, commercial and industrial uses shall be based upon the residential equivalent dwelling unit (EDU) service unit rate established in this section, as computed by the utilities department. 
B.  Equivalent dwelling unit service units shall be based upon three hundred (300) gallons equals one equivalent dwelling unit for permanent housing for one family or tenant. Residential uses include without limitation single-family detached residences, apartments, townhouses, condominiums, mobile homes and trailer spaces. 
C.  Commercial structures are those structures designed for the purpose of providing a permanent structure for enterprises engaged in the exchange of goods and services. This includes but is not limited to all private business and service establishments, schools, churches and public facilities. For purposes of establishing connection charges, commercial equivalent dwelling units shall be determined by multiplying the fixture units (as defined by the Uniform Plumbing Code) shown on the approved building plans by the appropriate sewage factor from the following table (Table 13.01.316(e)). Total equivalent dwelling units for commercial centers with various use categories will be the sum of the equivalent dwelling units computed for each use category. 
D.  Industrial structures are those designed for the purpose of providing a permanent structure for an enterprise engaged in the production, manufacturing or processing of material. For purposes of establishing industrial connection charges, equivalent dwelling units for industrial uses shall be determined as follows: 
1.  For domestic type wastewater, multiply the fixture units (as defined by the Uniform Plumbing Code) as shown on approved building plans by a sewage factor of 0.0741 based upon a 20-gallon-per-fixture unit flow per day. 
2.  For nondomestic wastewaters, compute from information contained on the industrial waste discharge permit using the following sewage factor formula: 
Sewage Factor Formula 
SF = K = [0.37 + 0.31(BOD)/230) + (0.32(SS)/220)] 
Where: 
SF 	= 	Sewage factor 
K 	= 	Gallons per fixture unit divided by the average domestic household flow of 270 gallons = 1 EDU 
BOD 5 mg/l 	= 	User's discharge—Biochemical oxygen demand (mg/l) 
SS mg/l 	= 	User's discharge—Suspended residue (mg/l) 
EDU 	= 	Estimated nondomestic flow [0.37 + 0.31(BOD) / 230)+ (0.32(SS) / 220)] 
 
3.  Combine the resultant EDU's derived from subsections (1) and (2) of this subsection. 
Table 13.01.316(e) 
Commercial Use Categories and Sewage Factors 
User Category 	Type of Business 	Sewage Flow 
Gallons/per day/FU 	Bid/TSS 
I. 	Motel/hotel 
Recreation/amusement 
Restaurant (fast food) 
Office 
Retail store 
Market (without butcher shop) 
Bar/tavern 	12 	230/220 
II. 	Market (without butcher shop) 
Bakery 
Mortuary 	24 	250/350 
III. 	Convalescent home 
Hospital 
Health spa with pool 
Restaurant (full service) 	42 	250/300 
IV. 	Laundromat 
Laundry 
Dry cleaner (processor) 	43 	350/500 
V. 	Carwash (coin-operated) 	102 	150/500 
VI. 	Church 
School 
Public facility 	17 	230/220 
VII. 	Health spa without pool 	42 	230/220 
 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-13)  
13.01.317 - Calculation of equivalent dwelling units for purposes of determining monthly charges. 
Monthly sewer charges for residential, commercial and industrial uses shall be determined based upon the service unit rate formula, as computed by the utilities department according to the following service unit assignment formula: 
Service Unit Assignment Formula 
SU = F/(270(0.37) + BOD(230) X (0.31) + SS(220) X (0.32) 
Monthly Sewer Service Charge = SU X Service Unit Rate 
Where: 
SU 	= 	Sewer units 
F 	= 	Sewage flow in gallons per day based on sewage factor applied to water meter readings 
BOD 5 	= 	User's discharge—Biochemical oxygen demand (mg/l) 
SS 	= 	User's discharge—Suspended solids concentration (mg/l) 
Q 	= 	Domestic water usage (gallons per day) taken directly from water meter readings. 
 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-13)  
13.01.318 - Monthly sewer rates. 
A.  Residential, multi-residential, church/social hall, public buildings and schools base sewer rate for property located within the city limits shall be based upon the city's operation, maintenance and replacement rate in an amount adopted by ordinance of the district, plus any currently applicable, legally adopted monthly charge assessed by an agency or district providing sewer treatment service to the city. 
B.  The commercial base sewer rate for property located within the city limits shall be the combined total of the following amounts: 
1.  The city's operation, maintenance and replacement rate, in an amount adopted by ordinance of the district; 
2.  The city's administrative rate for supervising commercial uses within the city, in an amount adopted by ordinance of the district; plus 
3.  Any currently applicable, legally adopted monthly charge assessed by any agency or district providing sewer treatment service to the city. 
C.  The industrial base sewer rate for property located within the city limits shall be the combined total of the following amounts: 
1.  The city's operation, maintenance and replacement rate in an amount adopted by ordinance of the district; 
2.  The city's administrative rate for supervising industrial uses within city limits in an amount adopted by ordinance of the district; plus 
3.  Any currently applicable, legally adopted monthly charge assessed by any agency or district providing sewer treatment service to the city. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-13)  
13.01.319 - Same—Outside city limits. 
The monthly charge for each user classification outside the corporate limits of the city shall be one and one-half (1½) times the city rate, or as agreed upon by the city council or district and the applicant for service. All connections shall be inspected by the engineering department prior to acceptance. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-13)  
13.01.320 - Continuance of monthly charges. 
After a property has been connected to the sewer system, the monthly sewer charge shall be imposed, whether the property is occupied or not, until such time as the structure using the sewer service is demolished or unoccupied and the sewer connection is capped. The capping of the sewer service is to be inspected by the development services department. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-13)  
13.01.321 - Annual review of rates; pass-through of rate increases. 
A.  The sewer rates established by this article shall be subject to annual review and evaluated in conjunction with annual fiscal year budget preparation. Sewer rates shall be set based upon the actual cost to the city for providing sewer service, capital reserve requirements, any administrative overhead allocation as determined by the annual review, plus any deficit recovery as determined by the city council or district. Administrative overhead cost shall be assessed for providing support services to the enterprise fund and shall be set annually by the city council or district through an adopted cost allocation plan. 
B.  Any increase in any currently applicable, legally adopted monthly charge assessed by an agency or district providing sewer treatment service to the city shall be immediately passed through to the affected property owners. Any amounts over-collected by the city shall be applied first to the deficit recovery, if any, then to fund balance. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-13)  
13.01.322—13.01.350 - Reserved.  
Division 2 - Billing Procedures 
 
13.01.351 - Authority to prescribe additional rules and regulations. 
The district or city council may, by resolution, adopt rules and regulations for the rendering and collecting of sewer bills. Unless otherwise provided, the rules, regulations and procedures contained within this division shall apply to the rendering and collecting of bills. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-13)  
13.01.352 - Rendering of bills; liability for payment. 
A.  Sewer bills shall be sent to the owner of the property served, who shall be responsible for the payment thereof. Property owners and occupants may make special arrangements with the finance director on application forms to be provided by the finance director for that purpose for bills to be sent to the occupant of the property rather than to the owner of the property. From the date of the signing and filing of the application, bills shall be sent to the occupant. Thereafter the property owner and the occupant shall be liable, jointly and severally, for the payment of sewer bills. 
B.  Sewer bills shall be rendered monthly and shall be due and payable upon presentation. The bill for each monthly period shall segregate amounts charged for collection and sewer treatment service. The agency responsible for the sewer treatment service shall be named on the bill. The bill shall be mailed not later than the tenth day of the second month for which service has been rendered and is billed. The commencement date for sewer bills for newly constructed structures shall be the first day of the month following the date upon which final inspection is given by the development services department or the first day of the month following the date that the premises or any portion thereof are occupied, whichever occurs first. The commencement date for sewer bills for structures previously served by facilities other than the city sewer system shall be the first of the month following the date that the structure is connected to the city sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-13)  
13.01.353 - Action on delinquent bills. 
On the 15th day of the month following the month in which a sewer bill is mailed, the bill shall become delinquent if the bill or any portion thereof which is subject to a bona fide dispute remains unpaid. A delinquent bill shall be subject to a penalty charge of ten (10) percent of the amount of the delinquent balance. After a bill has become delinquent, the finance director shall notify the owner or the occupant if the occupant has requested the bills be sent directly to the occupant, of such delinquency. Notification shall be made by United States mail. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-13)  
13.01.354 - Lien for delinquent charges. 
Any sewer rates authorized pursuant to this article which remain unpaid for 60 days past the date upon which they were billed may be collected thereafter by the city, as provided as follows: 
1.  The city shall cause a report of delinquent sewer fees to be prepared periodically. The city council shall fix a time, date and place for hearing the report and any objections or protests thereto. The report shall contain a list and description of each parcel of real property to which is attributed a delinquency in the payment of sewer rates, for a period of sixty (60) days or more, the names of the owners and the total amount of the delinquency attributable to that parcel. 
2.  The city council shall cause notice of the hearing to be mailed to the owners of the property with delinquencies, as listed on the latest equalized assessment roll. Such notice shall contain the date, time and place of the hearing and be sent not less than fourteen (14) days prior to the date of the hearing and shall inform the recipients of the amount of unpaid sewer rates and penalties. Such notice shall inform the owners that the unpaid sewer rates and penalties will be assessed against and shall result in a lien on their property. 
3.  At the hearing, the city council shall hear any objections or protests of the landowners who are to be assessed for delinquent fees. The city council may make such revisions or corrections to the report as it deems just, after which, by resolution, the report shall be confirmed. 
4.  The delinquent sewer rates, and any penalties thereon, set forth in the confirmed report shall constitute a special assessment against the respective parcels of land and are a lien on the property for the amount of delinquent fees, the late charges, and cost of lien. The city clerk shall certify that the report has been adopted by the city council in its final form, and file the report with the county auditor. In addition, the city clerk shall also record the amount of unpaid charges with the county recorder. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-13)  
13.01.355 - Termination of service. 
A.  If all structures in which sewage is produced are removed from a property served by the sewer system, or if the structure in which sewage is produced is demolished, then the city shall consider the service disconnected and shall provide a prorated adjustment of annual assessment based upon the first day of the month following the notification of removal or demolition of the structure by the city building official. The owner shall be entitled to a refund of the deposit or to such portion of the deposit as may be unused, upon written application therefore. Termination of service shall be considered equivalent to disconnection. 
B.  Thereafter, the property shall not be inhabited by humans nor shall any sewage be produced thereon until service has been restored through payment of new connection and deposit fees. If the property is inhabited by human beings and any sewage is produced thereon before the service has been restored, the accounting officer shall have authority to disconnect the property without further notice and to pursue any additional available remedies. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-13)  
13.01.356 - Reconnection. 
After a building sewer has been disconnected from the sewer system, it shall not be reconnected until all delinquent charges plus penalties, all charges which have accrued since the time of disconnection, any supplementary connection charges, and the estimated cost of reconnection have been paid; the deposit restored to the required amount; and any required guarantee for the payment of bills has been made. In addition to the connection charge, the deposit shall be paid or restored to the required amount as provided in this article. All of the charges, deposits and other amounts required to be paid shall be paid before the building sewer is reconnected to the sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-13)  
13.01.357 - Restoration of terminated service. 
After service to a property has been terminated, the sewer connection permit issued for the property shall be considered cancelled. The permit and service shall not be considered as restored until all delinquent charges plus penalties, all charges which have accrued since time of termination, and a restoration charge in an amount adopted by ordinance of the district has been paid and the deposit restored to the required amount. In addition to the amount provided in this section, all of the charges, deposits and other amounts required to be paid shall be paid before the permit and service are restored. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-13)  
13.01.358—13.01.385 - Reserved.  
Article VI - Extension of Sewer System 
 
13.01.386 - Applicability. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to additions to and extensions of the sewer system, which extensions or additions are built at the direct expense of property owners, sub-dividers or other persons or groups of persons. Other provisions of this chapter not in conflict with provisions of this article shall also apply. This article shall not apply to portions of the sewer system constructed by the city and paid for out of the sewer fund, except that nothing in this article shall prohibit the city from participating in the construction of an extension of the sewer system when the extension is of more than local benefit. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-13)  
13.01.387 - Additions and extensions defined. 
A.  As used in this article, the word "addition" shall mean a system of sewer mains, house connection sewers and appurtenances built by property owners at their expense to serve their land, and which does not serve any other land adjoining the work by direct connection thereto. 
B.  As used in this article, the word "extension" shall mean a system of sewer mains, house connection sewers and appurtenances built by property owners at their expense to serve their land, and which may also serve other adjoining land, the owners of which have not shared in the cost of the work. 
C.  A single sewer project may include additions and extensions. The term "property owner," as used in this article, shall include a single person, a group of persons, or a corporation, firm or other combination of persons. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-13)  
13.01.388 - Acceptance of work; special consideration. 
A.  Following the satisfactory completion of any sewer project for the construction of an addition or extension, and upon recommendation of the superintendent, the city council shall, by resolution, accept the work, which shall then become a part of the city sewer system. The resolution of acceptance shall contain the terms of any special consideration which shall apply to the sewers so accepted. 
B.  Special consideration may include provisions for reimbursement and relief from the connection charge, but shall not include provisions for monthly charges different from those established elsewhere in this chapter, except as provided for service to property lying outside the corporate limits of the city. All provisions for special consideration shall terminate at the expiration of ten (10) years following the date of the resolution of acceptance, or at such earlier date as may be established in the resolution of acceptance. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-13)  
13.01.389 - Reimbursement of costs. 
A.  The provisions of this section shall apply only to extensions and shall not apply to additions. If the resolution of acceptance is to provide for reimbursement, the city shall, before the work is accepted, determine the cost thereof and prorate this cost against all of the land which, in the city's opinion, will ultimately benefit from the work. The proration shall be based upon frontage or such other method as, in the opinion of the city, will provide an equitable sharing of cost. The cost of house connection sewers shall not be included in the determination of cost. 
B.  The city shall further determine the cost incurred by each person who has participated in the expense of the work. After considering the pro rata share of each such person's cost as based upon the benefit derived from the work, the city shall finally determine the total maximum amount which any person shall subsequently be entitled to receive as a reimbursement from persons connecting to the work. 
C.  Money which is to be paid as reimbursement shall be paid to each person entitled to receive it in proportion to the outstanding balance which each such person is entitled to receive. Any person entitled to receive reimbursement under the provisions of this article shall keep a correct mailing address on file with the city. If the city is unable to locate any person entitled to receive reimbursement, the city shall send a written notice to that person by registered mail to the last address filed with the superintendent by that person. The notice shall contain a statement of the amount and purpose of the particular reimbursement and shall state that if the person receiving the notice does not claim his portion of the reimbursement within one year from the date of the notice all rights of that person to that particular reimbursement will be forfeited. 
D.  Any portion of a reimbursement which remains unclaimed for one year after the date of the notice mentioned in subsection (c) of this section shall be paid, as previously provided, to other persons who may be entitled to receive the reimbursement. If any money is available for reimbursement and remains unclaimed for one year after the date of such notice and no other person is entitled to receive it, this money shall be paid into the sewer fund. The right to receive a reimbursement may be transferred by the person entitled to receive it by filing a statement of transfer with the city on a form for transfer to be furnished by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-13)  
13.01.390 - Connecting to additions. 
A property owner who desires to connect to an addition shall make application in the same manner as for an ordinary sewer connection. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-13)  
13.01.391 - Connecting to extensions. 
A property owner who desires to connect to an extension shall make application in the same manner as for an ordinary sewer connection. If the owner has not shared in the cost of the sewer and if reimbursement provisions apply, the owner shall pay to the city the amount which has previously been determined as the pro rata share of the cost of the sewer for his property. This amount shall be paid before the permit is issued. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-13)  
13.01.392 - Relief from connection charge. 
A property owner who connects to an addition or extension shall, during the first ten (10) years following the completion of the work and its acceptance into the sewer system, be relieved from part or all of the connection charge at the time the property is first connected to the sewer system if the owner has shared in the cost of the work. Unless otherwise provided in the resolution of acceptance, the amount of relief shall be the entire connection charge, except that no relief shall be given in excess of the cost of the addition or extension, including the house connection sewer, which was incurred by the owner and which applies to the property to be connected. The amount of the cost shall be determined by the sewer superintendent. Relief from connection charge shall not apply to any supplementary connection charge or any charges subsequently imposed for the reconnection of a disconnected sewer or the restoration of a terminated service. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-13)  
13.01.393—13.01.420 - Reserved.  
Article VII - Private Sewage Disposal Systems 
 
13.01.421 - Permitted use. 
Where a public sewer is not available under the provisions of this chapter, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system in accordance with the established requirements of the development services department. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-13)  
13.01.422 - Abandonment. 
At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system as provided in this chapter, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this chapter and the rules and regulations of the city, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled in accordance with the requirements of the development services department. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-13)  
13.01.423 - Maintenance. 
The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-13)  
13.01.424 - Applicability of other requirements. 
No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by any other law, ordinance, rule or regulation or by the health officer of the county. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-13)  
13.01.425—13.01.455 - Reserved.  
Article VIII - Financing of Facilities  
Division 1 - Generally 
 
13.01.456—13.01.475 - Reserved.  
Division 2 - Sewer Facilities Expansion Fee and Fund 
 
13.01.476 - Intent and purpose. 
The city council hereby declares that the fees required to be paid by this article are solely for the purpose of producing revenue, to be used to provide necessary sewerage facilities. The continued increase in housing in the city, with the attendant increase in sewage, has created an urgent need to provide the necessary sewerage facilities and the financing thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-13)  
13.01.477 - Facilities expansion fee. 
A.  In addition to any other fees prescribed by this code, sewerage facilities expansion fees shall be payable to the city for all new dwelling units and mobile home or trailer spaces which will make use of the sewerage facilities of the city. If dry sewers are installed for future connection to the sewerage system, the fees shall be required even though onsite disposal systems are to be utilized as an interim measure. In those cases where onsite disposal systems are authorized for other than interim use due to the lot size and soil conditions, the fees shall not be required, provided that if any such dwelling units so exempted connect to the sewerage system in the future, the fees shall be payable by the then owner of record of the property. 
B.  Every person constructing a dwelling in a different location or providing a new dwelling unit in a one-family or multi-family dwelling, dwelling group, apartment hotel or mobile home or trailer providing trailer spaces in a mobile home or trailer park, shall pay a sewerage facilities expansion fee in an amount adopted by ordinance of the district. Every person constructing an industrial or commercial building, moving an industrial or commercial building to a different location, providing a new industrial or commercial facility shall pay a sewerage facilities expansion fee in an amount adopted by ordinance of the district. The number of equivalent dwelling units attributable to each industrial or commercial building shall be computed in accordance with Section 13.01.316, as amended. The sewerage facilities expansion fee shall be paid prior to the issuance of the building permit for the subject unit or space. 
C.  Sewer expansion fees to be levied on existing system users who expand or revise use. In some situations existing commercial and industrial users will expand uses to meet increasing demands. As a result, additional fixture units will usually be included within the expanded facility. Under these situations the following criteria will apply: 
1.  Sewer expansion fees will only be levied on the fixture unit (FU) count difference between existing FUs and new FUs. 
2.  The sewer expansion fee will be determined based on the fee in effect at the time of building or sewer permit issuance for the expanding development. 
3.  A change in use, placing a commercial development in a different Table 3.01.316(e) category, will not result in the recalculation of sewer expansion obligation for the existing FUs. Only the new added FUs will be levied sewer expansion fees based on the Table 3.01.316(e) category which best defines the proposed use. 
D.  Attachment of sewer use rights; tied to property or structure. Under certain situations, an existing discharger may want to relocate a business. The issue may then arise as to ownership of certain existing discharge rights in the system. All sewer capacity remains with the existing building and should be sold to building owners rather than tenants. In cases where an existing building is completely demolished, the transfer of capacity rights can be permitted provided that: 
1.  Proof of building demolition can be documented; 
2.  Payment for original system capacity can be documented; 
3.  The demolition occurs simultaneously with the transfer; and 
4.  The transfer occurs within the city/agency who originally sold the capacity. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-13)  
13.01.478—13.01.500 - Reserved.  
Division 3 - Sewer Funds 
 
13.01.501 - Policy. 
It is the policy of the city council that the sewer service be operated as a utility, and that it shall be operated in a prudent manner with adequate reserves to meet emergencies and to replace parts of the system. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-13)  
13.01.502 - Funds established. 
The following sewer funds are to be created and maintained: 
1.  Maintenance and operating fund. The sewer maintenance and operating fund is to be created and maintained for the purpose of paying for the expenses associated with the maintenance and operation of the sewer system. Such expenses are to include direct sewage treatment costs, direct accounting and billing costs, and direct preventative and emergency sewage collection system maintenance costs, as well as general and departmental overhead as defined in Section 13.01.010. The source of the money for this fund is to be sewer permit fees, interest earnings and sewer service charges. Refundable sewer deposits provided by property owners are accounted for within this fund, and the amount of such deposits shall not be reflected in the fund balance. 
2.  Sewer replacement fund. The sewer replacement fund is to be created and maintained for the purpose of paying for replacing parts of the sewer system as they wear out, deteriorate or become obsolete. All items deemed to be replacement of existing facilities shall be paid for from this fund. The source of the money for this fund is to be through city council authorized transfers from the sewer maintenance and operating fund. Such transfers are to be authorized so that funds will be available to pay for future replacement of parts of the sewer system. The determination as to the amount of money to be held in this fund will be made by taking into consideration the estimated life and replacement cost of the various parts of the sewer system using the following formula: 
(Replacement cost of sewer system facility additions) X (0.10) X (Age of sewer system facilities) ° (75 years) 
3.  Sewer capital fund. The sewer capital fund is to be created and maintained for the purpose of paying for new sewer facilities found necessary because of the development of the city. Such facilities could include, but are not limited to, pumping stations, sewer laterals, manholes, cleanouts, sewer mains, treatment facilities, interceptors, monitoring stations, and equipment. An annual appropriation shall be made from this fund for general and department overhead. The source of the money for this fund is to be sewer connection charges, interest earnings, sewer installation charges, property assessments, and government grants. 
4.  Sewerage facilities expansion fund. The sewerage facilities expansion fund is to be created and maintained for the purpose of paying for sewer facilities needed for the expansion of the city including, but not limited to, treatment plants and sewer interceptor lines. The source of the money for this fund is to be the sewerage facilities expansion fee collected pursuant to Section 13.01.477. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-13)  
13.01.503 - Appropriations. 
Appropriations from the various funds provided for in this article shall be pursuant to authorization in the annual budget or by special action of the city Council. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-13)  
13.01.504 - Allocation of interest earnings. 
Moneys in the sewer funds may be commingled with moneys in other funds for cash management and interest earnings purposes, but each sewer fund shall be credited with its pro rata share of all interest earnings based on the fund's average balance. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-13)  
13.01.505 - Loans from sewer funds. 
Loans between sewer funds or to other funds may only be made pursuant to authorization of the city council and shall be for a specific time period not to exceed five years. During such time that moneys are on loan from any fund, interest shall be paid annually to the fund. The interest rate during this loan period shall be at least the average rate for the city's interest-bearing deposits during the loan duration. No loans shall be made from the maintenance and operating fund and the sewer replacement fund. Existing loans shall be brought into compliance with this section within five years. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-13)  
13.01.506 - Allocation of personnel and equipment costs. 
A.  Personnel. The total number of employees in the sewer maintenance and operating budget shall be determined using the following formula: 
(Total number actual hours proposed to be charged to the sewer maintenance and operating fund for permanent employees for the proposed operating budget) / (2,080 hours) 
Personnel costs will be charged on actual number of hours worked. Personnel costs include salaries and related benefits. 
B.  Equipment. The original purchase cost charged to the sewer capital fund shall be no more than its pro rata share of time used in sewer activities. The motor pool rental charges shall also be based on the actual hours used; the motor pool shall be responsible for the replacement of these capital items. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-13)  
Chapter 13.02 - WASTEWATER PRETREATMENT  
Article I - General Provisions 
 
13.02.010 - Intent. 
It is the intent of this chapter to protect public health, city and Coachella Sanitary District personnel, the collection system and the environment from waste discharges by nonresidential users with the potential to detrimentally impact the beneficial use of reclaimed water and municipal sludge. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.020 - Purpose. 
A.  The purpose of this chapter is to set forth: 
1.  Conditions and limitations on the use of the city's sewer system; 
2.  Specific enforcement provisions to resolve noncompliance with this chapter, thereby allowing the city to: 
a.  Comply with the laws, regulations, and rules imposed upon it by regulatory agencies; 
b.  Ensure that the city's sewerage facilities and treatment processes are protected and are able to operate with the highest degree of efficiency; 
c.  Protect the beneficial use of reclaimed water and municipal sludge; and 
d.  Protect the public health and environment. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.030 - Policy. 
A.  This chapter shall be interpreted in accordance with the definitions set forth in Article II. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the direct and indirect discharge of all wastes to facilities of city. 
B.  The city shall seek the cooperation of the users of the collection system to ensure compliance with this chapter. Reasonable approaches shall be utilized when applying applicable regulations without compromising the intent, purpose and policies of this chapter. 
C.  The city shall adopt more stringent quality requirements on wastewater discharges regulated by 40 CFR, Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471, in the event that more stringent quality requirements are necessary to protect beneficial use of reclaimed water and municipal sludge. 
D.  The city shall encourage conservation and pollution prevention through source control strategies which reduce the amount of pollutants entering the environment, prior to recycling, pretreatment, or disposal. 
E.  The city shall use the revenues derived from the application of this chapter to defray the cost of regulating sewer usage to include, but not be limited to, administration, monitoring, permitting, reporting, and enforcement. 
F.  All costs and expenses incurred by the plan check procedure of the city's source control division shall be paid by the applicant. Plan check fees shall be in an amount established by ordinance or resolution of the district. 
G.  The city shall ensure that all parties are afforded due process of law. An applicant or user shall be given written notice of rejection of an application, or violation of a control mechanism, or of any enforcement action. Such notice shall include a statement of reasons in support thereof and proposed actions to be taken, if any. Affected applicants or users shall have the right to a hearing. Decisions/determinations may be appealed as set forth in Article V. 
H.  The city, at its discretion, may utilize any one, combination, or all enforcement remedies provided in Article V in response to any violation. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.040 - Scope. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to sewer construction, use, maintenance, discharge, deposit, or disposal of wastewater, both directly and indirectly, into and through all city collection systems and to the issuance of control mechanisms and assessment/imposition of fees, fines and penalties thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.050 - Applicability. 
This chapter applies to all nondomestic users of the city's sewer system and specifies herein that all users of the city's sewer system are subject to regulation and enforcement. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.060 - Powers. 
A.  The general manager is authorized to: 
1.  Issue waste discharge authorizations; 
2.  Issue waste discharge permits; 
3.  Require the installation and maintenance of pretreatment and/or monitoring facilities and equipment; 
4.  Conduct inspections of facilities, including, but not limited to, inspecting and copying records; 
5.  Require monitoring and reporting of discharges to the public sewer system; 
6.  Monitor the quality of wastewater entering the sewer system; 
7.  Require the development of spill containment plans and reporting of accidental discharges; 
8.  Require the development of a slug control plan (per Title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations (40 CFR) 403.8(f)(2)(v)); 
9.  Deny, approve or approve with conditions, new or increased discharges or change in the quantity or characteristics of discharges, when such discharges do not meet applicable pretreatment requirements as specified in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(1)(I). 
10.  Take enforcement actions against those who violate or cause violation of this chapter or discharge permit conditions. These actions may include, but are not limited to the following: 
a.  Issuing letters; 
b.  Issuing notices of violation; 
c.  Issuing administrative orders ; 
d.  Issuing cease and desist orders; 
e.  Initiating and conducting noncompliance meetings; 
f.  Initiating and conducting administrative hearings; 
g.  Petitioning the courts for injunctions or civil penalties; 
h.  Signing criminal complaints; 
i.  Terminating services; 
j.  Requiring payment of violation charges; 
k.  Revoking and/or suspending the discharge permit. 
11.  Delegate authority to the division head or department head of any power granted to or the carrying out of any duty imposed upon the general manager pursuant to this chapter. 
12.  Adopt such rules, regulations and standards as are reasonable and necessary to protect the collection system and POTW and to control the proper use thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.070 - Access. 
A.  The city shall be permitted to enter all properties from which wastes or wastewaters are being or are capable of being discharged into a public sewer main for purposes of inspecting, observing, measuring, sampling, and testing pertinent to the discharge of wastes or wastewaters to ascertain whether the intent of this chapter is being met and the user is complying with all requirements. The city shall have access at reasonable times to all parts of the wastewater generating and disposal facilities for the purposes of inspection and sampling. The city shall have the right to set up on the user's property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling or metering operations. Where a user has security measures in force, the user shall make necessary arrangements so that personnel from the city will be permitted to enter without delay for the purpose of performing their specific responsibilities. 
B.  The city may require the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated pursuant to the manufacturer's recommendations to ensure their accuracy 
C.  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the city and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the user. 
D.  Unreasonable delays in allowing the city access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.072 - Search warrant. 
If the city has been refused access to a building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the city designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the city may seek issuance of a search warrant from the superior court of the county of Riverside. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.080 - Information required. 
To provide for fair and equitable use of sewerage facilities, the city shall have the unqualified right to require a discharger to provide information necessary to insure compliance with all rules, regulations and provisions of this chapter. 
All information and data on a user shall be available to the public unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods which would be detrimental to the user's competitive position. The demonstration of the need for confidentiality made by the permittee must meet the burden necessary for holding such information from the general public under applicable state and federal law. 
In any event, the city shall not limit EPA's access to any information provided by the discharger. 
In any event, information concerning wastewater quality and quantity will not be deemed confidential. Such information may include, but is not limited to: 
1.  Wastewater discharge peak flow rates and volume over a specified time period; 
2.  Physical, chemical, bacteriological, or radiological analysis of wastewaters; 
3.  Information on raw materials, processes, and products; 
4.  Quantity and disposition of specific liquid, sludge, oil, solvent, or other materials; 
5.  Details of wastewater pretreatment facilities, their operation and maintenance; 
6.  Details of systems to prevent and control the losses of materials through spills to the public sewer main; 
7.  Detailed plumbing plans indicating all sources discharging to the on- or off-site pretreatment or sewerage facilities; 
8.  A slug control program, per 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)(v); 
9.  Notification of discharges of a listed hazardous waste (Section 3001 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) to the sewer system per 40 CFR 403.12(p)); 
10.  Baseline monitoring reports per 40 CFR 403.12(b); 
11.  Compliance progress reports in accordance with all provisions listed in 40 CFR 403.12(c)(d)(e). 
12.  Notification of potential problems, including slug loading in accordance with all provisions listed in 40 CFR 403.12(f). 
13.  Notification of substantial changes in volume or character of pollutants discharged in accordance with all provisions listed in 40 CFR 403.12(j). 
14.  Monitoring and analysis reports demonstrating continued compliance in accordance with all provisions listed in 40 CFR 403.12(g). 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.090 - Authority. 
The city is regulated by several agencies of the United States Government and the state of California, pursuant to the provisions of federal and state law. Federal and state laws (including, but not limited to: 
1.  Federal Water Pollution Control Act, commonly known as the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. Section 1251 et seq); 
2.  California Porter Cologne Water Quality Control Act (California Water Code section 13000 et seq.); 
3.  California Health & Safety Code sections 25100 to 25250; 
4.  Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (42 U.S.C. Section 6901 et seq.); and 
5.  California Government Code, Sections 54739-54740) grant to the city the authority to regulate and/or prohibit, by the adoption of an ordinance, and by issuance of control mechanisms, the discharge of any waste, directly or indirectly, to the city sewerage facilities. 
Said authority includes the right to establish limits, conditions, and prohibitions; to establish flow rates or prohibit flows discharged to the city sewerage facilities; to require the development of compliance schedules for the installation of equipment systems and materials by all users; and to take all actions necessary to enforce its authority, whether within or outside the city boundaries, including those users that are tributary to the city or within areas for which the city has contracted to provide sewerage services. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
Article II - Definitions 
 
13.02.100 - Definitions. 
A.  Unless otherwise defined herein, terms related to water quality shall be consistent with the Clean Water Act and the Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act. If not defined therein, the term shall be consistent with any permit issued pursuant to such acts and consistent with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water Environment Federation. The testing procedures for waste constituents and characteristics shall be as provided in 40 CFR 136 (Code of Federal Regulations; Title 40; Protection of Environment; Chapter I, Environmental Protection Agency; Part 136, Test Procedures for the Analyses of Pollutants), or as specified. Other terms not defined are defined as being consistent with the International Conference of Building Officials, Uniform Building Code, Current Edition, or the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, Uniform Plumbing Code, Current Edition. 
B.  Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated. 
1.  "Applicant" shall mean any person or persons who has applied for permission to use the city's collection system for commercial or industrial purposes. 
2.  "City manager" shall mean the city manager of the city of Coachella. 
3.  "Categorical pretreatment standards" shall mean those final regulations promulgated and adopted by EPA (as outlined in 40 CFR 403, and 40 CFR, Chapter I, Subchapter N, 405-471) for each standard industrial classification (S.I.C.) or subcategory containing pollutant discharge limits. 
4.  "Categorical user" shall mean any industrial user whose process(es) are subject to categorical pretreatment standards. 
5.  "Cesspool" shall mean a lined excavation in the ground which receives the discharge of a sewage drainage system, or part thereof, so designed as to retain the solids and organic matter, but permitting liquids to seep through the bottom and sides. This shall also mean seepage pit. 
6.  "Code of Federal Regulations (CFR)" shall mean the codification of the general and permanent rules published in the United States Federal Register by the executive departments and agencies of the Federal Government to include but not limited to the Environmental Protection Agency. 
7.  "Collection System" shall mean the combined pipes, conduits, manholes and other structures, above and below ground, whose purpose is to convey wastewater to a City RWRF/POTW. 
8.  "Compatible or conventional pollutant" shall mean a combination of BOD, total suspended solids, pH, fecal coliform bacteria, plus other pollutants that the city's treatment facilities are designed to accept, treat and/or remove. Some compatible pollutants may be considered incompatible when discharged in quantities that have an adverse effect on the city's collection, treatment, disposal systems and/or discharge permit regulating the treatment facilities cause interference or pass through. 
9.  "Control mechanism" shall mean waste discharge permit, waste discharge authorization, special agreement or other regulatory mechanism. 
10.  "Department head" shall mean that person duly designated by the city manager to direct the collection and source control divisions and perform the duties as specified in this chapter. 
11.  "Discharger" shall mean any person, entity or collection agency who discharges or causes a discharge of wastewater directly or indirectly to a public sewer main. Discharger shall mean the same as user. 
12.  "Discharge requirements" shall mean the requirements of federal (as listed in 40 CFR 403), state or local public agencies having jurisdiction over the effluent discharges from city regional water reclamation facilities/publicly owned treatment works (POTW). 
13.  "Discharge or indirect discharge" shall mean the introduction of pollutants into a POTW from any nondomestic source. 
14.  "District" shall mean the Coachella Sanitary District. 
15.  "Division Head" shall mean that person duly designated by the general manager to implement the city's source control program and perform the duties as specified in this chapter. 
16.  "Domestic wastewater" shall mean the liquid and solid waterborne wastes derived from the ordinary living processes of humans of such character as to permit satisfactory disposal, without special treatment, into the public sewer or by means of a private disposal system. 
17.  "General manager" shall mean the utilities general manager of the city of Coachella. 
18.  "Incompatible or nonconventional pollutant" shall mean any pollutant which is not a compatible pollutant as defined herein. 
19.  "Indirect discharger" shall mean any person, entity or collection agency who discharges or causes a discharge of wastewater to a septic tank, cesspool, chemical toilet, or private sewer system which, from time to time, is serviced by a septic tank pumper permitted by the city to discharge to city sewerage facilities. 
20.  "Industrial user" shall mean any discharger of nondomestic wastewater to a collection agency's sewer main either directly, or indirectly. 
21.  "Industrial wastewater" shall mean all liquid carried wastes including, but not limited to, all wastewater from any producing, manufacturing, processing, institutional, commercial, restaurant, agriculture, or other operation where the wastewater discharged contains quantities of wastes of non-human origin and excluding domestic wastewater, rainwater, groundwater, stormwater, and drainage of uncontaminated water. 
22.  "Inspector" shall mean a person authorized by the general manager to inspect any establishment directly or indirectly discharging or anticipating discharge to a public sewer main or a RWRF/POTW. 
23.  "Interference" shall mean a discharge by a user which, alone or in conjunction with discharges by other sources, inhibits or disrupts the city's RWRF/POTW, its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and which is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the RWRF/POTW's discharge order (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation), or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with applicable federal, state, and local regulations (per 40 CFR 403.3 (I)). 
24.  "Local limits" shall mean a set of technically based discharge limits that are developed by the city to protect the public sewer main and to prevent sludge contamination or violation of discharge requirements. 
25.  "Mass emission rate" shall mean the weight of material discharged to the sewer system during a given time interval. Unless otherwise specified, the mass emission rate shall mean pounds per day of particular constituent or combination of constituents. 
26.  "New source" shall mean any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under section 307c of the Act. (40 CFR 403.3K Definitions) 
27.  "Nondomestic wastewater" shall mean all wastewater except domestic wastewater and pollutant-free wastewater. This shall also mean industrial wastewater. 
28.  "Normal working day" shall mean the period of time during which production and/or operation is taking place. 
29.  "Pass through" shall mean the discharge of pollutants through the RWRF/POTW in quantities or concentrations which are a cause in whole or in part of a violation of any requirement of the RWRF/POTW's discharge order (per 40 CFR 403.3(n)). 
30.  "Permittee" shall mean a person who has applied for and received permission to discharge into the city's collection system subject to the requirements and conditions established by the city. 
31.  "Person" shall mean any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation or public agency, including the State of California and the United States of America. 
32.  "Pollutant" shall mean any constituent or characteristic of wastewater on which a discharge limitation or prohibition may be imposed either by the city or the regulatory agencies empowered to regulate the city. 
33.  "Pretreatment" shall mean the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to discharge of the wastewater into a collection agency's system. The reduction or alteration may be accomplished by physical, chemical or biological process or process changes, or by other means. 
34.  "Pretreatment facility" shall mean any works or devices for the treatment or flow control of wastewater prior to discharge. 
35.  "Pretreatment requirements" shall mean any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment standard. 
36.  "Pretreatment standard or standards" shall mean prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits. 
37.  "Public agency" shall mean the state of California or any city, county, district, other local authority or public body within this state. 
38.  "Public nuisance" shall mean anything which: (1) is injurious to health, or is indecent or offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property, so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property, and (2) affects at the same time an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, although the extent of the annoyance or damage inflicted upon individuals may be unequal, and (3) occurs during or as a result of the treatment or disposal of wastes. 
39.  "Public sewer main" shall mean any closed conduit, excluding building sewers, which is financed, installed, owned, operated, or maintained by a collection agency for the purpose of transporting wastewater from building sewers. 
40.  "RCRA" shall mean Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 Public Law (PI) 94-580 and amendments thereto. 
41.  "Regional water reclamation facility (RWRF)" shall mean the city sewage treatment plant designed to serve a specific area of the city. Also known as a publicly owned treatment works or POTW, as defined by section 212 of the Clean Water Act. 
42.  "Regulatory agencies" shall mean those agencies having oversight of the operation of the city, including but not limited to the following: 
a.  United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA); 
b.  California Environmental Protection Agency (Cal-EPA); 
c.  California State Water Resources Control Board (SWRCB); 
d.  California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Colorado River Basin Region (CRBR) 
43.  "Residential user" shall mean a household which discharges only domestic wastewater from a dwelling unit. 
44.  "Responsible party" shall mean: 
a.  If the user is a corporation, a responsible corporate officer, that is: 
(i)  A president, secretary, treasurer, or vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision making functions for the corporation, or 
(ii)  The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities employing more than two hundred fifty (250) persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding $25 million (in second-quarter 1980 dollars), if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
b.  If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship. a general partner or proprietor, respectively. 
c.  If the user is a federal, state, or local governmental entity, or their agents, the principal executive officer or director having responsibility for the overall operation of the discharging facility. 
(i)  By a duly authorized representative of the individual designated in paragraph (1), (2) or (3) of this definition if: 
(a)  The authorization is made in writing by the individual described in paragraph (1), (2) or (3); 
(b)  The authorization specifies either an individual or a position having responsibility for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates, such as the position of plant manager, operator of a well, or well field superintendent, or a position of equivalent responsibility, or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company; and 
(c)  The written authorization is submitted to the city. 
d.  If an authorization under paragraph (D) of this section is no longer accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility for the overall operation of the facility, or overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, a new authorization satisfying the requirements of paragraph (D) of this section must be submitted to the city. 
45.  "Sanitary wastewater" shall mean domestic quality wastewater from other than a dwelling unit. 
46.  "Septic tank" shall mean a watertight receptacle which receives the discharge from a sewer system and is designed and constructed to retain solids, digest organic matter through a period of detention, and allow the liquids to discharge for disposal. 
47.  "Sewerage facilities" shall mean any and all facilities used for collecting, conveying, pumping, treating and disposing of wastewater. 
48.  "Significant industrial user" shall mean: 
a.  A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or 
b.  A user that: 
(i)  Discharges an average of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gpd or more of process wastewater to the city's collection system (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling, and boiler blowdown wastewater); 
(ii)  Contributes a process wastestream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the RWRF; or 
(iii)  Is designated as such by the city on the basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the RWRF's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
c.  Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in subsection (B) has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the RWRF's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from a user, and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8 (f) (6), determine that such user should not be considered a significant industrial user. 
49.  "Significant noncompliance (SNC)" shall mean any user with compliance violations which meet one or more of the following criteria: 
a.  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined as those in which sixty-six (66) percent or more of all of the measurements taken during a six month period exceed (by any magnitude) the daily maximum limit or the average limit for the same pollutant parameter; 
b.  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined as those in which thirty-three (33) percent or more of all of the measurements taken during a six month period equal or exceed the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit times the applicable TRC (TRC=1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
c.  Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily maximum or longer term average) that the city determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through (including endangering the health of city personnel or the general public); 
d.  Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment or has resulted in the city's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
e.  Violations of schedule milestones for starting construction, completing construction or achieving final compliance, including failure to meet, by ninety (90) days or more after the schedule date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism or enforcement order, for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; 
f.  Failure to provide required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules within thirty (30) days of the due date; 
g.  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; 
h.  Any other violations or group of violations which the city considers to be significant. 
50.  "Single pass cooling" shall mean unpolluted water used for the absorption and immediate discharge of excess thermal energy to the environs prior to heat exchange and reuse. 
51.  "Slug" shall mean any discharge of water or wastewater which, in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds five times the average 24-hour concentration of flows during normal operation for a period of fifteen (15) minutes or more and/or has a significant adverse impact, either singly or in combination with other discharges, on the collection agency's sewer system or the quality of the effluent from the involved city treatment plant. 
52.  "Spill containment" shall mean a protection system installed by the user to prohibit the accidental discharge to the sewer of incompatible pollutants. 
53.  "Standard industrial classification (S.I.C.)" shall mean the system of classifying industries identified in the S.I.C. manual, issued by the office of management and budget. 
54.  "Toxic pollutants" shall mean those substances which, individually or when combined with other substances normally found in domestic sewage, result in wastes in a collection agency sewer system in concentrations or quantities which could have an adverse or harmful effect on such sewer system facilities, sewer treatment plant operations and maintenance personnel or equipment, treated sewage effluent quality, water reclamation procedures, public or private property, or which may endanger the public, local environment, or create a public nuisance. 
55.  "User" shall mean any person who discharges or causes a discharge of wastewater directly or indirectly to a public sewer. User shall include discharger. 
56.  "Violation" shall mean an event or condition at a user's facility that is prohibited by ordinance, control mechanism, or order. 
57.  "Violation charge" shall mean that charge levied against a user for as a result of a waste discharge violation. 
58.  "Waste discharge authorization" shall mean the revocable permission to discharge wastewater to the public sewer main subject to technically based limits on wastewater constituents and characteristics. 
59.  "Waste discharge permit (WDP)" shall mean the periodically renewable, revocable permission to discharge industrial wastewater to the public sewer main subject to technically based limits on wastewater constituents and characteristics. 
60.  "Waste discharge violation" shall mean the failure by a user to comply with this chapter, or any conditions or reporting requirements as contained in their control mechanism. 
61.  "Waste hauler" shall mean any commercial pumper that is permitted by Riverside County Department of Health as a nonhazardous liquid waste hauler, discharging domestic and sanitary wastewater only. This shall also mean septic tank pumper. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.101 - Other meanings. 
Words used in this chapter in the singular may include the plural and the plural the singular. Use of masculine shall mean feminine and use of feminine shall mean masculine. Shall is mandatory; may is permissive or discretionary. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
Article III - General Sewer Use Requirements 
 
13.02.300 - Prohibited discharge standards. 
A.  General Prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the city's collection system any pollutant or wastewater which, alone or in conjunction with other substances, causes pass through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. 
B.  Specific Prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the city's collection system the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater: 
1.  Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the city's RWRFs or collection system, including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140 ° F (60 ° C) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21; 
2.  Wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or more than 10.5, or otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the city's RWRFs or collection system or equipment; 
3.  Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction of the flow in the city's RWRFs or collection system resulting in interference but in no case solids greater than three-eighths ( 3/8 ) inches in any dimension; 
4.  Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with the city's RWRFs or collection system; 
5.  Wastewater having a temperature greater than 140 ° F (60 ° C), or which will inhibit biological activity in the RWRF resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the RWRF to exceed 104 ° F (40 ° C) or which falls below 40 ° F; 
6.  Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through; 
7.  Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the city's RWRFs or collection system in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems; 
8.  Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the general manager; 
9.  Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair; 
10.  Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the RWRF's effluent; 
11.  Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations; 
12.  Stormwater, surface water, ground water, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized water, noncontact cooling water, and unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the general manager; 
13.  Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes; 
14.  Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the city's RWRFs or collection system; 
15.  Wastewater required to be manifested under RCRA, unless specifically authorized by the general manager. 
16.  Infectious wastes as defined in the California Health and Safety Code. 
C.  Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the city's collection system. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.310 - Discharge of pollutant to watercourse. 
No person shall circumvent or obviate the intent or purpose of this chapter by discharging or by causing to be discharged, into any storm drain, channel, natural watercourse or public street, any material or waste prohibited or restricted as to its discharge into a sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.312 - Discharge of pollutant to ground. 
No person shall deposit or discharge or cause to be deposited or discharged into any sump which is not impermeable, or into any pit or well, or onto the ground, or into any storm drain or watercourse, any material which, by seeping underground or by being leached or by reacting with the soil, can pollute usable groundwaters, or any pretreatment wastes. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.314 - Point of discharge. 
No person, excluding authorized city personnel involved in maintenance functions of sanitary sewer facilities, shall discharge or cause to be discharged any wastewater or any other matter directly into a manhole or other opening leading to the POTW other than through an approved building sewer, unless written permission for the discharge has been provided by the general manager. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.316 - Dilution of flow. 
No person shall increase the use of process water or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in this chapter, in categorical standards, or in any other pollutant-specific limitations developed by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.318 - Interference with City equipment or facilities. 
No person shall enter, break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any temporary or permanent structure, equipment or appurtenance which is part of the POTW or is required or authorized by the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.320 - National Categorical Pretreatment Standards. 
A.  The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471 are hereby incorporated. 
B.  Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the general manager may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c). 
C.  When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the general manager shall impose an alternate limit using the combined wastestream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
D.  A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when developing the categorical pretreatment standard. 
E.  A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15. 
F.  Any user operating under a permit incorporating equivalent mass or concentration limits calculated from a production-based standard shall notify the general manager within two business days after the user has a reasonable basis to know that the production level will significantly change within the next calendar month. Any user not notifying the general manager of such anticipated change will be required to meet the mass or concentration limits in its permit that were based on the original estimate of the long term average production rate. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.330 - State requirements. 
State requirements and limitations on dischargers shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than the federal requirements and limitations, or those in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.340 - Local limits. 
A.  No user shall discharge or cause to be introduced directly or indirectly into the city's collection system, a quantity or quality of wastewater which exceeds the local limits on discharges to public sewer mains established by the city. The local limits, conventional pollutant surcharge limits, and surcharge fees specific to each city RWRF may be adopted by resolution of the city council or district. 
B.  These limits apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the city's collection system. The general manager may impose limitations based on concentrations of pollutants in milligrams per liter or as an amount of pollutants in pounds per day. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.350 - Limitations on water softeners. 
Water softeners will be regulated in accordance with state law. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.360 - Right of revision. 
The city reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the city's RWRFs or collection system. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.370 - Dilution. 
No user shall ever increase the use of process water or, in any way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The general manager may impose such limitations on the amount, in pounds per day, of pollutants discharged by users who are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases when the imposition of such limitations is appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.380 - Special restrictions—Cesspool, septic tank, holding tank, waste hauler. 
A.  Cesspool, septic tank and holding tank pumpings containing only domestic and/or sanitary wastes may be accepted only at city designated locations from holders of both a valid liquid waste hauler water discharge permit issued by the city and a valid environmental health permit issued by the County of Riverside Health Services Agency Department of Environmental Health. The contents of any cesspool or septic tank may not be pumped directly into a public sewer main unless specifically approved by the city under emergency or other abnormal short duration circumstances. Wastes from industrial process sources are prohibited and may not be hauled and discharged to the public sewer system. 
B.  No waste hauler shall discharge to the POTW except as set forth herein: 
1.  Septic tank waste may be introduced into the POTW only at locations designated by the general manager, and at such times as are established by the general manager. Such waste shall not violate any requirements established by the city. The general manager may require septic tank waste haulers to obtain a control mechanism. 
2.  Industrial waste haulers may discharge loads only at locations designated by the general manager. No load may be discharged without prior consent of the general manager. The general manager may collect samples of each hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable standards. The general manager may require the industrial waste hauler to provide a waste analysis of any load prior to discharge. Industrial waste haulers must provide a waste tracking form for every load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of the industrial waste hauler, permit number, truck identification, names and addresses of sources of waste, and volume and characteristics of waste. The form shall identify the type of industry, known or suspected waste constituents, and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes. 
3.  Wastewater from recreational vehicles and boats shall only be discharged at dump sites designated for such use. The city reserves the right to inspect records of individual wastewater dumps from the authorized operators of each designated dump site. Detailed plans describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the general manager for review, and shall be acceptable to the general manager before such facilities are constructed. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.382 - Vehicle servicing facilities. 
A.  Any facility maintained for the servicing, washing, cleaning or repair of vehicles licensed by the state department of motor vehicles, construction equipment, industrial transportation or power equipment shall install and maintain a gravity separation interceptor in accordance with Section 13.02.384. Wastewaters from toilets shall not be allowed to pass through this interceptor, but all wastewaters arising from the servicing and repair of vehicles shall pass through this interceptor before discharge to the POTW. If the vehicle servicing facility does not include facilities for the washing of more than one vehicle at a time, the interceptor shall have a fluid capacity of not less than one thousand five hundred (1,500) gallons. If the vehicle servicing facility has facilities for washing or cleaning more than one vehicle at a time, the interceptor shall be as large as necessary so that a seven-day accumulation of sand and oil together will not fill more than twenty-five (25) percent of the fluid capacity. The interceptor shall be designed so as to retain any oil and grease which will float and any sand which will settle. 
B.  Any interceptor legally and properly installed at a vehicle servicing facility before January 1, 2012, shall be acceptable as an alternative to the interceptor specified in subsection (a) of this section, provided such interceptor is effective in removing sand and oil and is so designed and installed that it can be inspected and properly maintained. 
C.  The plumbing official shall not approve the plumbing of a vehicle servicing facility if it does not have a gravity separation interceptor meeting the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.384 - Food processing facilities. 
A.  All restaurants or other food processing facilities shall direct all wastes from floor drains, sinks, waste container wash racks and dishwashers through a two-compartment gravity separation interceptor. All domestic wastewaters from restrooms, showers and drinking fountains shall be kept separate until the previously specified wastes have passed through the interceptor. The interceptor shall have a minimum fluid capacity of seven hundred fifty (750) gallons, or as required by Appendix H of the latest edition of the Uniform Plumbing Code, whichever is greater. Any interceptor or grease trap legally and properly installed at a food processing facility before January 1, 2012, shall be acceptable as an alternative to the interceptor specified in this subsection, provided such interceptor or grease trap is effective in removing grease and is so designed and installed that it can be inspected and properly maintained. 
B.  Conditional waivers for the grease interceptor requirement may be granted by the city for those restaurants determined not to have adverse effects on the POTW. Conditional waivers may be revoked for the following reasons: 
1.  Changes in types of food prepared; 
2.  Falsification of information submitted in the restaurant survey form; 
3.  Changes in operating hours; 
4.  Changes in equipment used; 
5.  Violation of any conditions contained in the waiver. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
Article IV - Control Mechanisms  
Division 1 - General Requirements 
 
13.02.400 - Wastewater analysis. 
When requested by the general manager, a user must submit information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within ninety (90) days of the request. The general manager is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require users to update this information. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.402 - Control mechanism requirement. 
A.  The city may require any user to obtain a control mechanism prior to discharging to the city's collection system or to obtain control mechanisms as necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter, including but not limited to obtaining a permit, installing a gravity separation interceptor, a spill containment system, implementing a slug control plan, installing pretreatment facilities, or utilizing other best management practices. 
B.  No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the city's collection system without first obtaining a control mechanism, except that a significant industrial user that has filed a timely application pursuant to Section 13.02.404 may continue to discharge for the time period specified therein. 
C.  Any violation of the terms and conditions of a control mechanism shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and subject the user to the sanctions set out in Article V of this chapter. Obtaining a control mechanism does not relieve the user of its obligation to comply with all federal and state pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other requirements of federal, state, and local law. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.404 - Issuing control mechanisms—Existing connections. 
Any user required to obtain a control mechanism who was discharging wastewater into the city's collection system prior to the effective date of this chapter and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future, shall, within ninety (90) days after said date, apply to the general manager for a control mechanism in accordance with Section 13.02.408, and shall not cause or allow discharges to the city's collection system to continue after one hundred twenty (120) days of the effective date of this chapter except in accordance with a control mechanism issued by the general manager. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.406 - Issuing control mechanisms—New connections. 
Any user required to obtain a control mechanism who proposes to begin or recommence discharging into the city's collection system must apply for such control mechanism prior to the beginning or recommencing of such discharge. An application for this control mechanism, in accordance with Section 13.02.408, must be filed at least sixty (60) days prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin or commence. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.408 - Waste discharge application contents. 
All users required to obtain a control mechanism must submit a waste discharge application. The general manager may require all users to submit as part of an application the following information: 
A.  All information required in Section 13.02.600(B) of this chapter; 
B.  Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the premises, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility which are or could accidentally or intentionally be discharged to the city's collection system; 
C.  Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and proposed or actual hours of operation; 
D.  Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes, and rate of production; 
E.  Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day); 
F.  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation, and all points of discharge; 
G.  Time and duration of discharges; 
H.  An application fee, annual fee, special use fee, connection fee, and/or pretreatment program fees as may be established by ordinance or resolution of the city council or district; and 
I.  Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the general manager to evaluate the waste discharge application. 
Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the user for revision. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.410 - Application signatories and certification. 
All waste discharge applications and user reports must be signed by an authorized representative of the user and contain the following certification statement: 
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.412 - Control mechanism decisions. 
The general manager will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. Within thirty (30) days of receipt of a complete waste discharge application, the general manager will determine whether or not to issue a control mechanism. The general manager may deny any application for a control mechanism. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
Division 2 - Control Mechanism Issuance Process 
 
13.02.500 - Control mechanism duration. 
A.  A waste discharge permit shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years from the effective date of the permit. A waste discharge permit may be issued for a period less than five years, at the discretion of the general manager. Each waste discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will expire. 
B.  A waste discharge authorization shall be issued for an indefinite time period, subject to review and reconsideration at the discretion of the general manager. 
C.  A special agreement shall be issued for a specified time period, set forth in the terms of the special agreement. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.502 - Waste discharge permit contents. 
A.  Waste discharge permit shall include such conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary by the general manager to prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the RWRF's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, and protect against damage to the RWRF and the city's collection system. 
Waste discharge permits must contain: 
1.  A statement that indicates waste discharge permit duration, which in no event shall exceed five years; 
2.  A statement that the waste discharge permit is nontransferable without prior notification to the city in accordance with Section 13.02.508, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing waste discharge permit; 
3.  Effluent limitations based on applicable pretreatment standards; 
4.  Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record-keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, frequency, and sample type based on federal, state, and local law; 
5.  A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violations of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state, or local law. 
B.  Waste discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the following conditions: 
1.  Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization; 
2.  Requirements for the installation and maintenance of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the city's collection system; 
3.  Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or routine discharges; 
4.  Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the city's collection system; 
5.  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the city's collection system; 
6.  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment; 
7.  A statement that compliance with the waste discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the waste discharge permit; and 
8.  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the general manager to ensure compliance with this chapter, and state and federal laws, rules, and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.504 - Waste discharge permit appeals. 
Any person, including the user, may petition the general manager to reconsider the terms of a waste discharge permit within thirty (30) days of notice of its issuance. 
A.  Failure to submit timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a waiver of the administrative appeal. 
B.  In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the waste discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to be placed in the waste discharge permit. 
C.  The effectiveness of the waste discharge permit shall not be stayed pending the appeal. 
D.  If the general manager fails to act within thirty (30) days of the filing of an appeal, a request for reconsideration shall be deemed to be a decision to deny such request. Decisions not to reconsider a waste discharge permit, not to issue a waste discharge permit, or not to modify a waste discharge permit shall be considered final administrative actions for the purposes of judicial review. 
E.  Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative waste discharge permit decision shall do so by filing a petition for writ of mandate with the Superior Court for Riverside County within ninety (90) days. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.506 - Waste discharge permit modification. 
The general manager may modify a waste discharge permit for good cause including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
A.  To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements; 
B.  To address significant alterations or additions to the discharger's operation processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of waste discharge permit issuance; 
C.  A change in the RWRF that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge; 
D.  Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the city's collection system, city personnel or the receiving waters; 
E.  Violation of any terms or conditions of the waste discharge permit; 
F.  Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the waste discharge application or in any required reporting; 
G.  Revision of or a grant of variance from such categorical standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13; 
H.  Correction of typographical or other errors in the waste discharge permit; or 
I.  To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new owner or operator. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.508 - Waste discharge permit transfer. 
Waste discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner or operator only if the permittee gives at least thirty (30) days advance notice to the general manager and the general manager approves the waste discharge permit transfer. The notice to the general manager must include a written certification by the new owner or operator which: 
A.  States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to change the facility's operations and processes; 
B.  Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and 
C.  Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing waste discharge permit. 
Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the waste discharge permit void as of the date of facility transfer. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.510 - Waste discharge permit revocation. 
A.  A waste discharge permit may be revoked for good cause including, but not limited to the following reasons: 
1.  Failure to notify the general manager of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge; 
2.  Failure to provide prior notification to the general manager of changed conditions pursuant to Section 13.02.620; 
3.  Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the waste discharge application; 
4.  Falsifying self-monitoring reports; 
5.  Tampering with monitoring equipment; 
6.  Refusing to allow the general manager timely access to the facility premises and records; 
7.  Failure to meet effluent limitations; 
8.  Failure to pay fines; 
9.  Failure to pay sewer charges; 
10.  Failure to meet compliance schedules; 
11.  Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the waste discharge application; 
12.  Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business ownership of a permitted facility; or 
13.  Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the waste discharge permit or this chapter. 
B.  Waste discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All waste discharge permits issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a new waste discharge permit to that user. 
C.  Waste discharge permit revocation is subject to appeal as set forth in Article V. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.512 - Waste discharge permit reissuance. 
A user with an expiring waste discharge permit shall apply for waste discharge permit reissuance by submitting a complete waste discharge application (or a statement signed by the responsible party that there are no changes to the application previously submitted), in accordance with Section 13.02.408, a minimum of sixty (60) days prior to the expiration of the user's existing waste discharge permit. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.514 - Regulation of waste received from other jurisdictions. 
A.  After the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, any agreement entered into by the city and an agency outside of the city's legal boundary, allowing discharge to the POTW, and any modifications to such an existing agreement, shall be subject to the approval of the city council. 
B.  Such agreements shall provide protections to the POTW equivalent to those set forth in this chapter, such as, but not limited to, compliance with pretreatment standards and pretreatment requirements; rights of inspection and sampling of the user's discharge to determine compliance with such standards and requirements; and imposition of any fees, fines, costs, or deposits as necessary. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.516 - Additional control mechanisms. 
A.  Whenever deemed necessary, the city may require users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage wastestreams from industrial wastestreams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and determine the user's compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
B.  The city may require any person discharging into the POTW to install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. A wastewater permit may be issued solely for flow equalization. 
C.  Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the city, they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts, as defined by the city manager, of grease and oil, or sand; except that such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All interception units shall be of a type and capacity approved by the city and shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired as provided by the manufacturer's maintenance documentation, by the user at their expense. 
D.  Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required, at the discretion of the city manager, to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
Division 3 - Reporting Requirements 
 
13.02.600 - Baseline monitoring reports. 
A.  Within either one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6 (a)(4), whichever is later, existing categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the city's collection system shall submit to the general manager a report which contains the information listed in paragraph B, below. At least ninety (90) days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the general manager a report which contains the information listed in paragraph B, below. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source shall also give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged. 
B.  Users described above shall submit the information set forth below. 
1.  Identifying Information. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owner. 
2.  Environmental Permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility. 
3.  Description of Operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the city's collection system from the regulated processes. 
4.  Flow Measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the city's collection system from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined waste stream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
5.  Measurement of Pollutants. 
a.  The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process. 
b.  The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the general manager, of the regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in Section 13.02.640. 
c.  Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in Section 13.02.645. 
6.  Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. 
7.  Compliance Schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in Section 13.02.605. 
8.  Signature and Certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with Section 13.02.410. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.605 - Compliance schedule progress reports. 
The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by Section 13.02.600(B)(7) of this chapter: 
A.  The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation); 
B.  No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months; 
C.  The user shall submit a progress report to the general manager no later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and 
D.  In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the general manager. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.610 - Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline. 
Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the city's collection system, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the general manager a report containing the information described in Section 13.02.600(B)(4-6) of this chapter. For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long-term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with Section 13.02.410. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.615 - Periodic compliance reports. 
A.  If a permitted user monitors any pollutant using the procedures prescribed in Section 13.02.645, the results of this monitoring shall be at a frequency determined by the general manager but in no case less than twice per year (in June and December), be reported. The report shall indicate the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. All such reports must be signed and certified in accordance with Section 13.02.410. 
B.  All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.620 - Reports of changed conditions. 
Each user must notify the general manager of any planned significant changes to the user's operations or system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at least thirty (30) days before the change. 
A.  The general manager may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a waste discharge application under Section 13.02.408. 
B.  The general manager may issue a waste discharge permit under Section 13.02.412 or modify an existing waste discharge permit under Section 13.02.506 in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions. 
C.  For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are not limited to, flow increases of twenty (20) percent or greater, and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.625 - Reports of potential problems. 
A.  In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a noncustomary batch discharge, or a slug load, that may cause potential problems for the RWRF or the city's collection system, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the general manager of the incident. This notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user. 
B.  Within five days following such discharge, the user shall, unless waived by the general manager, submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the city's collection system or RWRF(s), natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.630 - Reports from unpermitted users. 
All users not required to obtain a waste discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to the general manager as the general manager may require. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.635 - Reports of sampling violations/repeat sampling. 
If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the general manager within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the general manager within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the violation. The user is not required to resample if the city monitors at the user's facility at least once a month, or if the city samples between the user's initial sampling and when the user receives the results of this sampling. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.640 - Analytical requirements. 
All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a waste discharge application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by US EPA. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.645 - Sample collection. 
A.  Except as indicated in Section B, below, the user must collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the general manager may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or a minimum of four (4) grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits. 
B.  Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.650 - Timing. 
Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.655 - Record keeping. 
Users subject to the reporting requirements of this chapter shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements. Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or the city, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the general manager. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.660 - Self-monitoring reports. 
Users may be required to submit periodic self-monitoring reports containing a description of the nature, concentration and flow of pollutants required to be reported by the city. Sampling for self-monitoring reports shall be performed during the period covered by the report. All required analyses shall be performed by a state certified laboratory using analytical methods as defined in this article. Significant industrial users shall be required to submit self-monitoring reports at least every six months. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.665 - Solvent management plans. 
All industrial users subject to effective categorical standards which include a total toxic organic limitation shall be required to file a solvent management plan. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.670 - Accidental discharge/slug control plans. 
The city shall evaluate whether each significant industrial user needs an accidental discharge/slug control plan. The city may require any user to develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan. Alternatively, the city may develop such a plan for any user. An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following: 
A.  Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges; 
B.  Description of stored chemicals; 
C.  Procedures for immediately notifying the city of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by Section 13.02.625 of this chapter; and 
D.  Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.675 - Notification of hazardous waste discharge. 
A.  All industrial users shall notify the city, the EPA regional waste management division director, and state hazardous waste authorities in writing of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be classified as a hazardous waste pursuant to 40 CFR part 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch or other). If the industrial user discharges more than one hundred (100) kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification shall also contain the following information to the extent such information is known and readily available to the industrial user: an identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the waste stream discharged during that calendar month, and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the waste stream expected to be discharged during the following twelve (12) months. The notifications required by this subsection shall provide the notification no later than 180 days after the discharge of the hazardous waste. 
B.  Any notification under this subsection need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed discharges must be submitted in accordance with 40 CFR 403.12(j). 
C.  The hazardous waste discharge notification requirements specified in this subsection do not apply to pollutants already reported under the self-monitoring requirements of this chapter. Industrial users are also exempt from such requirements during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than fifteen (15) kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). 
D.  Discharges of more than fifteen (15) kilograms of non-acute hazardous wastes, as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), require a one-time notification. Additional notification is not required for subsequent months during which the industrial user discharges additional quantities of the same nonacute hazardous waste. 
E.  In the case of new federal regulations under section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the industrial user shall notify the city, the EPA regional waste management division director and state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within ninety (90) days of the effective date of such regulations. 
F.  In the case of any notification made under these requirements, the industrial user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume or toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.680 - Toxic organics management plan. 
The city may require any user to submit a toxic organic management plan (TOMP) to address the prevention of discharge of toxic organics to the POTW or the environment. A TOMP shall contain, at a minimum, the toxic organic compounds used, the method(s) of disposal, and the procedures for assuring that toxic organics do not spill into the wastewater being discharged. The city may allow a user to develop and implement a TOMP in lieu of required self-monitoring for toxic organics. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.685 - Other reports. 
Users shall file any other reports required by state law, including such reports as are required by Health and Safety Code chapter 6.95 (§§ 25500 through 25547.2). 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.690 - Confidential information. 
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater permit applications, wastewater permits, and monitoring programs, and from the city's inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city, that the release of such information would divulge information, processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable state law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data. When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents, characteristics, and other effluent data as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
Article V - Enforcement 
 
13.02.700 - Noncompliance monitoring procedures and applicable fees. 
A.  Self-Monitoring Requirements as a Result of Noncompliance. 
1.  If analysis of any sample obtained by the city or by a user shows noncompliance with the applicable wastewater discharge limits set forth in the ordinance or in the permittee's discharge permit, the city may impose self-monitoring requirements on the permittee or user. 
2.  A user shall perform required self-monitoring of constituents in a frequency, at the specific location, and in a manner directed by the city. 
3.  All analyses of self-monitoring samples shall be performed by an independent laboratory acceptable to the city and submitted to the city in a form and at a frequency determined by the city. 
4.  All self-monitoring costs shall be borne by the user. 
5.  Nothing in this section shall be deemed to limit the authority of the city to impose self-monitoring as a permit condition. 
B.  Noncompliance Sampling Fees. 
1.  If analysis of any sample of a user's discharge obtained by the city shows a violation by the user of the mass emission rates or concentration limits specified in the user's discharge permit or in this chapter, then the user shall be subject to noncompliance sampling fees pursuant to fee schedules adopted by ordinance or resolution of the district. 
2.  The fees specified in Subsection 13.02.700(B)(1) herein shall be imposed for each date on which the city conducts sampling as a result of a violation by a user. 
C.  Noncompliance Inspection Fees. 
1.  Each user is subject to routine inspection. When noncompliance with any of the provisions of this chapter is determined, a follow-up inspection may be required. Each user shall receive one follow-up inspection to verify compliance for each routine inspection without being subject to noncompliance inspection fees. 
2.  When it becomes necessary to perform additional inspections in order to determine compliance with the provisions of this chapter, then the user shall pay noncompliance inspection fees to the city pursuant to fee schedules adopted by ordinance or resolution of the district. 
3.  The fees specified in Subsection 13.02.700(C)(2) herein shall be imposed for each date (excluding one follow-up inspection) on which the city conducts an inspection as a result of a violation by a user. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.705 - Election of enforcement remedies. 
The general manager, upon finding a violation, may employ any of the remedies set forth in this article, subject to due consideration of the following: 
A.  The magnitude of the violation; 
B.  The duration of the violation; 
C.  The effect of the violation on RWRF compliance with discharge order; 
D.  The effect of the violation on the operation of the RWRF; 
E.  The compliance history of the user; and 
F.  The good faith of the user. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.710 - Notice of violation. 
A.  Upon finding a violation, the general manager may issue a notice of violation. Within ten (10) working days of the delivery of this notice, the user shall respond to the source control division with either an objection contesting the finding, or an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required action. Said response in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after the receipt of the notice of violation. 
B.  Upon receipt of an objection contesting a finding of violation, the division head will schedule a hearing within ten (10) working days at which the user may present information supporting the objection. Within five working days of the hearing, the division head shall determine the validity of the objection, either rescinding the notice of violation or denying the objection, thereby requiring submission of the plan. The user may appeal the division head's determination as set forth in Article V. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.715 - Administrative orders. 
Administrative orders include, but are not limited to, consent orders, show cause orders, cease and desist orders, and compliance orders. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.720 - Consent orders. 
The general manager may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents will include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to Section 13.02.730 and shall be judicially enforceable. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.725 - Show cause orders. 
A.  The general manager may order a user which has been given a notice of violation and which has failed to submit an acceptable plan of corrective action or which, having submitted such a plan, fails to follow through with execution of the plan, to appear at a hearing scheduled by the general manager to show cause why the enforcement action proposed in the show cause order should not be taken. 
B.  The show cause order shall specify the time and place for the hearing, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The show cause order shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing. The order may be served on any authorized representative of the user. A show cause order shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
C.  At the conclusion of the show cause hearing, the general manager may: rescind previous enforcement action; issue an appropriate administrative order (consent order, compliance order, or cease and desist order), including assessment of fines; initiate control mechanism revocation proceedings or termination of sewer services; or direct the remission of the file to counsel for legal action. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.730 - Compliance orders. 
A.  When the general manager finds a violation, he may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a specified time. if the user does not come into compliance within the time provided, sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. 
B.  Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a pretreatment standards or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. 
C.  Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.735 - Administrative fines. 
A.  When, subsequent to a show cause hearing, the general manager finds a violation, he may fine the user in an amount not to exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00 ) per violation per day of discharge in violation of any control mechanism or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standards or requirement. 
B.  The user may be responsible for the city's costs of preparing administrative enforcement actions, such as notices and orders. 
Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall, after thirty (30) calendar days, be assessed an additional penalty of five percent of the unpaid balance, and interest shall accrue thereafter at a rate of one and one half (1½) percent per month. A lien against the user's property will be sought for unpaid charges, fines, and penalties. 
C.  Users desiring to dispute an administrative fine must file a written request for the general manager to reconsider the fine along with full payment of the fine amount within thirty (30) days of the user's receipt of notice of the fine. Assessment of fines may be appealed pursuant to Article V. In the event the user's appeal is successful, the payment, together with any interest accruing thereto, shall be returned to the user. 
D.  Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.740 - Emergency suspensions. 
A.  The general manager may immediately suspend a user's discharge, after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. 
B.  The general manager may also immediately suspend a users discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of a regional water reclamation facility, or which presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment. 
1.  Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the general manager may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the city's collection system, the city's RWRFs, the receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The general manager may allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the general manager that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings in Section 13.02.745 are initiated against the user. 
2.  A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the general manager prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing under Sections 13.02.725 or 13.02.745. 
Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.745 - Termination of discharge. 
In addition to the provisions in Section 13.02.510, any user who violates the following conditions is subject to discharge termination: 
A.  Violation of waste discharge permit conditions; 
B.  Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge; 
C.  Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge; 
D.  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or 
E.  Violation of the pretreatment standards in Article III of this chapter. 
Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under Section 13.02.725 why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the city shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.750 - Published notices for significant noncompliance. 
In accordance with federal regulations, the city shall annually cause to be published the names of all users in significant noncompliance. Said publication shall be made in the newspaper of the largest daily circulation published in the city's service area.  
13.02.755 - Judicial enforcement remedies. 
In certain circumstances, judicial enforcement may be appropriate. Such remedies may include, but are not limited to, injunctive relief, civil penalties, and criminal prosecution. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.760 - Injunctive relief. 
When the general manager finds a violation, the city may petition the Superior Court for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the control mechanism, order, or other requirement imposed by this chapter on activities of the user. The city may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. 
A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.765 - Civil penalties. 
A.  Authority. All users of the city's system and facilities are subject to administrative or judicial enforcement actions by the city, U.S. EPA, State of California Regional Water Quality Control Board, or the County of Riverside District Attorney. Said actions may be taken pursuant to the authority and provisions of several laws, including but not limited to: (I) Federal Water Pollution Control Act, commonly known as the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C.A. Section 1251 et seq.); (2) California Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act (California Water Code Section 13000 et seq.); (3) California Hazardous Waste Control Law (California Health & Safety Code Sections 25100 to 25250); (4) Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (42 U.S.C.A. Section 6901 et seq.); and (5) California Government Code, Sections 54739-54740. 
B.  Recovery of Fines or Penalties. When the city must pay fines or penalties imposed by other regulatory or enforcement agencies based, and the city can establish said violation was the result of the discharge of any user, which discharge was in violation, as defined in this chapter, the city shall be entitled to recover from the user all costs and expenses, including, but not limited to, the full amount of said fines or penalties. 
C.  Ordinance. Pursuant to the authority of California Government Code Sections 54739-54740, any person who violates any provision of this chapter, any permit condition, prohibition or effluent limit, or any suspension or revocation order, shall be liable civilly for a sum not to exceed twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) per violation for each day in which such violation occurs. Pursuant to the authority of the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251 et seq., any person who violates any provision of this chapter, or any permit condition, prohibition, or effluent limit shall be liable civilly for a sum not to exceed twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) per violation for each day in which such violation occurs. The city shall petition the Superior Court to impose, assess, and recover such penalties, or such penalties as the city may impose, assess, and recover pursuant to federal and/or state law. 
D.  Administrative Civil Penalties. 
1.  Pursuant to the authority of California Government Code Sections 54740.5 and 54740.6, the city may issue an administrative complaint against any person who violates: 
a.  any provision of this chapter; 
b.  any permit condition, prohibition, or effluent limit; or 
c.  any suspension or revocation order. 
2.  The administrative complaint shall be served by personal delivery or certified mail, and shall specify a date and time for a hearing, which will be held within sixty (60) days following service. The administrative complaint will allege the act or failure to act that constitutes the violation of the city's requirements, the provisions of law authorizing civil liability to be imposed, and the proposed civil penalty. The matter shall be heard by a hearing officer designated by the city manager. The person against whom an administrative complaint has been issued may waive the right to a hearing. 
3.  At the hearing, the person shall have an opportunity to respond to the allegations set forth in the administrative complaint by presenting written or oral evidence. 
4.  After the hearing, the hearing officer shall deliver a written report to the general manager, setting forth findings of fact, conclusions and a recommendation. Upon receipt of the written report, the general manager shall issue his decision and order in writing within thirty (30) calendar days after the hearing. The decision and order shall be served by personal delivery or certified mail. 
5.  In determining the amount of civil penalties, the general manager may take into consideration all relevant circumstances, including but not limited to the extent of harm caused by the violation, the economic benefit derived through any noncompliance, the nature and persistence of the violation, the length of time over which the violation occurs, and corrective action, if any, attempted or taken by the person involved. 
6.  Civil penalties may be assessed as follows: 
a.  In an amount which shall not exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for each day for failing or refusing to furnish technical or monitoring reports; 
b.  In an amount which shall not exceed three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) for each day for failing or refusing to timely comply with any compliance schedules established by the city; 
c.  In an amount which shall not exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per violation for each day of discharge in violation of any waste discharge limit, permit condition, or requirement issued, reissued, or adopted by the city; 
d.  In any amount which does not exceed ten dollars ($10.00) per gallon for discharges in violation of any suspension, revocation, cease and desist order or other orders, or prohibition issued, reissued, or adopted by the city; 
7.  The General Manager's order assessing administrative civil penalties shall be final on the 31st day after it is served on the person unless an appeal and request for hearing is filed with the city Manager before the 31st day. Copies of the administrative order shall be served on the party served with the administrative complaint, either by personal service or by registered mail, and a copy forwarded to other persons who appeared at the hearing and requested a copy. 
8.  The general manager's decision and order is subject to appeal to the city manager pursuant to Section 13.02.785. Any person aggrieved by a final order issued by the city manager may obtain review of the order of the city manager in the superior court, pursuant to Government Code Section 54740.6, by filing a petition for writ of mandate within thirty (30) days following service of the Board's decision or order. 
9.  Payment of any order setting administrative civil penalties shall be made within thirty (30) days of the date the order becomes final. The amount of any administrative civil penalties imposed which have remained delinquent for a period of sixty (60) days shall constitute a lien against the real property of the discharger from which the discharge resulting in the imposition of the civil penalty originated. The lien shall have no effect until recorded with the county recorder. The city may record the lien for any unpaid administrative civil penalties on the 91st day following the date the order becomes final. 
10.  No administrative civil penalties shall be recoverable under Section 13.02.765(D) for any violation for which the city has recovered civil penalties through a judicial proceeding filed pursuant to Government Code Section 54740. 
E.  Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.770 - Criminal prosecution. 
A user who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this chapter, a control mechanism, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or imprisonment for not more than six months, or both. Each violation and each day in which a violation occurs may constitute a new and separate violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the penalties contained herein. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.775 - Supplemental enforcement actions. 
A.  Performance Bonds. The city may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provision of this chapter, a previous wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless such user first files a satisfactory bond, payable to the city, in a sum not to exceed a value determined by the city to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance. 
B.  Liability Insurance. The city may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provision of this chapter, a previous wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless the user first submits proof that it has obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair damage to the POTW caused by its discharge. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.780 - Appeals to the general manager. 
A.  General. Any user or applicant affected by any decision, action or determination may file with the general manager a written request for an appeal hearing. The city must receive the request within thirty (30) days of mailing of notice of the decision, action, or determination to the user or applicant. The request for hearing shall set forth in detail all facts supporting the request. 
B.  Notice. The general manager shall, within fifteen (15) days of receiving the request for appeal, designate a hearing officer who will hear the appeal and provide written notice to the user or applicant of the hearing date, time and place. The hearing date shall not be more than thirty (30) days from the mailing of such notice by certified mail, unless a later date is agreed to by the user or applicant. If the hearing is not held at the agreed time due to actions or inactions of the user or applicant, then the decision shall be deemed final. 
C.  Hearing. At the hearing, the user or applicant shall have the opportunity to present information supporting its position concerning the decision, action or determination. 
D.  Written Determination. After the hearing, the hearing officer shall deliver a written report to the general manager setting forth findings of fact, conclusions, and a recommendation whether to uphold, modify or reverse the original decision, action or determination. Upon receipt of the written report, the general manager shall issue his decision and order within thirty (30) calendar days of the hearing. The written decision and order of the general manager shall be sent by certified mail. 
The order of the general manager shall be final on the sixteenth day after it is mailed, unless a request for hearing is filed with the city manager pursuant to Section 13.02.785, no later than 5:00 p.m. on the fifteenth day following such mailing. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.785 - Appeals to the city manager. 
A.  General. 
1.  Any user or applicant may appeal a decision, action, or determination made by the general manager prior to the date that the general manager's order becomes final, by filing a written request for hearing with the city manager accompanied by an appeal fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00). The request for hearing shall set forth in detail all the issues in dispute and all facts supporting the request. 
2.  No later than sixty (60) days after receipt of the request for hearing, the city manager shall either set the matter for a hearing, or deny the request for a hearing. 
3.  A hearing shall be held by the city manager within sixty-five (65) days of the date the request for a hearing was granted, unless a later date is agreed to by the user or applicant and the city manager. If the matter is not heard within the required time, due to actions or inactions of the user or applicant, the general manager's order shall be final. 
B.  Granting Request for Hearing. The city manager shall grant all requests for an appeals hearing concerning permit suspension, revocation, or denial. Whether to grant or deny the request for a hearing on appeals of other decisions of the general manager shall be within the sole discretion of the city manager. 
C.  Appeal Fee Refund. The appeal fee shall be refunded if the city manager denies a hearing. 
D.  Written Determination. 
1.  After the hearing, the city manager shall make a determination whether to uphold, modify, or reverse the decision, action, or determination made by the general manager. 
2.  The city manager's decision shall be set forth in writing and shall contain findings of fact and conclusions. The written decision and order of the city manager shall be sent by certified mail within sixty-five (65) days after the close of the hearing 
3.  The order of the city manager shall be final upon its adoption. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.790 - Appeal of charges and fees. 
A.  Any user or applicant may request reconsideration of the imposition and collection of fees or charges, such as connection charges, sewer use charges, and waste hauler fees. Following review of such a request, the city shall notify the user or applicant by certified mail of the city's decision on the reconsideration request within thirty (30) days of the city's receipt of the request. Any user or applicant may file an appeal which shall be heard by the city manager. The notice of appeal must be received by the city within thirty (30) days of the mailing of the city's decision on the reconsideration request. 
B.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, appeals of noncompliance sampling fees shall be made pursuant to the appeal procedure set forth in Sections 13.02.780 and 13.02.785. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.800 - Payment of charges. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided, all fees, charges and penalties established by this chapter or by resolution are due and payable upon notice thereof. All such amounts are delinquent if unpaid thirty (30) days after date of invoice. 
B.  Any charge that becomes delinquent shall have added to it a penalty in accordance with the following: 
1.  Thirty-one (31) days after date of invoice, a basic penalty of five percent of the base invoice amount, not to exceed a maximum of one thousand ($1,000.00); and 
2.  Interest at a rate of one and one-half (1½) percent per month of the sum of base invoice amount and basic penalty shall accrue from and after the thirty-first day after date of invoice. 
C.  Any invoice outstanding and unpaid after sixty (60) days shall be cause for immediate initiation of permit revocation proceedings or immediate suspension of the permit. 
D.  Penalties charged under this section shall not accrue to those invoices successfully appealed. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.805 - Remedies nonexclusive. 
The remedies provided for in this chapter are not exclusive. The general manager may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will be in accordance with the city's enforcement response plan. However, the general manager may take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. 
Further, the general manager is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant user. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.810 - Collection of delinquent accounts. 
Collection of delinquent accounts shall be in accordance with the city's policy for collection of delinquent obligations owed to the city, as amended from time to time; any such action for collection may include an application for an injunction to prevent repeated and recurring violations of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.815 - Recovery costs incurred by city. 
A.  In the event a user fails to comply with any of the terms and conditions of this chapter, an administrative order, a permit suspension or revocation, a consent order, or a permit issued hereunder, the city shall be entitled to reasonable attorney's fees and costs which may be incurred in order to enforce any of said terms and conditions with or without filing proceedings in court. 
B.  The city may require the user to pay any additional costs incurred which are reasonably related to the enforcement of a user's discharge permit or any requirements of this chapter. These costs may include any inspections, monitoring, sampling or other investigations required by the city on a non-routine basis; procurement of water records; additional treatment; reasonable attorney fees and other legal costs, whether or not civil enforcement is pursued in court; any expert analysis required on a non-routine basis; any damage to the POTW; costs required to resume normal operations of the POTW; and any other costs incurred by the city in its enforcement efforts. These costs shall be based upon actual cost, including actual staff time incurred for such enforcement activities. These costs are due and payable as directed in any notice and are not subject to appeal. The city shall provide the user an accounting of these costs upon the user's request. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.820 - Financial security/amendments to permit. 
A.  Compliance Deposit. Users that have been subject to enforcement and/or collection proceedings may be required to deposit with the city an amount necessary to guarantee payment of all charges, fees, penalties, costs and expenses that may be incurred in the future, before permission is granted for further discharge to the collection system. 
B.  Delinquent Accounts. The city shall review and examine user's account to determine whether previously incurred fees and charges have been paid in accordance with time requirements prescribed by this chapter. The city may thereafter issue an amendment to the user's control mechanism in accordance with the provisions of Article IV and Section 13.02.820.E. of this chapter. 
C.  Bankruptcy. Every user filing any legal action in any court of competent jurisdiction, including the United States Bankruptcy Court, for purposes of discharging its financial debts or obligations or seeking court-ordered, protection from its creditors, shall, within ten (10) days of filing such action, apply for and obtain the issuance of an amendment to its control mechanism. 
D.  Permit Amendments. The city shall review and examine user's account to determine whether previously incurred fees and charges have been paid in accordance with time requirements prescribed by this chapter. The city may thereafter issue an amendment to the user's permit in accordance with the provisions of Article IV and Section 13.02.820.E. 
E.  Security. An amendment to a control mechanism issued pursuant to Sections 13.02.720, 13.02.725, and 13.02.730, may be conditioned upon the user depositing financial security in an amount equal to the average total fees and charges for three calendar months during the preceding year. Said deposit shall be used to guarantee payment of all fees and charges incurred for future services and facilities furnished by city and shall not be used by the city to recover outstanding fees and charges incurred prior to the user filing and receiving protection from creditors in the United States Bankruptcy Court. 
F.  Return of Security. In the event the user makes payment in full within the time prescribed by this chapter of all fees and charges incurred over a period of two years following the issuance of an amendment to the control mechanism pursuant to Sections 13.02.820(B), (C), and (D), the city shall either return the security deposit posted by the user or credit their account. 
G.  Water Supply Severance. Water service to the user may be severed for any violation. Service will only recommence, at the user's expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
13.02.825 - Judicial review. 
A.  Purpose and effect. Pursuant to Section 1094.6 of the California Code of Civil Procedure, the city hereby enacts this part to limit to ninety (90) days following final decisions in adjudicatory administrative hearings the time within which an action can be brought to review such decisions by means of administrative mandamus. 
B.  Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms and words shall have the following meanings: 
1.  "Decision" shall mean and include adjudicatory administrative decisions that are made after hearing, or after revoking, suspending, or denying an application for a permit or a license. 
2.  "Complete record" shall mean and include the transcript, if any, of the proceedings, all pleadings, all notices and orders, any proposed decision by the general manager, the final decision, all admitted exhibits, all rejected exhibits in the possession of the city or its offices or agents, all written evidence, and any other papers in the case. 
3.  "Party" shall mean a person whose permit or service has been denied, suspended, or revoked. 
C.  Time Limit for Judicial Review. Judicial review of any decision of the city or its officer or agent may be made pursuant to Section 1094.5 of the Code of Civil Procedure only if the petition for writ of mandate is filed not later than the ninetieth day following the date on which the decision becomes final. If there is no provision for reconsideration in the procedures governing the proceedings or if the date is not otherwise specified, the decision is final on the date it is made. If there is provision for reconsideration, the decision is final upon the expiration of the period during which reconsideration can be sought; provided that if reconsideration is sought pursuant to such provision the decision is final for the purpose of this section on the date that reconsideration is rejected. 
D.  Preparation of the Record. The petitioner may request, in writing, the complete record of the proceedings. The record shall be prepared by the city officer or agent who made the decision and shall be delivered to the petitioner within ninety (90) days after filing the written request. The city may recover from the petitioner its actual costs for transcribing or preparing the record. 
E.  Extension. If the petitioner files a request for the record within ten (10) days after the date the decision becomes final, the time within which a petition, pursuant to Section 1094.5 of the Code of Civil Procedure, may be filed shall be extended to not later than the thirtieth day following the date on which the record is either personally delivered or mailed to the petitioner or the petitioner's attorney of record, if appropriate. 
F.  Notice. In making a final decision, the city shall provide notice to the party that the time within which judicial review must be sought is governed by Section 1094.6 of the Code of Civil Procedure. 
G.  Administrative Civil Penalties. Notwithstanding the foregoing in Section 13.02.820, and pursuant to Government Code Section 54740.6, judicial review of an order of the city manager imposing administrative civil penalties pursuant to Section 13.02.765(D) may be made only if the petition for writ of mandate is filed not later than the thirtieth day following the day on which the order of the city manager becomes final. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 2(Exh. B), 10-23-13)  
Chapter 13.03 - WATER SERVICE SYSTEM  
Article I - General 
 
13.03.010 - Department created—Supervision. 
A utilities department is created in the city and the supervision of such department shall be under the direction of the utilities general manager. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.011 - Office of general manager created—Appointment, duties, compensation. 
The office of utilities general manager is created, which office shall be appointed by the city manager. The utilities general manager shall be the administrative officer of the water authority and shall discharge such duties and receive such compensation as shall be provided by resolution or ordinance or by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.012 - Application for service required. 
All applications for water must be made in writing on forms provided by the city and must be signed by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.013 - Liability for cost of changing connection. 
Should the service connection installed pursuant to the request of an applicant be of the wrong size or installed at a wrong location, the cost of all charges required shall be paid by the applicant; provided, however, the provisions of this subsection shall not apply where there is no error in said application. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.014 - Conditions of connection. 
Every service connection made upon receipt of an application as provided above shall be subject to the following conditions: 
A.  The applicant shall pay the stipulated rates at the time and in the manner provided in this chapter. 
B.  The utilities department may change rates and temporarily discontinue the service at any time without notice to the consumer. 
C.  The utilities department and the city shall not be liable for any damage by water or otherwise resulting from defective plumbing, broken or faulty service or water mains, or resulting from any condition of the water itself, or any substance that may be mixed with or be in the water as delivered to any consumer. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.015 - Deposits required—Amount. 
Consumers guarantee deposits are required for water service pursuant to section 13.03.113. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.016 - Deposits not interest-bearing. 
No interest shall be payable at any time upon any deposit made by any consumer for service under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.017 - Application of deposit. 
Guarantee deposits shall be refunded after twelve (12) months of continuous, satisfactory payment history (i.e., no delinquencies). If an account is closed in fewer than twelve (12) months, or if an account is closed with any balance remaining on deposit, such balance shall be applied to the closing bill. Any balance in excess of ninety-nine cents ($0.99) of any deposit remaining after the closing bill for service has been settled will be returned promptly, provided nothing is owing to the utilities department by the depositor for water delivered to any former address. Further application of deposits shall be made as provided in section 13.03.113.B. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.018 - Connection and meter installation charges. 
A.  The utilities department shall make charges as adopted by ordinance of the city council or authority for installation of and the perpetual maintenance of all water services, meters and appurtenances thereto, same to remain the property of the utilities department. Such charges, in addition to all other usual and regular charges of such utilities department, including charges for water main extensions and connections, must be paid before work will be performed. 
B.  Whenever an installation is required by an applicant that is not covered by the above schedule of charges, such work will be done with charges based upon the cost of such installation as required by an applicant, which will be established by ordinance of the city council or authority. 
C.  The schedule of charges adopted by the city council or authority will include meter boxes except where the basement is excavated to the curb line, in which case the applicant shall provide at his or her own expense an adequate vault and cover to house such meter and appurtenances in accordance with utilities department requirements. 
D.  If a meter and service installation exceeds fifty (50) feet in length or for any other valid reason it cannot be installed for the amount stated in the above schedule of charges due to the peculiarity of the proposed services, the water department reserves the right to make such installation on the basis of the costs of such installation as determined by the utilities department. 
E.  When services are installed for automatic fire sprinkler service, the applicant must install at his or her own expense a detector check valve of design and at a location approved by the utilities department. 
F.  When a meter and service are installed, and application is made for an increase in size of service and meter at the same location, a schedule of credits as adopted by ordinance of the city council or authority will be allowed for the meter removed on the above schedule of charges for installation. 
G.  Whenever services, meters, fire hydrants or other appurtenances are required to be moved or exchanged by an applicant for any reasons whatsoever, the charges for such removal shall be made on the basis of the cost of such removal as determined by the utilities department. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.019 - Monthly charges. 
Monthly charges shall be made for water and for fire hydrants, pursuant to ordinance duly adopted by the city council of the city of Coachella, California or the authority for those rates within the city limits, outside the city limits and for the circumstances where each customer's water is measured through a meter. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.020 - Reading of meters, billing of charges—When bills due. 
For convenience in the reading of meters and the preparation of water bills, the utilities department is expressly authorized, and it shall be its duty, to divide the city into districts. These districts may, from time to time, be revised or changed as necessary or desirable, in order to equalize the work of reading meters and billing. The meters in each district so established shall be read on approximately the same day of each and every month, except when Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays intervene. Water bills on such meter readings shall be prepared and mailed to the consumers in each district on approximately the same day of each or every other month, except when Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays intervene. Fifteen (15) days shall be allowed from the date of mailing such bills for the payment thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.021 - Charge when property vacant. 
In case a house becomes vacant the regular minimum rate shall be charged and collected from the owner thereof whether water is used or not, unless the utilities department is notified in writing of the fact that the property is unoccupied and the utilities department is requested to cut off the water service therefrom. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.022 - Individual connections and meters required—Exceptions. 
A.  Two or more buildings under one ownership and on the same lot or parcel of land must be supplied by individual or separate service connections and meters except in the case of a court or in case of buildings located on the rear of an inside lot, one service and meter may be installed by the owner to cover more than one building. 
B.  The utilities department, however, reserves the right to limit the number of buildings or the area of the land under one ownership to be supplied by one service connection. 
C.  A service connection shall not be used to supply adjoining property of a different owner, or to supply property of the same owner across a street or alley. 
D.  When property provided with a service connection is subdivided, such service connection shall be considered as belonging to the lot or parcel of land which it directly enters. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.023 - Combining readings of separate meters. 
For the purpose of making charges, all meters supplying a consumer's premises will be considered separately, and the readings thereof will not be combined, except that where the water department shall, for operating necessity, install in place of one meter, two or more meters, then the readings of such two or more meters will be combined for the purpose of making charges; provided, however, that the minimum water rates shall be applied to each such meter. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.024 - Resale, misuse of water. 
Unless specially agreed upon the consumer shall not resell any of the water received by him from the utilities department to any other person, or for any other purpose or on other premises than specified in his application for service. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.025 - Curb cock required—Liability for damage. 
Every service connection installed by the utilities department shall be equipped with a curb cock or wheel valve on the inlet side of the meter; such valve or curb cock being intended exclusively for the use of the utilities department in controlling the water supply through the service connection pipe. If the curb cock or wheel valve is damaged by consumer's use to an extent requiring replacement, such replacement shall be at the consumer's expense. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.026 - Pressure conditions. 
All applicants for service connections or water service shall be required to accept such conditions of pressure and service as are provided by the distributing system at the location of the proposed service connection, and to hold the utilities department harmless from all damage arising from low pressure or high pressure conditions or interruptions of service. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.027 - Work requiring changes in mains and connections. 
Where persons, corporations or contractors making improvements, etc., requiring excavations in streets wherein water mains and service connections exist, requiring such water mains and service connections to be cut and refitted, lowered or raised, etc., said persons, corporations or contractors shall make written request to the utilities department, insuring the payment of all costs incurred by the utilities department in making the changes necessary or required to be made. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.028 - Fire service connections. 
A.  When a fire service connection is installed the valve governing same will be closed and sealed and remain so until a written order is received from the owner of the premises to have water turned on. After water is turned on the utilities department shall not be held liable for damages of any kind whatsoever that may occur to the premises serviced by reason of the installation, maintenance, use, fluctuation of pressure, or interruption of supply. 
B.  In no case shall any connection be made with any sprinkler or fire service without written consent of the utilities department, and should it be found that any such unauthorized connection has been made, or that water has been used from a sprinkler or fire service for any other purpose than extinguishing a fire, the water service shall be shut off and not turned on again until a sum equivalent to the monthly minimum provided for at that time, for a similar sized regular installation, is paid covering the entire period during which the service has been installed. A standard meter of the equivalent size of the service pipe shall be installed by the utilities department at the owner's expense at rates provided in Section 13.03.018. 
C.  The utilities department reserves the right to install on each fire service connection a by-pass meter, such installation to be made at the expense of the owner of the property. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.029 - Water to pass through meter. 
A.  All services not otherwise provided for in these rules and regulations shall be metered, and all city water used on any premises shall pass through a meter. 
B.  No by-pass or connection between the meter and the main shall be made, maintained or permitted except as may be installed by the utilities department for sprinkler or fire service. Water served to any premises, where there is or has been any infringement of this section will be shut off at once, and will not be turned on again until full satisfactory settlement has been made with the utilities department for such infringement. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.030 - Use of water from hydrants. 
A.  Persons wishing to take a supply of water from a fire hydrant must make application to the utilities department for such service. The utilities department will make the necessary connections and install a meter of required size. 
B.  When water is required for construction purposes of any type, upon making proper application a service connection will be made with a main or at a hydrant at the most accessible point to the construction work. When the connection is not sufficiently accessible and water must be taken to the work in a tank wagon or barrel, such supply shall be taken through the meter as installed. In no case will water be furnished for any purpose except through a meter. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.031 - Unauthorized turning water on or off. 
Turning on or off water at the curb or inlet side of the meter by other than authorized employees of the utilities department in any instance or for any purpose whatsoever is unlawful. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.032 - Using water to test pipes and fixtures. 
Whenever plumbers or other persons connecting service pipes to the property or outlet side of the meter may use the water for testing pipes and fixtures at an unoccupied building, they shall see that water is properly shut off before leaving same. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.033 - Boiler connections. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person or persons to draw water from any city water supply pipe direct into any stationary steam boiler. 
B.  All boilers or other heaters supplied with city water shall be installed in compliance with the city's plumbing code and California state safety regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.034 - Charge for temporary connections. 
A temporary service connection may be installed at the same charge as provided for a regular service connection. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.037 - Temporary connections remote from property. 
When water service is required by an owner of real property on which there now exists or is planned for immediate construction a dwelling, other structure or improvement requiring domestic water service and there is no water main adjacent to such property the utilities department may grant permission to said applicant to have a service connection and meter set at the nearest existing water main. The applicant must agree in writing to the following conditions, to pay all costs of installation and maintenance of a pipeline from the service connection and meter to his or her property and assume all responsibility, liability for, and the payment of all costs and damages growing out of the installation, operation or failure of such pipeline. Such connection and pipeline shall be installed an used as a temporary arrangement only; that no water shall be conveyed through such pipeline for the use of any residence or property other than the property for which it was originally intended; and that at such time as a regular permanent water main may be installed to serve the property under this agreement, and on written demand of the utilities department the applicant must bear his or her proportionate share of the costs of such main extension and at his or her expense shall install a regular domestic water service, and shall discontinue the use of such temporary service connections and pipeline. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.038 - Special arrangements for short term temporary service. 
For temporary service over a short period, special arrangements may be made to secure water supply as follows: 
A.  From an installed service connection not in use. 
B.  From an outlet at the inlet side of a meter on a service connection that is in use, provided the applicant shall first secure the owner's permission to make such connection, and shall agree to pay the cost of making the connection. 
C.  From house faucets, provided the applicant shall first have arranged with the consumer who pays for water used through the service. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.039 - Emergency shut-off required. 
Consumers are instructed that in laying service pipe from the building to the meter, it is compulsory that a full way gate valve be placed in the line, inside the meter box, for use in shutting off the water in case of emergency. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.040 - Meter reading period—Charge when meter defective—To whom bills mailed. 
Under ordinary conditions continuous service meters shall be read monthly on approximately the same day of the month, provided, however, that the utilities department may, at its discretion, read the meter of any consumer on a bi-monthly schedule and a bill issued showing the period covered by the meter readings, the quantity of water used and the total charge for the service rendered. If the meter readings indicate that a large or unusual consumption has occurred, the readings will be checked before the bill is mailed. The utilities department's services will be available without charge in assisting in locating the probable causes of high consumption. When it is impossible to read the meter due to any obstructions, an average bill, or a series of average bills, will be rendered, and the accumulated over-read or under-read (if any) will be adjusted at the next actual reading date. If the meter fails to register, the charge for water will be based upon the average of the comparable period of the preceding year, taking into consideration the volume of business, weather conditions, and any other factors that may assist in determining an equitable charge. Unless the applicant for water service shall direct otherwise, all bills will be mailed to the premises where water service is furnished. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.041 - Meter testing—Adjustment of bill. 
A.  When the accuracy of a water meter is in question, the utilities department shall upon the request of the consumer cause an official test to be made upon deposit by the consumer in an amount established by ordinance of the city council or authority. 
B.  If, upon examination of the meter to ascertain the accuracy of its operation, it shall be found to register over three percent more water than actually passes through it, another meter will be substituted therefor, and the fee charged for such test will be refunded to the person making the application. An adjustment for a period of three months prior to the test will be made on the basis of the percentages the meter is in error. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.042 - Shutting off water at consumer's request. 
Upon application of the owner or occupant of a building or premises served by a water service connection to have the water shut off at the supply or inlet side of the meter, the department will shut the water off, and at the same time will record the reading of the meter.  
13.03.043 - Shutting off water for repairs, extensions and violations. 
The department reserves the right to shut off the water supply from any premises at any time without notice, for the purpose of making repairs, extensions or other necessary purposes, or for any infraction of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.044 - Wasting water prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person to willfully or neglectfully waste water in any manner whatsoever, and any person having knowledge of any conditions whereby water is being wasted shall immediately notify the department of such fact. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.045 - Water emergency regulations authorized. 
The city manager or utilities general manager is hereby authorized to determine and declare that a water shortage emergency exists in any or all parts of the city, and upon such determination, to promulgate such regulations, rules and conditions relative to the time of using water, the purpose or purposes for which it may be used, and such other necessary limitations as will, in his or her opinion, relieve the water shortage in any such section or sections of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.046 - Notice of declaration of emergency. 
Upon such emergency declaration by the city manager or utilities general manager, it shall be his or her duty to have public notice given by publishing a notice giving the extent, terms and conditions respecting the use and consumption of water, at least once in the official newspaper of such city. Upon such declaration and publication of such notice due and proper notice shall be deemed to have been given each and every consumer supplied with water by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.047 - Charges for turning water on and off. 
A.  A charge in an amount established by ordinance of the city council or authority will be made by the department for turning on the water supply, when requested by the consumer. No charge will be made for shutting off of the water supply, when requested by the consumer, incident to the closing of an account. 
B.  When service has been disconnected on account of nonpayment of water bills, or on account of failure to make the required cash guarantee deposit, or for any other violation of this chapter, a charge in an amount established by ordinance of the city council or authority shall be made by the department for turning on the water. The amount, plus the consumer's unpaid outstanding bills, must be paid by the consumer before service is renewed. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.048 - Unauthorized turning on of water. 
It is unlawful for the occupants of the premises to turn on the water, or cause it to be turned on, after it has been shut off at the curb or meter for any of the above reasons, and in addition to any other penalties prescribed by law, the water will be shut off again, the curb cock shall be sealed, the meter taken out, and a charge, in an amount established by ordinance of the city council or authority, will be made for the expenses incurred. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.049 - Removal of non-registering meters. 
When a non-registering meter is removed for failure to operate, a notice shall be left on the premises informing the consumer that the old meter supplying such premises has been removed for failure to operate, and that a new meter has been set in its place. This notice shall also inform the consumer that in the event the removed meter shall be found upon examination to have been injured and rendered ineffective because of the backing up of hot water or steam from the consumer's water heater or boiler, the expense of the damage caused thereby will be charged to such consumer. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.050 - Admission of department employees. 
Employees of the utilities department shall be admitted during all reasonable hours to the consumer's premises for the purpose of inspecting, testing, checking, changing, or reading water meters installed thereon, and shall upon request and proper identification be admitted for said purpose to any building or structure located upon such premises. All employees of the utilities department engaged in such work shall be furnished with identification badges or letters of authority from an official of the utilities department. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.051 - Employees not to make repairs or be paid money. 
Employees of the utilities department are prohibited from making any sort of repairs to consumer's fixtures on the property side of the meter. No money shall be paid to any utilities department employee for any service unless he or she shall be an authorized collector for the city. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.052 - Turning water on at vacant premises—Valve required on property side of meter. 
Whenever, in response to a turn-on order, a utilities department employee shall find the house or property vacant, he or she shall endeavor to ascertain if water is running on the inside of the building. If this is found to be the case the water will be left shut off at the meter and a notice shall be left at the house stating why the water was not turned on. All property owners shall be required, for their own convenience and safety, to have or provide a full way gate valve in the line inside the meter box on the property side of the meter. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.053 - Using water without making application. 
A.  A person taking possession of premises and using water through an active service connection without having made application to the water department for water service shall be held liable for the water delivered from the date of the last recorded meter reading, and if the meter was, found inoperative the quantity of water consumed will be estimated. 
B.  If proper application for water service is not made promptly upon notification to do so by the water department, or if accumulated bills for service are not paid immediately, the service may be discontinued by the water department without further notice. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.054 - Department not liable for damages inside meter. 
The utilities department's jurisdiction and responsibility ends at the meter, and the water department will in no case be liable for damages occasioned by water running from open or faulty fixtures, or from broken or damaged pipes beyond the utilities department's meter. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.055 - Miscellaneous services of department. 
The utilities department is always willing to render any reasonable service in connection with the supply of water service to consumers upon application at the main office of the utilities department; provided, however, that reasonable charges may be made for any expense involved in rendering the service. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.056 - Mains declared property of department. 
All water pipes which have been approved by the utilities department, constructed in streets, easements, alleys, or other public thoroughfares within the corporate limits of the city shall become the property of the utilities department. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.057 - Notice before working on street—Liability for damages. 
All persons, who open, grade, regrade, fill, excavate, or otherwise work on a street, shall give at least three days' written notice to the utilities department for the removal, raising, lowering, or otherwise displacement of any water mains, pipes, fittings, meters, or other water system property that may interfere with such street work. Persons performing such work shall be liable for damage to city properties. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.058 - Use of fire hydrants. 
Fire hydrants are provided for the sole purpose of extinguishing fires, and are to be opened and used only by the fire department and utilities department, or such other persons as are specially authorized by the utilities department, upon such person or persons making application at the main office of the utilities department. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.059 - Manner of opening fire hydrants. 
To insure safety of fire hydrants for fire protection, any person authorized by the utilities department to open fire hydrants will be required to use only an approved Spanner wrench, and to replace the caps on outlets when the same are not in use. Failure to meet this requirement will be sufficient cause to prohibit further use of the hydrants, and the refusal of subsequent authorization for use of the fire hydrants. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.060 - Taking water away from fire hydrant. 
It is unlawful for any person or persons to carry away any water from any fire hydrant without a written permit, furnished upon a regular application, from the utilities department. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.061 - Obstructing access to hydrants and water fixtures. 
It is unlawful for any person to place upon or about any fire hydrant, gate valve, manhole, curb-cock stop-cock, meter or meter box connected with water pipes of the system of water-works, any material, debris or structure of any kind so as to prevent free access to the same at all times. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.062 - No rent for meters and appliances. 
No rent or other charge shall be made by the consumer against the utilities department nor by said utilities department against the consumer for placing or maintaining any meter or appliance upon the consumer's premises. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.063 - Relocating connection. 
Any person desiring to change the location of a service that has already been installed shall make application to the utilities department and, upon payment in advance of the cost of time and material, including excavation and repaving, as estimated by the city engineer, the utilities department will cause said change to be made. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.064 - Meters and appliances department property—Maintenance. 
All water meters and appliances installed by the utilities department at its expense upon the consumer's premises shall remain at all times the property of the city and shall be maintained, repaired, and renewed by the utilities department when rendered unserviceable by normal wear and tear, and may be removed from the consumer's premises at any time. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.065 - Care by consumers to avoid damage to department property. 
A.  The consumer shall exercise reasonable care to prevent water meters and appliances on his/her premises from being injured or destroyed, and shall refrain from interfering with the same. Where replacements, repairs, or adjustments of any water meter or other appliance are rendered necessary by any act resulting from malice or neglect of the consumer, or any member of his or her family, or of anyone employed by him or her, the cost thereof shall be charged to and paid for by the consumer on presentation of the bill therefor. 
B.  Any damage which may result from hot water or steam from any boiler or heater on the consumer's premises shall be paid for by the consumer on presentation of a bill therefor. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.066 - Permission required for work affecting department property—Bypasses prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person to move, alter, interfere with, or remove, or cause the same to be done, any water meter or appliance installed by the utilities department without first obtaining written permission from the utilities general manager, or to make or maintain any bypass or other connection between the meter and main water line. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.067 - Additional connection charge when consumer has not paid cost of main extension. 
Every applicant for water service for mains installed prior to the date of application who has not theretofore either in person or through his predecessor, in interest, paid his or her proportionate share of the cost of the water main, with respect to the property to be served, shall before such application will be acted upon or water furnished pursuant thereto, pay to the utilities department a main connection charge (front footage fee) in an amount established by ordinance of the city council or authority for each lineal foot of existing water main adjacent to the parcel. Such connection charge is in addition to all other usual and regular charges of the utilities department including charges for service connection and meter installation. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.068 - Main extensions and replacement at city cost. 
Whenever the utilities general manager recommends and the public interest or convenience requires the extension of any water main or the replacement of any substandard water main or mains of the utilities department, the city council or authority may make water main extensions and replacements of substandard mains, provided that funds are available. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.069 - Extensions to unsubdivided property. 
A.  When an application is made for water service which requires a water main extension to serve property not conventionally subdivided into city lots, the area shall be considered acreage, and the extension shall be made at the expense of the applicant as hereinafter provided. 
B.  The required extension shall originate at the nearest adequate existing water main as determined by the utilities general manager and shall extend to and full length along the property to be provided with water service. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.070 - Extension designs—Specifications. 
A.  The design, location, materials and standards of construction of any and all extensions shall be approved by the utilities general manager. 
B.  The design of an extension shall be based upon consideration of adequate capacity to meet the present and future requirements of the area to be benefited, of distribution system operation and efficiency, of maintenance requirements, and of anticipated life of such extension. 
C.  Extensions shall generally be located on the south and east sides of dedicated city streets or in rights-of-way granted to the city for water main location. Under no circumstances shall any structure be placed over any water main or extension. 
D.  Materials and standards of construction shall be those which have been adopted and are used by the utilities department for the area and class of service to be provided. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.071 - Cost of extensions to or in populated areas. 
The cost of an extension to or in a populated area shall be borne by the applicant requiring such extension, in conformity with the following provisions: 
A.  Upon receipt of an application for water service which requires an extension, when such application is properly filled out and provides an accurate description of the property to be served, the city council shall cause the utilities department to prepare a map showing the area to be benefited by such extension and to make an estimate of cost of installation of the proposed extension. The applicant shall then deposit an amount established by ordinance of the city council or authority with the city. Following receipt of such deposit, the water superintendent shall cause the proposed extension to be constructed. Or, upon approval of the utilities general manager and subject to specifications of and inspection by the utilities department, the proposed extension may be installed by private contract at the applicant's sole expense. 
B.  Where subsequent service connections are made to the extension and where a portion or all of the cost of main extensions was paid by the applicant, the water main charges received by the city for subsequent service connections to the extension for a period of five years following the date of completion of the extension, the applicable portion of the cost shall be refunded to the person who paid for such extension or to his or her successors or assigns as provided in this chapter. 
Sale of the property in this chapter referred to and conveyance of the title thereto shall constitute an assignment to the purchaser of such property, and payment of such amount as become due to the maker thereof or the purchaser of such property shall constitute a discharge of the obligations to the city of the amount so paid. 
After the expiration of the five year period, any water main construction charges subsequently received shall become the sole property of the city. 
A water main construction charge for each and every service connection to an extension installed under the provisions of this section, shall be paid before such service connection is made. The water main construction charge is separate from and is in addition to the service connection charge. 
C.  All main extensions shall be required to be eight inches in diameter or larger if required by their development. If a larger main extension is required by the city engineer, the line shall be installed by the developer at a rate determined by the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.072 - Extensions to areas subdivided by conveyances. 
A.  The city council is authorized to make water main extensions for the benefit of areas of the city which have been subdivided by means of conveyances, and not pursuant to any regular statute of the state or ordinance of the city, if it is in the best interests of the city to make such extensions. 
B.  A charge for each and every service connection to an extension installed under the provisions of this section shall be paid by the person receiving such connection before any such connection is actually made. The construction charge to be paid pursuant to the terms of this chapter is separate from and is in addition to the service connection charge. The amount of the construction charge to be charged for such water main extension shall be determined in the same manner as that provided for in subsections A and B of Section 13.03.071. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.073 - Main to be installed before street paved. 
Before any street within a subdivision is paved with a permanent type of pavement, any required water main shall be installed in that street. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.074 - Extensions to new subdivisions. 
All extensions of water mains into areas of the city hereafter subdivided, shall be installed according to the design and requirements of the utilities department and at the cost of the sub-divider; further provided, that such installations shall be made under written agreement between the sub-divider and the city. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.075 - Alternative procedures for mains and extensions to new areas. 
The following procedure for the installation of water mains and extensions thereof is intended as an alternate procedure to any other presently authorized by ordinance or law, and is not intended to in any way be exclusive. 
A.  Whenever the council of the city determines that the public interest and necessity demand the acquisition, construction and completion of water mains to undeveloped areas of the city not yet adequately served with water, for the purpose of providing such areas with water service, and appropriate moneys out of the treasury of the city for such public improvements, no person shall be permitted to connect his property to such water main nor receive water service from the city through such water main until said property owner has paid to the city the proportionate share of the cost of said water main with respect to the property of said property owner to be served; and no application, either by petition or otherwise, shall be approved by the council for the installation and completion of a water main under this section unless and until the property owners to be benefited or a sufficient number thereof shall have paid to the city, or agreed to pay, such proportionate share of the cost of said water main as in the opinion of the council insures the payment of the cost of the public improvement. Such payments shall be in addition to any other fee prescribed by any ordinance of the city or by the ordinance for the installation and connection of laterals with said water main reaching to the property of the property owners to be served. 
B.  Whenever the council determines that the public interest of the city will be served by the extension of water mains into new areas not adequately served with water, no persons shall be permitted to make a connection with such extension water main until the property owner whose property shall be served by said extension water main shall have paid to the city his or her proportionate share of the cost of said extension, and no application for a connection or service from said extension water main shall be approved unless and until such person shall have paid to the city his or her proportionate share of the cost of the extension water main. 
C.  No new water mains or extensions of existing water mains designed to serve an area of the city not yet adequately served by water shall be installed by said city under this section until the following conditions shall have been performed and the following requirements fulfilled: 
1.  Whether initiated by the property owners by petition or initiated by the council itself by resolution, the council shall cause a map or plat to be prepared by the city engineer and filed with the city clerk, which map or plat shall show the exterior boundaries of the entire area proposed or designed to be eventually served by the proposed public improvement, or in lieu thereof a written description of the area to be served by such public improvement, together with an estimate of the total cost of the initial improvement. 
2.  The adoption of an ordinance of the city council or authority which shall prescribe a minimum initial contribution to be paid by the property owners of the area to be benefited by the construction of the initial unit of such public improvement, which shall be sufficient in amount to satisfy the council that the construction cost will be paid. 
D.  Wherever used in this section the phrase "extension water main" is defined to mean any extension of the water main as defined in this section and also any extensions of said water main. 
E.  There is created in the office of the city treasurer, a fund to be known as "water capital fund" into which fund all moneys received from property owners pursuant to the terms of this section shall be paid, and the moneys in such fund shall be used for no other purpose than the construction of water mains to serve undeveloped areas of the city, or extensions thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.076 - Additional regulations authorized. 
The city council or authority may, by resolution, provide such rule and regulations as it may deem necessary or advisable to accomplish the intent and purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.077 - Water system connection charge. 
All newly constructed buildings within the city which connect to the city water system shall pay a water system "connection fee". Such connection charge for each type of building or use shall be set by city council or authority ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.078—13.03.100 - Reserved.  
Article II - Fees, Charges and Billing 
 
13.03.101 - Collection. 
A.  The rates set out in this chapter shall be charged and collected by the city of Coachella finance department for all water sold, supplied, distributed or transported by the city, except as may be established by contract. 
B.  The city will require each prospective customer to apply for the service desired, and also to provide the department with the necessary information to establish credit. The customer will be charged a new account fee in an amount established by ordinance of the city council or authority when applying for service. An additional fee in an amount established by ordinance of the city council or authority may be charged if the customer requires same day turn on. 
C.  All service applications which require the installation of a new meter will be charged an amount established by ordinance of the city council or authority for the first meter and for each subsequent meter to be installed at a single premises, when all meters are installed at one time. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.102 - Water meter rates and commodity charge. 
The meter rates and commodity charges for water sold, supplied, distributed or transported to customers, whether within or outside of the city limits, unless otherwise herein specified, shall be in amounts established by the city council or authority. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.103 - Calculation of water bill. 
The monthly bill shall be the sum of the customer charge, commodity charge and the replenishment assessment charge as set forth in Sections 13.03.102 and 13.03.120. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.104 - Private fire lines—Inside city limits. 
The rate for water service and water consumed by private fire lines used exclusively for fire protection, whether such lines be connected with automatic sprinkling systems or to hose attachments, shall be in an amount established by ordinance of the city council or authority. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.105 - Private fire lines—Outside city limits. 
Private fire line service involving use of surplus water may be made available to customers located outside the city in accordance with rates, terms and conditions contained in contracts approved by the council. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.106 - Additional charge. 
In addition to the monthly rate for private fire lines set out in Sections 13.03.104 and 13.03.105, the commodity charge specified in Section 13.03.102 shall be charged for all water used for other than fire-extinguishing purposes as recorded on the bypass meter. The department may, as it sees fit, read any such bypass meter and render bills accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.107 - City use. 
A.  All services furnished to the city, except to the utilities department, shall be paid for at the rates established by this chapter, and all water furnished to the city, except to the utilities department, shall be paid for at the meter rates and commodity charge established by this chapter. Where it is impracticable to furnish such water through a meter for sewer flushing, street sweeping, watering trees, storm drain flushing, construction purposes, and all miscellaneous uses not specifically mentioned in this chapter, such water shall be paid for at the commodity charge established by this chapter. The monthly volume of unmetered water used for such purposes shall be estimated by the utilities general manager and charges for such water shall be made in accordance with such estimates. 
B.  The commodity charge of the foregoing rates is subject to the replenishment assessment charge described in Section 13.03.120. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.108 - Construction and miscellaneous uses. 
A.  Water for construction and miscellaneous uses shall service connection under the conditions stated in Sections 13.03.147 through 13.03.151. The charges be furnished through a metered temporary for use of such water shall be the appropriate meter rates specified in Section 13.03.102. 
B.  The commodity charge of the rates in this section is subject to the replenishment assessment charge as described in Section 13.03.120. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.109 - Standby or partial service. 
The rates provided in this chapter are not applicable to standby or partial service. This type of service may be furnished in accordance with rates, terms, and conditions contained in contracts approved by the council. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.110 - Application for service. 
The utilities department shall require each business or commercial applicant for water service to sign an application for the service desired, and also to establish credit. All applications shall be required to provide the following information: 
A.  Name of applicant; 
B.  Name of all responsible parties; 
C.  Social security number of applicant and all responsible parties; 
D.  Driver's license or California identification card; 
E.  If business, tax identification number, articles of incorporation, and/or limited partnership documents; 
F.  Purpose for which service is to be used; 
G.  Location of premises; 
H.  Address to which bills are to be mailed or delivered; 
I.  Telephone number where applicant can be reached; 
J.  Present address and telephone number of applicant and all responsible parties; 
K.  Previous address and telephone number of applicant and all responsible parties; 
L.  Place of work or business of applicant and all responsible parties; 
M.  Whether applicant is owner, agent or tenant of premises; 
N.  Necessary information to establish the credit of the applicant and all responsible parties; 
O.  Other premises receiving service or having received service for same applicant, service name, and all responsible parties; 
P.  Whether premises have been previously supplied; 
Q.  Date service is to commence; 
R.  Such other information as may be necessary to establish identity and credit worthiness of applicant and all responsible parties; 
S.  Complete and accurate application to restore disconnected service, due to an initial incomplete application. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.111 - Application for service—Single-family domestic. 
Before the commencement of use of water service in single-family domestic premises, the applicant shall inform the department as to desire for water service, sign an application for water service and provide the following information: 
A.  Name of applicant; 
B.  Name of roommate or spouse; 
C.  Social security number of applicant and roommate or spouse; 
D.  Driver's license or California identification card for applicant and roommate or spouse; 
E.  Location of premises; 
F.  Address to which bills are to be mailed or delivered; 
G.  Telephone number where applicant can be reached; 
H.  Present address and telephone number of applicant if different than premises; 
I.  Previous address and telephone number of applicant and roommate or spouse; 
J.  Place of work or business of applicant and roommate or spouse; 
K.  Whether applicant is owner, agent or tenant of premises; 
L.  Necessary information to provide identity of applicant and roommate or spouse; 
M.  Necessary information to establish the credit of the applicant and roommate or spouse; 
N.  Other premises receiving service or having received service for same applicant, roommate or spouse; 
O.  Whether premises have been previously supplied; 
P.  Date of commencement of service; 
Q.  Such other information as may be necessary to establish identity and credit worthiness of applicant and roommate or spouse. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.112 - Noncompliance. 
Any customer who fails to timely pay a water bill pursuant to this chapter may be subject to disconnection of the customer's water service and to all disconnection and reconnection fees, in addition to any enforcement mechanisms available to the city under section 13.03.114 or any other provision of law. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.113 - Deposit. 
A.  Each applicant for water service shall deposit with the finance department a sum in the estimated amount of three months' charges for accounts billed monthly, or four months' charges in the case of accounts billed bimonthly. If the account has a master meter, each applicant for water service, shall deposit with the department a sum in the estimated amount of three months' charges in the case of accounts billed monthly, and four months' charges in the case of accounts billed bimonthly. The deposit is calculated by taking into account all services billed by the department including, but not limited to: water, sewer, utility tax, replenishment assessment charge, and state surcharge, as determined by the department. Such deposit shall be in the form of cash, check, money order, time certificate from a commercial bank or savings and loan, or cashier's check. Deposit amounts shall be no less than the amount established by ordinance of the city council or authority. The calculated deposit shall be added to the applicant's first bill and will be due in accordance with Section 13.03.114 of this code. 
B.  Any such application for water service who shall have been a customer of sewer service furnished by the department and who shall, during the most recent twelve (12) months within the eighteen (18) months prior to the date of application, have paid before the issuance of any disconnection notice or late charge, all bills for services levied to such applicant by the department and who shall have provided all necessary information for credit identification of such applicant, have no unpaid delinquent closing bills or delinquent accounts with the department, and have a satisfactory rating from a credit reporting agency as chosen by the department, shall not be required to make or maintain any such deposit. Any deposit previously made by such applicant shall, after such twelve (12) months' consecutive payment of bills, be applied to such customer's account after any other unpaid delinquent accounts for such customer are satisfied. 
C.  Upon the discontinuation of any service, any balance of such deposit remaining in the hands of the department, after all bills for services to such customer have been paid, shall be returned. 
D.  On the failure of any customer to comply with the terms of this chapter regarding the payment of bills, the department may require the customer to reestablish credit in the manner specified in subsection A of this section for original service. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.114 - Payment—Enforcement. 
A.  All charges for water sold, furnished, supplied, or delivered by the department shall be due and payable upon presentation of the bill, and if not paid within twenty (20) days thereafter, shall be deemed delinquent. The department may issue a disconnection notice for any delinquent bill and all services for a customer receiving such notice by mail or other delivery may be disconnected without further notice. If payment is not received thirty-eight (38) days from the original mailing of a bill, the larger of fifteen dollars ($15.00) or one and one-half (1½) percent of the unpaid balance will be charged and collected in addition to other amounts due from the customer. There will be a charge rendered for any dishonored or returned payment received on an account. The amount charged shall be established by resolution and shall include the actual costs for all payments which are not honored by the appropriate financial institutions for any reason. 
B.  Water service will not be disconnected if, within forty-eight (48) hours following the delivery of a disconnection notice, customer submits a written protest of the disputed bill containing all facts and evidence necessary to review the protest or if the bill is satisfied. The utilities general manager shall have final and conclusive determination of these protests and shall provide this determination to the customer in writing. Should the protest be denied, water service shall be disconnected within either forty-eight (48) hours from the date of personal service of the determination or within five days from the date of mailing of the determination. 
C.  If the customer is receiving service from the department at more than one premises, service at any or all of the customer's premises receiving service shall be subject to disconnection and discontinuance without further notice when a notice of disconnection has been mailed or delivered to such customer and bills for service at any one or more premises are not paid within the time specified above. 
D.  Delinquent master metered accounts will be charged a processing fee for unpaid accounts that result in the posting of tenant notices for disconnection of service more than once in a two-year period. The amount of the fee charged shall be established by resolution and shall include the actual cost of processing a delinquent master metered account. The schedule for such fee shall remain on file and be available from the city clerk of the city. 
E.  Master metered accounts that are delinquent to the point of posting tenants with a "notice of disconnection" will be assessed an administrative penalty as follows: 
1.  An administrative penalty of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the second occurrence in a two-year period; 
2.  An administrative penalty of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each additional occurrence in a two-year period. The customer whose account is delinquent may appeal assessment, pursuant to Sections 13.02.780 and 13.02.785. 
F.  When service has been disconnected for nonpayment of bills or as a result of theft of service described in subsection H below, it shall not be reconnected to the same customer except upon payment of all prior billing for service at this account and all other accounts for this customer and any other amounts due to the department as a result of meter tampering, unauthorized use or theft as set forth in subsection H below. When the city sends a representative to disconnect the service for nonpayment of charges or other noncompliance with the provisions of this chapter or rules and regulations adopted pursuant hereto, the account shall be charged an amount established by ordinance of the city council or authority. If a customer turns on or causes to be turned on a disconnected service, the department may again turn off the service using any means to ensure that service may not be reconnected by the customer or an agent of the customer and may charge and collect an amount established by ordinance of the city council or authority in addition to any other applicable fees and costs associated with meter tampering, unauthorized use or theft of service described in subsection H below. 
G.  Each time a department representative returns to a customer's premises to reconnect a service, an additional fee shall be charged and collected from the customer before service is restored. When same-day service restoration is requested, the service restoration fee shall be an additional amount. The city council shall establish such amounts by ordinance. 
H.  The following provisions shall apply where it has been determined by the general manager that the unauthorized use or theft of water has occurred by a customer: 
1.  Service may be disconnected and a fee in an amount established by ordinance of the city council shall be charged and collected in addition to any other amounts due from the customer including, but not limited to, costs associated with the repair and/or replacement of any damaged meters, meter locking devices and/or other related equipment, loss of revenue related to such theft, attorney's fees, city personnel time, resources and investigative costs, in addition to any penalties provided for in any other section of this code or imposed due to violation of state or local law, if a customer has: 
a.  Caused or allowed interference of registration or recording of usage or the bypassing of the meter either partially or completely; or 
b.  Restored service by any means after service has been terminated for nonpayment or obtained water without making the proper application or receiving proper authorization from the Coachella utilities department; or 
c.  Damaged, removed, or tampered in any manner with any part of a meter, meter seal, or meter locking device; or 
d.  Obtained service by use of a metering device which is not authorized by the Coachella utilities department; or 
e.  Fraudulently obtained, or attempted to obtain, service by the use of a false name and/or identification, or by placing the account in the name of someone else after service has been disconnected for nonpayment of service fees and/or due to theft of service and circumstances associated therewith as described in this section. 
2.  Any customer who has been determined by the utilities general manager to have engaged in any of the acts described in subsection H.1. and has had notice of disconnection mailed or delivered shall have service disconnected if proper connection, to the satisfaction of the department, is not established within forty-eight (48) hours of the delivery of the notice. Service shall be restored or established only upon proper connection, to the satisfaction of the department, and the payment of all outstanding fees and costs by the customer. Where the customer has had prior notice of disconnection mailed or delivered by the department and has restored connection without authorization, or where the conduct of the customer has resulted in a hazardous condition, service may be disconnected immediately and shall not be restored until proper connection, to the satisfaction of the department, has been established and all outstanding fees and costs have been paid by the customer. 
3.  Any customer who has been determined by the utilities general manager to have engaged in any of the acts described in subsection H.1. may appeal the assessment of administrative penalties and costs as described in Sections 13.02.780 and 13.02.785 after the notice of the assessed charges. 
I.  In the event that a premises is vacant or there is no responsible party on file with the city, the owner of such premises or landlord of such premises shall be liable to the city for the payment of any charges incurred. This includes all charges incurred between the time a tenant vacates the premises and the premises are reoccupied by a new tenant. 
J.  The department may apply interest to all delinquent accounts. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.115 - Disputed or erroneous bills. 
Whenever the correctness of any bill for water is in dispute, the utilities and or finance department will cause an investigation to be made. 
Bills reflecting clerical or meter errors shall be adjusted to a correct basis as determined by the city's investigation for a period of not to exceed six months prior to discovery of the error. Adjustments for slow or fast meters shall be made in accordance with Sections 13.03.206 and 13.03.207. 
In cases where other factors required for application of rate schedule or other provisions, are not subject to exact determination or are in question, or in disputed cases relative to service or rate application, the department shall establish such factors by tests, analyses and investigations to determine the proper basis for making an adjustment, if any. Adjustments in the billing shall then be authorized by the utilities general manager as shown to be proper. Such adjustments shall be subject to review, when requested by the customer or by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.116 - Lien for delinquent charges. 
Any water rates authorized pursuant to this article which remain unpaid for sixty (60) days past the date upon which they were billed may be collected thereafter by the city, as provided as follows: 
1.  The city shall cause a report of delinquent water fees to be prepared periodically. The city council shall fix a time, date and place for hearing the report and any objections or protests thereto. The report shall contain a list and description of each parcel of real property to which is attributed a delinquency in the payment of water rates, for a period of sixty (60) days or more, the names of the owners and the total amount of the delinquency attributable to that parcel. 
2.  The city council shall cause notice of the hearing to be mailed to the owners of the property with delinquencies, as listed on the latest equalized assessment roll. Such notice shall be sent not less than fourteen (14) days prior to the date of the hearing and shall inform the recipients of the amount of unpaid water rates and penalties. Such notice shall inform the owners that the unpaid water rates and penalties will be assessed against and shall result in a lien on their property. 
3.  At the hearing, the city council shall hear any objections or protests of the landowners who are to be assessed for delinquent fees. The city council may make such revisions or corrections to the report as it deems just, after which, by resolution, the report shall be confirmed. 
4.  The delinquent water rates, and any penalties thereon, set forth in the confirmed report shall constitute a special assessment against the respective parcels of land and are a lien on the property for the amount of delinquent fees, the late charges, and cost of lien. The city clerk shall certify, over his signature, that the report has been adopted by the city council in its final form, and file the report with the county auditor. In addition, the city clerk shall also record the amount of unpaid charges with the county recorder. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.117 - Termination of service. 
If all structures in which water is served are removed from a property served by the water system, or if the structure in which water is served is demolished, then the city shall consider the service disconnected and shall provide a prorated adjustment of monthly assessment based upon the first day of the month following the notification of removal or demolition of the structure by the city building official. The owner shall be entitled to a refund of the deposit or to such portion of the deposit as may be unused, upon written application therefore. Termination of service shall be considered equivalent to disconnection. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.118 - Reconnection. 
After a building water service has been disconnected from the city water system, it shall not be reconnected until all delinquent charges plus penalties, all charges which have accrued since the time of disconnection, any supplementary connection charges, and the estimated cost of reconnection have been paid; the deposit restored to the required amount; and any required guarantee for the payment of bills has been made. In addition to the connection charge, the deposit shall be paid or restored to the required amount as provided in this article. All of the charges, deposits and other amounts required to be paid shall be paid before the building water service is reconnected to the city water system. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.119 - Restoration of terminated service. 
After service to a property has been terminated, the water service connection permit issued for the property shall be considered cancelled. The permit and service shall not be considered as restored until all delinquent charges plus penalties, all charges which have accrued since time of termination, and a restoration charge in an amount established by ordinance of the city council or authority has been paid and the deposit restored to the required amount. In addition to the amount provided in this section, all of the charges, deposits and other amounts required to be paid shall be paid before the permit and service are restored. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.120 - Annual review of rates; pass-through of rate increases. 
A.  The water rates established by this article shall be subject to annual review and evaluated in conjunction with annual fiscal year budget preparation. Water rates shall be set based upon the actual cost to the city, and shall include costs for providing water service, capital reserve requirements, any administrative overhead allocation as determined by the annual review, plus any deficit recovery as determined by the city council or authority. Administrative overhead cost shall be assessed for providing support services to the enterprise fund and shall be set annually by the city council or authority through an adopted cost allocation plan. 
B.  Any increase in any currently applicable, legally adopted monthly charge assessed by an agency or district providing water replenishment service to the city shall be immediately passed through to the affected property owners. Any amounts over-collected by the city shall be applied first to the deficit recovery, if any, then to fund balance. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.121—13.03.140 - Reserved.  
Article III - Water Service Connections 
 
13.03.141 - Inside city limits. 
The department shall furnish, install and maintain all service connections and the charges for these facilities shall be at the expense of the owner of the premises. 
A.  Water Services. The service connection installation charges shall be the cost to the department and shall include meter housing. Water service installation costs are charged in accordance with the department schedule of charges for water service connections, adopted by resolution of the council, and on file in the office of the utilities general manager. The water connection fees shall be adjusted by resolution of the council on an as-needed basis. 
B.  Private Fire Line Protection Services. The charge for the private fire protection service connection installation including bypass meter, check valve and housing shall be at the cost to the department, charged in accordance with the department schedule of charges for water service connections, adopted by resolution of the council, and on file in the office of the utilities general manager. The water connection fees shall be adjusted by resolution of the council on an as-needed basis. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.142 - Outside city limits. 
Charges outside city limits are the same as inside city. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.143 - Separate connections required—Exceptions. 
Two or more houses or buildings under the same ownership and on the same lot or parcel of land may be supplied through the same service connection or a separate service connection may be provided for each house or building. The department shall have the right to limit the number of houses or buildings, or the area of the land under one ownership, to be supplied by one service connection. The same service connection shall not be used to supply water to property in a single ownership which is separated by a public street, alley or right-of-way or which is non-adjoining. The same service connection shall not be used to supply water to adjoining property of a different ownership. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.144 - Connection. 
In making application for a water service connection, the applicant shall specify the premises to be served by such service connection and only the premises so specified shall receive water through such service connection. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.145 - Violation—Disconnection—Notice. 
Any service connection used in violation of Section 13.03.143 or 13.03.144 may be disconnected by the department after a thirty (30) day written notice of intention to disconnect such connection has been mailed to the person in whose name service is rendered at such person's address as shown by the records of the department. The notice shall contain a statement of the reasons for such disconnection and the proposed date of disconnection. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.146 - Subdivision. 
When property provided with a service connection is subdivided, each service connection shall be considered as belonging to the lot or parcel of land which is nearest to it. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.147 - Temporary service connection—Purpose. 
A temporary service connection may be installed for construction purposes, temporary concessions or any other special use where it is not practicable or reasonable under the circumstances to install a permanent service connection. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.148 - Temporary service connection—Deposit. 
Upon application for a temporary service connection, no water shall be supplied through such temporary service unless a deposit for service has been so made and remains in the hands of the department undiminished. The deposit shall be in an amount established by ordinance of the city council or authority. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.149 - Temporary service connection—Charges. 
When a temporary service connection is terminated and disconnected, the cost of equipment, installation and disconnection shall be totaled, the salvage value of the material recovered deducted therefrom and the balance remaining of the original deposit shall be refunded. Should the total cost of the equipment, installation and disconnection exceed the amount of the deposit, the applicant shall be billed for such excess. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.150 - Temporary service connection—Duration. 
A temporary service connection shall be terminated and disconnected within six months after installation, unless an extension of time is granted by the department. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.151 - Temporary service connection—Conversion to permanent service connection. 
A temporary service connection conforming with all requirements of a permanent service connection may be made permanent; provided, that all charges required for a permanent service connection at that premises are paid. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.152—13.03.170 - Reserved.  
Article IV - Water Mains 
 
13.03.171 - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise expressly stated or the context clearly indicates a different intention the following terms shall, for the purpose of this chapter have the meanings indicated in this section: 
"Authority" means the Coachella Water Authority. 
"Distribution main" means a water main, or a part of the capacity thereof, designed or used to distribute water for fire protection and domestic use within a given territory served by the city. 
"Supply main" means a water main, or a part of the capacity thereof, designed or used for the purpose of transporting water to a distribution main. 
"Water main" means the principal pipe or conduit laid in a street or right-of-way through which water is transported or distributed by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.172 - Water line contamination. 
No person shall connect, cross-connect, maintain or install any tank, fixture, receptacle or other device in or on any premises which is connected to any water line, pipe or conduit, which conveys or carries any water for domestic or human consumption if the plan, arrangement, connection, maintenance or installation is such as to make possible any contamination or pollution of such water. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.173 - Property serviced. 
Except where it is impracticable to do so, all property shall be served with water from a water main installed in a street or right-of-way on which such property fronts or to which it is contiguous. If there be no such main, an extension of an existing water main shall be required as a condition to obtain service. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.174 - Connection to existing main. 
A.  If there is an existing water main from which service may be obtained, property not previously connected to the main may receive water service through such main upon payment of the service connection installation charge provided for in Sections 13.03.141 and 13.03.142 and except as provided in this section, upon payment of the water construction charge provided for in Section 13.03.175. 
B.  No water main construction charge shall be required to be paid where such existing water main or any main which it may have replaced has been or shall have been constructed for the benefit of such property and at no expense to the city, either from its general fund, water fund or moneys derived from a bond issue authorized by election. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.175 - Computation of construction charge. 
When a water main construction charge is required to be paid, the amount thereof shall be the percentage of the cost of constructing the main that is equal to the percentage that the area sought to be connected is of the entire area of all land determined by the utilities general manager to be benefitted by the construction of such main. In calculating the area to be connected within the area to be benefitted, all of the area of any parcel up to five thousand (5,000) square feet shall be included, plus fifty (50) percent of the area of any parcel over and above the first five thousand (5,000) square feet. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.176 - Extension—Made at applicant's expense—Type of construction. 
A.  Where a water main extension is required to provide water service, it shall be made at the expense of the person applying for such service, except as provided in this chapter. Such extension shall extend from the nearest water main in place to and for the full length of that portion of the street or right-of-way on which the property to be served fronts or to which it is contiguous. 
B.  Such extension shall be an AWWA approved material, or equal, of adequate capacity to meet the requirements for a distribution main in the territory to be immediately or ultimately served thereby as determined by the utilities general manager in accordance with efficient operating requirements of the water system. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.177 - Extension—Application—Deposit—Charges. 
A.  Upon the receipt of an application for a water main extension to serve property having no available water main and a deposit in such an amount as the utilities general manager shall estimate to be sufficient to pay the cost of making the same, the utilities general manager shall cause such extension to be made. The actual cost of such extension shall be taken at not less than the amount which would be required to be paid as a water main construction charge if an available main existed. The application shall describe the property intended to be benefitted by such extension. 
B.  Upon the completion of such extension and the determination of the actual cost thereof, any remaining portion of such deposit in excess of such cost shall be refunded. In case such deposit is insufficient, the applicant shall be liable to the city for such deficiency. The service connection installation charge provided for in Sections 13.03.141 and 13.03.142 shall be in addition to the amounts required to be paid by this section. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.178 - Application—Supply-main charge. 
When application is made for a water main extension the applicant, in addition to all other charges provided for in this title shall be required to pay a supply-main charge. Such charge shall be based upon the cost of the supply main serving the territory in which the property for which the water main extension is applied for is located. The utilities general manager shall determine the ratio which the property bears to the total area of the territory served or to be served by such supply main and the benefit which it will receive from such supply main and shall fix the amount of the charge accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.179 - Reimbursement of construction costs. 
If a water main extension has been installed at no expense to the city either from its general fund, water authority fund or from moneys derived from a bond issue authorized by election for the benefit of certain property, the water main construction charges thereafter received by the city, within fifteen (15) years from the date of the completion of the installation of such extension, for subsequent service connections thereto from all other property, shall be refunded to the person who paid for such extension or to such person's successors or assigns; provided, that the amount of such refund shall in no case exceed the actual cost of such extension less the amount which would have been required to be paid by this chapter as a water main construction charge for service to the property for the benefit of which the extension was originally made. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.180 - Installation in new subdivisions. 
A.  Where a water main extension is required to serve property in a new subdivision, the provisions of Sections 13.03.176, 13.03.177 and 13.03.179 shall apply. If there is an existing water main from which such property or any portion thereof may be served, water main construction charges as provided for by Sections 13.03.174 and 13.03.175 shall be paid by the sub-divider. 
B.  Where it is necessary to install pumping and reservoir equipment to establish and maintain adequate water pressure and supply for service to new subdivisions, as determined by the utilities general manager, the applicant shall deed to the city permanent graded sites and access thereto for such equipment; shall pay the cost of the connecting main to the water storage facility, shall pay the benefiting cost of booster pumping and water storage facilities, and other necessary appurtenances. Benefiting costs as determined by the utilities general manager, shall be the ratio which the property bears to the total area of the territory, served or to be served by such booster pumping and water storage facilities and the benefits which it will receive from such facilities and shall fix the amount of the charge accordingly. 
C.  In addition to providing the water system in the subdivision and other water facilities and their costs as required in this section, the developer shall pay to the department such amount as is required, in the judgment of the utilities general manager, to conform off-tract water facilities to the requirement of the subdivision. The design of the water facilities for the subdivision and of all off-site water facilities shall conform to the requirements of the department and shall comply with all applicable ordinances, rules and regulations. 
D.  The applicant shall also deed to the city all rights-of-way that may be necessary for permanent or temporary pipelines or other equipment. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.181 - Territory annexed. 
A.  All territory annexed after January 1, 2012 and to be served with water by the city shall provide distribution mains meeting department standards and specifications. These distribution mains shall be installed and conveyed to the city. If on the date of annexation of any territory to the city, the distribution mains in place do not meet city standards and specifications, they shall be replaced with mains meeting such standards and specifications at the expense of the property owners to be benefitted. When the department determines that a substandard main existing on the date of annexation is adequate to serve the property adjacent thereto for a substantial number of years, in lieu of immediate construction of a new main, such existing substandard main may be conveyed to the city, and a special area charge shall be paid to the development on behalf of each parcel of property adjoining such main before water service is provided to such parcel by the city. Such special area charge shall be calculated by the department so as to recover from the owners of property benefitted, on the basis of area, their share of the cost of replacing the substandard main with a main meeting city standards and specifications. The detailed formula for calculating such charges and the method of payment shall be prescribed in rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter. 
B.  In addition to requirement of subsection A of this section, all territory annexed after January 1, 2012, shall pay for the cost of acquiring and constructing the supply and transmission mains and water producing, pumping and storage facilities required to serve such territory and pay a proportionate share of the unpaid cost of other supply and transmission mains and water producing, pumping and storage facilities which benefit such territory. The costs shall be determined by the department and method of payment shall be prescribed in rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.182 - Variances. 
Where the strict enforcement of the provisions of this chapter will present practical difficulties or work unnecessary hardships or will result in an ultimate cost or charge to an applicant for water service which is not or will not be commensurate with the benefits to be received, the utilities department shall fix the amount of such cost or charge in such an amount and may prescribe such conditions respecting refunds and such conditions relating to service as are in harmony with the purposes and spirit of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.183 - Distribution system water pressure. 
Any distribution system extension requiring a new water system pressure service zone shall be designed to provide a minimum operating pressure throughout the new distribution system zone of no less than sixty-five (65) pounds per square inch at all times. 
The pressure for compliance is measured at the "service connection" to the water main in the street. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.184—13.03.200 - Reserved.  
Article V - Water Meters 
 
13.03.201 - Water meters. 
The department shall furnish, set and maintain all meters, and the charges for the meters and installation shall be at the expense of the owner of the premises. 
A.  Water Meters. Water meters shall be installed on all water services. For new meter installations an application fee in an amount established by the city council or authority will be charged for each water meter to be installed at that premises. 
B.  Detector Check Meters. There shall be installed on all private fire line connections a check valve of a type approved by the National Board of Fire Underwriters and equipped with a bypass meter. Detector check meter charges are in an amount established by ordinance of the city council or authority. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.202 - Monthly readings—Special readings. 
In order to determine the rates to be charged each customer of water under the terms of this chapter, meters shall be placed upon each service connection to measure the water furnished or delivered, except in cases of the rates specified in Sections 13.03.104 and 13.03.108. All meters shall be read by the department at intervals of approximately one month, or as nearly so as the convenient operation of the department will permit except as provided for in Section 13.03.203. The interval between two successive meter readings shall be deemed and regarded as a month for the purposes of this chapter, and all rates shall be computed accordingly. When service is commenced or discontinued between regular meter readings, the customer charge will not be prorated and the bill shall be the customer charge applicable to the size meter through which such service is taken plus the commodity charge. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.203 - Bimonthly readings—Computation of bill—Special readings. 
A.  The utilities department may cause bimonthly reading of meters for all or any portions of the system whenever it determines that such practice will result in a more economical collection of bills for water. When such bimonthly reading of meters occurs, the department shall read such meters at intervals of approximately two months, or as near thereto as the convenient operation of the department will permit, and the interval between two successive meter readings shall be deemed and regarded as two months for the purposes of this chapter. 
B.  The customer charge shall be twice the customer charge prescribed in this chapter, and the commodity charge shall be computed by applying the rates prescribed in this chapter to one-half (½) the water consumed during a two-month period and multiplying the results by two. When service is commenced or discontinued between regular meter readings, the customer charge will not be prorated and the bill shall be the customer charge applicable to the size meter through which such service is taken if service period is one month or less, or twice such customer charge if service is for a period in excess of one month, plus in either case the commodity charge. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.204 - Separate water meters required—Exception. 
A separate meter shall be placed for each individual residential dwelling unit and upon each separate service connection and the rate to be paid shall be computed separately upon each meter. For multi-residential buildings the department may install less than one meter for each resident dwelling unit when needed to meet other goals of the city's general plan. 
For nonresidential services, the department may in lieu of a single meter and where special operating or service conditions require, install such number of meters on a service connection as shall be necessary to equal the capacity of such a single meter. For billing purposes, the consumption as registered by a battery of meters installed pursuant to this section shall be combined and charged for at such rate including the monthly minimum charge, as though the water were supplied through a single meter. 
Meters shall be installed in close proximity to the building itself and screened in a manner required by the city. Installation of meters in the parkway next to the street curb may be allowed if the number of meters is four or fewer and the configuration of the parkway shows that the location is appropriate. The technical specifications of the installation shall be as required by the utilities general manager. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.205 - Ownership—Replacement and repairs. 
All water service connections, meters and housings installed by the department or conveyed to the department, however provided for, shall remain at all times the property of the city and shall be maintained, repaired and renewed by the department when rendered unserviceable through reasonable use. Where replacement, repairs or adjustments are rendered necessary by the act, negligence or carelessness of the customer, any member of the customer's family, person in the customer's employ, or agent of the customer, any expense caused to the city thereby shall be charged and collected from the customer. The water meter may not be altered or tampered with or removed by anyone other than the city of Coachella utilities department personnel. No meter seal may be broken by anyone other than the city of Coachella utilities department personnel. Utilities department may give its prior consent to seal breaking by the customer when deemed necessary by the utilities department. Unauthorized alteration, tampering or removal by any party, including a licensed plumber, will result in the customer being charged unauthorized meter alteration fees and any other applicable charges described in subsection H. No rent or charge will be paid by the department where such facilities are located on the customer's premises. The department may relocate its facilities as required by operating conditions, and may relocate any and all of its facilities from customer's premises at the termination of service. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.206 - Meter tests. 
A.  Whenever the accuracy of a water meter is questioned, the customer may demand that the meter be examined and tested by the department. Such demand shall be made in writing to the department, and shall be accompanied by a deposit in an amount established by ordinance of the city council or authority. Upon receipt of such demand and deposit, the department shall cause the meter to be examined and tested. Such customer shall have the right to require the department to conduct the test in the customer's presence or in the presence of an expert or other representative appointed by the customer. 
B.  If the meter shall be found to register over two percent more than actually passes through it under conditions of normal operation, then the meter shall be properly adjusted or another meter will be substituted therefor, and the deposit shall be refunded to the customer. If the meter is found to register not over two percent more than actually passes through it, the deposit shall be retained by the department as partial compensation for the examination and test. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.207 - Adjustment of bills for meter error. 
A.  When a meter is found to register over two percent more than actually passes through it, the department will refund to the customer the overcharge based on the corrected meter readings for the period in which the meter was in use, not exceeding six months; provided, that if the actual cause and period of error can be definitely determined, the correction shall be made to cover such period. 
B.  If the meter upon test as herein provided is found not to register or to register less than ninety-eight (98) percent of the actual usage, an average bill or a bill for the water used but not covered by the bills previously rendered, for a period not to exceed six months, shall be rendered to the customer by the department; provided, that if the actual cause and period of error can be definitely determined, the correction may be made to cover such period. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.208 - Access to water meter. 
A.  All meters used for billing purposes will be furnished and installed by the department on the customer's premises in accordance with the "water service requirements" of the department and so located and spaced as to be accessible for inspection, reading, and testing. The owner of any premises shall, at the owner's expense, provide extension to the owner's plumbing for an approved meter location to comply with the foregoing whenever the existing meter has become inaccessible for inspection, reading, and testing by reason of changes in building or any changes made for the convenience of tenant or owner. 
B.  For billing purposes, if a water meter becomes inaccessible for inspection, reading, or testing, the department shall make reasonable estimates of water usage, until such time as access to the meter is restored. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.209—13.03.240 - Reserved.  
Article VI - Backflow Prevention 
 
13.03.254 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is: 
A.  To protect the public water supply of the city by isolating the customer's water system from the city water service, thus preventing contamination or pollution from the customer's premises to the city water system; 
B.  To eliminate both potential and existing cross-connections between the potable water system and non-potable water systems within the customer's premises; 
C.  To maintain the backflow prevention program by administering an inspection and testing program of backflow prevention assemblies installed near the meter. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.255 - Policy. 
A.  The city of Coachella utilities department has a responsibility to protect the public water system from contamination caused by the backflow of contaminants through the water service connection. If in the judgment of the department, where contamination is possible, an approved backflow prevention assembly is required, the department shall give notice to the customer to install the approved assembly or assemblies at the service connection to the premises. The customer shall immediately install the approved assembly or assemblies at the customer's own expense. Failure, refusal or inability on the part of the customer to install the approved assembly or assemblies shall constitute grounds for disconnecting water service to the premises until the backflow assembly or assemblies have been installed. 
B.  These regulations shall apply to all premises served water by the department. 
C.  These regulations are adopted pursuant to the state of California Administrative Code Title 17, Public Health, entitled "Regulations Relating to Cross-Connections" and all subsequent amendments. This title requires that each water purveyor develop and implement a comprehensive backflow prevention program for protecting the public water supply from contamination or pollution. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.256 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them, unless otherwise noted: 
"Approved backflow prevention assembly" means a device or a physical separation that has been designed specifically for preventing the backflow of water or liquid from entering the system and the device that has passed laboratory and field evaluation tests performed by a recognized testing organization which has demonstrated their competency to perform such tests to the California Department of Public Health. 
"Approved water supply" means any water supply whose use is regulated by the state or local health agency. 
"Auxiliary supply" means any water supply on or available to the premises other than the city water supply. 
"AWWA standard" means an official standard developed and approved by the American Water Works Association (AWWA). 
"Backflow" means a flow condition, caused by a differential in pressure, that causes the flow of water or other liquids, gases, mixtures or substances into the distributing pipes of a potable supply of water from any source or sources other than an approved water supply source. Back siphonage is one cause of backflow. Back pressure is the other cause. 
"Backflow prevention supervisor" means a person, designated by the utilities general manager and at the expense of the water user, to maintain the backflow prevention assemblies and to prevent cross-connections on the premises. 
"City water system" means the source facilities and distribution system under the control of the utilities department up to and including the meter. 
"Contamination" means an impairment of the quality of the potable water by sewage, industrial fluids or waste liquids, compounds or other materials to a degree which creates an actual or potential hazard to the public health. 
"Cross-connection," means and includes any unprotected actual or potential connection or structural arrangement between a potable water system used to supply for drinking purposes and any source or system containing unapproved water or a substance that is not or cannot be approved as safe, wholesome and potable. Bypass arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or change-over devices and other temporary or permanent devices through which or because of which "backflow" can or may occur are considered to be cross-connections. 
"Customer's water system" means and includes all facilities beyond the service meter. The system or systems may include both potable and non-potable water systems. 
"Department," when used in this chapter, means the utilities department of the city. 
"Double check detector assembly" (DCDA) means a backflow prevention device consisting of a line size double check valve assembly in parallel with a detector meter and meter size double check valve assembly. Each double check valve assembly is to be equipped with properly located test cocks and a tightly closing shutoff valve at the end of the assembly. 
"Double check valve assembly" (DCVA) means an assembly composed of at least two independently acting check valves including tightly closing shutoff valves on each side of the check valve assembly and test cocks available for testing the water-tightness of each check valve. 
"Double check valve backflow prevention assembly" (DCV) means a backflow prevention device consisting of two independently operating spring-loaded check valves. In the event one valve is obstructed, the second valve should close to prevent reverse flow. The device should include tightly closing resilient seated shutoff valves at each end of the assembly and be fitted with properly located resilient seated test cocks. 
"Hazard, degree of." "Degree of hazard" is a term derived from an evaluation of the potential risk to public health and the adverse effect of the hazard upon the potable water system. 
1.  "Health hazard" means any condition, device, or practice in the water supply system and its operation which could create, or in the judgment of the division, county or state health official, may create a danger to the health and well-being of the water customer. 
2.  "Plumbing hazard" means a plumbing type cross-connection in a customer's potable water system that has not been properly protected by an approved air-gap or approved backflow prevention assembly. 
3.  "Pollution hazard" means an actual or potential threat to the physical properties of the water system or to the drinkability of the public of the customer's potable water system but which would constitute a nuisance or be aesthetically objectionable or could cause damage to the system or its appurtenances, but would not be dangerous to health. 
4.  "System hazard" means an actual or potential threat of severe damage to the physical properties of the public potable water system or the customer's potable water system or of a pollution or contamination which would have a protracted effect on the quality of the potable water in the system. 
"Health agency" means the California Department of Public Health. 
"Local health agency" means the County of Riverside Department of Public Health. 
"Person" means an individual, corporation, company, association, partnership, municipality, public utility or other public body or institution. 
"Pollution" means the presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic or biological) in water which tends to degrade its quality so as to constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness or quality of the water to a degree which does not create an actual hazard to the public health but which does adversely and unreasonably affect such waters for domestic use. 
"Premises" means any and all areas on a customer's property which are served or have the potential to be served with water. 
"Public water system" means a system for the provision of piped water to the public for human consumption by the city. 
"Reduced pressure detector check assembly" means a backflow prevention device consisting of a line size reduced pressure principle device in parallel with a detector meter and meter size reduced pressure principle device. Each reduced pressure principle device is to be equipped with properly located test cocks and a tightly closing shutoff valve at each end of the assembly. 
"Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly" (RPBA) means an assembly incorporating not less than two independently acting approved check valves together with an automatically operated differential relief valve located between the check valves. The unit shall include properly located test cocks and tightly closing shutoff valves at each end of the assembly. 
"Service connection" means the point of connection of a user's piping to the water supplier's facilities. 
"Water supplier" means the city of Coachella utilities department. 
"Water user" means any person obtaining water from an approved water supply system. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.257 - Cross-connection prohibited. 
No water service connection shall be installed or maintained to any premises where actual or potential cross-connections are known to exist unless such cross-connections are abated or controlled to the satisfaction of the department. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.258 - Surveys and investigations. 
A.  Existing Facilities. At all reasonable times, the customer's premises shall be open to the department for the purpose of conducting surveys and investigations to determine whether there are actual or potential cross-connections within the customer's premises through which contamination or pollution could backflow into the city water system, provided, however, that the department will seek permission to enter any occupied residence unless there exists an emergency or condition immediately threatening the public health, safety or welfare. 
B.  New Buildings and Facilities. The city development services and engineering departments, in cooperation with the utilities department, will review plans and other conditions to determine if a backflow assembly is required or waived as water service protection for new buildings and facilities. If the installation of a backflow prevention assembly is required in the building or as a meter protection, a plumbing permit shall be issued by the city to comply with the city plumbing code. Existing commercial and industrial buildings and facilities will be reviewed for compliance with City backflow prevention ordinance when changes in occupancy occur or when required by the utilities general manager. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.259 - Type of protection required. 
A.  The type of protective device that may be required to prevent backflow into the approved water supply (listing in an increasing level of protection) includes: double check valve assembly (DC), reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly (RP), and an air-gap separation (AG). The customer may choose a higher level protection than required by the department. 
B.  The minimum types of backflow protection that shall be installed on customer's premises at the service connection whenever the following degrees of hazard exist are as follows: 
Degree of Hazard 	Prevention 	Minimum Type of Backflow Prevention 
1. Sewage and Hazardous Substances. 
a. 	A system where the city water system is used to supplement a recycled water supply. If an emergency exists where potable water is connected to a recycled water system, potable water system shall be isolated by an air-gap separation as determined by the utilities general manager and the health agency. An approved backflow prevention assembly shall be installed on the potable water line. 	AG 
b. 	A system where there are wastewater pumping and/or treatment plants and there is no interconnection (but the potential exists) with the city water system. This includes multifamily buildings, but not a single-family residence, that has a sewage lift pump. A reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly may be provided in lieu of an air-gap if approved by the utilities general manager and the health agency. 	AG 
c. 	A system where recycled water is used and there is no interconnection (but the potential exists) with the potable water system. A reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly may be provided in lieu of an air-gap if approved by the utilities general manager and the health agency. 	AG 
d. 	A system where hazardous substances are handled such as to create an actual or potential hazard to the city water system. This shall include systems having auxiliary water supplies, tanks or industrial piping systems containing process fluids or used waters originating from the city water system which are no longer under the sanitary control of the city. This, however, does not include a single-family residence that has a sewage lift pump. A reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly may be provided in lieu of an air-gap if approved by the utilities general manager and the health agency. 	AG 
e. 	A system where there are irrigation systems into which fertilizers, herbicides or pesticides are, or can be, injected. 	RP 
2. Auxiliary Water Supplies. 
a. 	A system where there is an unapproved auxiliary water supply which is interconnected with the public water system. A reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly may be provided in lieu of an air-gap if approved by the utilities general manager and the health agency. 	AG 
b. 	A system where there is an unapproved auxiliary water supply and there are no interconnections with the public water system. A double check valve assembly may be provided in lieu of a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly if approved by the utilities general manager and the health agency. 	RP 
3. Fire Protection Systems. All fire protection systems will be required to have backflow prevention devices as described below. However, Class I and Class II fire protection systems will be exempt from these requirements. Class I and Class II fire protection systems are defined under Section 13114.7 of the California Health and Safety Code (Refer to AWWA Manual M-14). 
a. 	A fire system that is directly supplied or from the public water system and an unapproved auxiliary water supply is available for use on or to the premises (not interconnected). A double check valve assembly may be provided in lieu of a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly if approved by the utilities general manager and the health agency. 	RP reduced pressure detector check assembly 
b. 	A fire system that is supplied from the public water system and interconnected with an unapproved auxiliary water supply. A reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly may be provided in lieu of an air-gap if approved by the utilities general manager and the health agency. 	AG 
c. 	A fire system supplied by the recycled water and the department's water system is used as a supplemental supply. 	AG 
d. 	A fire system that is supplied from the department's water system and there exists a recycled water supply to the premises (not interconnected). An RP assembly may be provided in lieu of an AG if approved by the utilities general manager and the health agency. 	AG 
e. 	A fire system that is supplied from public water system and where either elevated storage tanks or fire pumps which take suction from the private reservoirs or tanks are used. A double check valve assembly may be proved in lieu of a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly if approved by the utilities general manager and the health agency. 	RP or reduced pressure detector check assembly 
f. 	A fire system that is interconnected with more than one service connection from the city water system and check no other system hazard exists. 	DC or double check detector check assembly 
4. Other Systems. 
a. 	A system that requires a booster pump on RP the service connection line. (For fire service requirements, refer to subsection (B)(3)(e) of this section.) 	RP 
b. 	A system where there are intricate plumbing and piping arrangements or where entry to all portions of the premises is not readily accessible for inspection purposes making it impracticable or impossible to ascertain whether or not cross-connections exist. 	RP 
c. 	A system that is restricted, classified or closed to on-site inspection. 	RP 
d. 	A system where there is a repeated history of cross-connections being established or reestablished within customer's premises. 	RP 
e. 	A system with internal cross-connections that cannot be permanently corrected and controlled to the satisfaction of the utilities general manager and the health agency. 	RP 
f. 	Two or more services supplying water from different street mains to the same building, assembly, structure or premises through which an inter-street main flow may occur, shall have a double check valve on each water service to be located adjacent to and on the property side of the respective meters. 	DC 
g. 	Other systems which may be specified by the department from time to time. 	
         Devices to be specified 	
 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.260 - Backflow prevention assemblies. 
A.  Approved Backflow Prevention Assemblies. Only backflow prevention devices which have been approved by the utilities general manager shall be acceptable for installation by a water user connected to the public water system. 
B.  Backflow Prevention Assembly Installation. 
1.  The approved backflow assembly shall be installed at the expense of the customer. 
2.  Air-Gap Separation (AG). The air-gap separation shall be located on the customer's premises as close to the service connection as is practical. All piping from the service connection to the receiving tank shall be above grade and be entirely visible. No water use shall be provided from any point between the service connection and the air-gap separation. The water inlet piping shall terminate a distance of at least two (2) pipe diameters of the supply inlet, but in no case less than one (1) inch above the overflow rim of the receiving tank as specified in the current edition of the Uniform Plumbing Code requirements for minimum air-gaps for water distribution. 
3.  Reduced Pressure Principle Backflow Prevention Assembly (RP). The approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed on the customer's premises and as close to the service connection as is practical. The device shall be installed a minimum of twelve (12) inches above grade and no more than thirty-six (36) inches above grade measured from the bottom of the device and with a minimum of twelve (12) inches side clearance. The assembly shall be installed so that it is readily accessible for maintenance and testing. Water supplied from any point between the service connection and the RP device shall be protected in a manner approved by the utilities general manager. 
4.  Double Check Valve Assembly (DC). The approved double check valve assembly shall be located as close as practical to the user's connection and shall be installed horizontally above grade and in a manner where it is readily accessible for testing and maintenance. If it is necessary to put a double check valve assembly below the grade, upon the approval of the assistant general manager and the local health agency, it must be installed in a vault such that there is a minimum of twelve (12) inches between the bottom of the vault and the bottom of the assembly so that the top of the assembly is not more than a maximum of eight (8) inches below grade, so there is a minimum of twenty-four (24) inches of clearance between the side of the assembly with the test cocks and the side of the vault, and a minimum of twelve (12) inches clearance between the other side of the assembly and the side of the vault. The vault must have adequate drainage to prevent flooding. Special consideration must be given to double check valve assemblies of the "Y" type. These devices must be installed on their "side" with the test cocks in a vertical position so that either check valve may be removed for service without removing the assembly. Vaults which do not have an integrated bottom must be placed on a three-inch layer of gravel. 
5.  Approved backflow assemblies shall have at least the same cross-sectional area as the water meter. If a continuous water supply is necessary, two sets of approved backflow assemblies shall be installed in parallel. Where parallel assemblies are required, the sum of the cross-sectional areas of the assemblies shall be at least equivalent to the cross-sectional area of the meter. 
6.  There shall be no outlet, tee, tap or connection of any sort between the water meter and the approved backflow assembly. A "Y" strainer and/or pressure-reducing valve installed before the approved backflow assembly are the only exceptions. 
7.  Approved backflow assemblies shall not be bypassed, made inoperative or removed without specific written authorization by the utilities general manager. 
8.  Approved backflow assemblies shall be protected, when necessary, from extreme weather or site condition that could cause physical damage to or malfunction of the backflow assembly. 
C.  Backflow Prevention Device Testing and Maintenance. 
1.  The owners of any premises on which, or on account of which, backflow prevention assemblies are installed, shall have the assemblies tested by a certified backflow prevention assembly tester licensed by the local health agency. Backflow prevention assemblies must be tested at least annually and immediately after installation, relocation or repair. The department may require a more frequent testing schedule if it is determined to be necessary by the utilities general manager. No device shall be placed back in service unless it is functioning as required. A report in a form acceptable to the city shall be filed with the utilities department each time a device is tested, relocated or repaired. These devices shall be serviced, overhauled or replaced whenever they are found to be defective and all costs of testing, repair and maintenance shall be borne by the water user. 
2.  The department will supply affected water users with a list of certified backflow assembly testers licensed by the local health agency to test backflow prevention assemblies. The department will notify affected customers by mail when annual testing of a device is needed and also supply users with the necessary forms which must be filled out each time a device is tested or repaired. 
D.  Backflow Prevention Assembly Removal. 
1.  Approval must be obtained from the utilities general manager before a backflow prevention assembly is removed, relocated or replaced. 
a.  Removal. The use of a device may be discontinued and the device removed from service upon presentation of sufficient evidence to the utilities general manager to verify that a hazard no longer exists or is not likely to be created in the future. 
b.  Relocation. An assembly may be relocated following confirmation by the general manager that the relocation will continue to provide the required protection and satisfy installation requirements. A retest will be required following the relocation of the device. 
c.  Repair. An assembly may be removed for repair, provided the water use is either discontinued until repair is completed and the device is returned to service, or the service connection is equipped with other backflow protection approved by the utilities general manager. A retest will be required following the repair of the assembly. 
d.  Replacement. An assembly may be removed and replaced provided the water use is discontinued until the replacement assembly is installed. All replacement assemblies must be approved by the utilities general manager and must be commensurate with the degree of hazard involved. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.261 - Backflow prevention supervisor. 
At each of the premises, where a determination has been made that backflow protection is necessary, a "backflow prevention supervisor" shall be designated by and at the expense of the water customer. Such backflow prevention supervisor shall be responsible for the monitoring of the backflow prevention assemblies and for avoidance of cross-connections. In the event of contamination or pollution of the drinking water system due to a cross-connection on the premises, the utilities general manager shall be promptly notified by the backflow prevention supervisor so that appropriate measures may be taken to overcome the contamination. The water customer shall inform the utilities general manager of the backflow prevention supervisor's identity, mailing address, email address and telephone number on an annual basis and whenever a change occurs. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.262 - Administrative procedures. 
A.  Water Supply Survey. 
1.  The utilities general manager and his/her designee shall review all requests for new services to determine if backflow protection is needed. Plans and specifications must be submitted to the utilities general manager upon request for review of possible cross-connection hazards as a condition of service for new service connections. If it is determined that a backflow prevention assembly is necessary to protect the public water system, the required device must be installed before service will be granted. 
2.  The utilities general manager may require an on-premises inspection to evaluate cross-connection hazards. Any customer who cannot or will not allow an on premises inspection of their piping system shall be required to install the backflow prevention assembly the utilities general manager considers necessary. 
3.  The utilities general manager may require a reinspection for cross-connection hazards of any premises to which water is serviced by the department. Any customer who cannot or will not allow an on premises reinspection of their piping system shall be required to install, at the meter, the backflow prevention assembly the utilities general manager considers necessary. 
B.  Customer Notification—Device Installation. 
1.  The utilities general manager shall notify the water user of the survey findings, listing corrective action to be taken if required. A period of thirty (30) days shall be given to complete all corrective action required including installation of backflow prevention assemblies. The notice shall be in writing and shall also state that service to the water use may be terminated should the water user fail to take the required corrective actions within the allotted time period. 
2.  If the required corrective action is not taken within the 30-day period as provided in subsection (B)(1) above, the utilities general manager may terminate water service to the affected water user until the subject device is installed and tested with passing results. 
C.  Customer Notification—Testing and Maintenance. 
1.  The utilities general manager shall notify each affected water user when it is time for the backflow prevention assembly installed on their service connection to be tested and verified, by a certified assembly device tester, to be functioning correctly. Said notice shall be in writing and shall provide the water user thirty (30) days to have the device tested. The notice shall include the necessary form(s) to be completed and resubmitted to the department by the water user. The written notice shall also state that service to the water user may be terminated should the water user fail to take the required corrective actions within the allotted time period. 
2.  If the required action is not taken within the thirty-day period as provided in subsection (C)(1) above, the utilities general manager may terminate water service to the affected water user until the subject device is tested with passing results. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.263 - Water service termination. 
A.  General. When the department encounters water uses that represent a clear and immediate hazard to the potable water supply that cannot be immediately abated, the utilities general manager shall institute the procedure for terminating the water service. 
B.  Basis for Termination. Conditions or water uses that create a basis of water service termination shall include, but are not limited to, the following items: 
1.  Refusal to install required backflow prevention assembly; 
2.  Refusal to test a backflow prevention assembly; 
3.  Refusal to repair a faulty backflow prevention assembly; 
4.  Refusal to replace a faulty backflow prevention assembly; 
5.  Removal and/or bypassing without prior approval of a backflow assembly where required; 
6.  Direct or indirect connection between the public water system and a sewer line; 
7.  Unprotected direct or indirect connection between the public water system and a system or equipment containing contaminants; 
8.  Unprotected direct or indirect connection between the public water system and an auxiliary water system; 
9.  A situation which presents an immediate health hazard to the public water system; 
10.  Non-designation of a user's supervisor when required within a specific time period; 
11.  Non-submission of records of tests, repairs and maintenance to the department upon a second letter request of their submission; and 
12.  Non-payment of fees/charges incurred by the department in connection with the administration of the backflow prevention program. 
13.  Maintenance and utilization of backflow prevention device(s) which is/are not approved by the department. 
C.  Water Service Termination Procedures. 
1.  For conditions in subsection (B)(1), (2), (3), (4), (10), (11) or (12) of this section, the water service to a customer's premises shall be terminated after two written notices have been sent specifying the corrective action needed and the time period in which it must be done, if no action is taken within the allowed time period. 
2.  For conditions in subsection (B)(5), (6), (7), (8) or (9) of this section, the following steps shall be taken by the department: 
a.  Make reasonable effort to advise water user of intent to terminate water services; 
b.  Terminate water supply and lock service valve. The water service shall remain inactive until correction of violations has been approved by the utilities general manager and any charges due to the department have been paid by the water customer. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.264 - Backflow prevention assembly charge. 
Where backflow prevention assemblies must be maintained and tested, an administrative fee established by ordinance of city council or Authority to be billed per month per backflow prevention assembly shall be charged. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.265 - Noncompliance. 
A.  Upon noncompliance by the water user following the notice pursuant to Section 13.03.260(C)(2) regarding the periodic testing of the backflow prevention assembly, the department shall have the option, at its sole discretion, of hiring a certified contractor to test the backflow prevention assembly, terminating water service, or pursuing any other available remedy. In addition to any available remedy, the department may charge and collect an administrative penalty in the amount of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per assembly device in addition to any other amounts due from the customer including, but not limited to, costs associated with the testing, repair and/or replacement of the assembly device, any related equipment and city personnel time and resources connected to the necessary remedial actions. Nonpayment of such expenses and fee may result in termination of water service or additional administrative, legal, equitable or other remedies. 
B.  Upon noncompliance by the user following the thirty (30) days notice pursuant to Section 13.03.260(B)(1) regarding the installation of the required backflow prevention assembly, the department shall have the option, at its sole discretion, of installing or hiring a licensed contractor to install the approved assembly, terminating water service, or pursuing any other available remedy. In addition to any available remedy, the department may charge and collect an administrative penalty in the amount of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per assembly device in addition to any other amounts due from the customer including, but not limited to, costs associated with the installation of the device and city personnel time and resources connected to the necessary remedial actions. Nonpayment of such fee and expenses may result in termination of water service or additional administrative, legal, equitable or other remedies. 
C.  Any water user whose water service has been terminated under the provisions set forth in subsection (A) or (B) above, shall have the service reconnected only upon proper installation, assembly and/or testing of the assembly device(s) and the payment of all outstanding penalties, fees and costs. 
D.  Any user who has been assessed administrative penalties and costs by the department as a result of noncompliance pursuant to the provisions contained in subsection A or B above, may appeal the assessment of administrative penalties and costs described pursuant to Sections 13.02.780 and 13.02.785. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.266—13.03.269 - Reserved.  
Article VII - Capital Facilities Expansion Fee and Fund 
 
13.03.270 - Intent and purpose. 
The city council hereby declares that the fees required to be paid by this article are solely for the purpose of producing revenue. The continued increase in housing in the city, with the attendant increase in water, has created an urgent need to provide the necessary water facilities and the financing thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.271 - Water facilities expansion fee. 
A.  In addition to any other fees prescribed by this code, water facilities expansion fees shall be payable to the city for all new dwelling units and mobile home or trailer spaces which will make use of the water facilities of the city. 
B.  Every person constructing a dwelling in a different location or providing a new dwelling unit in a one-family or multi-family dwelling, dwelling group, apartment hotel or mobile home or trailer providing trailer spaces in a mobile home or trailer park, shall pay a water facilities expansion fee in an amount established by city council or authority. Every person constructing a nonresidential, industrial or commercial building, moving an industrial or commercial building to a different location, providing a new industrial or commercial facility shall pay a water facilities expansion fee in an amount established by ordinance of the city council or authority. The water facilities expansion fee shall be paid prior to the issuance of the building permit for the subject unit or space. 
C.  The water expansion fee will be determined based on the fee in effect at the time of building or water service permit issuance for the expanding development. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.272—13.03.285 - Reserved.  
13.03.286 - Policy. 
It is the policy of the city council that the water service be operated as a utility, and that it shall be operated in a prudent manner with adequate reserves to meet emergencies, to replace and to upgrade parts of the system as needed. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.287 - Funds established. 
The following water funds are to be created and maintained: 
1.  Maintenance and operating fund. The water maintenance and operating fund is to be created and maintained for the purpose of paying for the expenses associated with the maintenance and operation of the water system. Such expenses are to include direct water treatment, distribution, and pumping costs, direct accounting and billing costs, and direct preventative and emergency water storage, pumping, treatment, and distribution system maintenance costs, as well as general and departmental overhead as defined in Section 13.01.010. The source of the money for this fund is to be water permit fees, interest earnings and water service charges. Refundable water deposits provided by property owners are accounted for within this fund, and the amount of such deposits shall not be reflected in the fund balance. 
2.  Water replacement fund. The water replacement fund is to be created and maintained for the purpose of paying for replacing and upgrading parts of the water system as they wear out, deteriorate or become obsolete. All items deemed to be replacement of existing facilities shall be paid for from this fund. The source of the money for this fund is to be through city council authorized transfers from the water maintenance and operating fund. Such transfers are to be authorized so that funds will be available to pay for future replacement of parts of the water system. The determination as to the amount of money to be held in this fund will be made by taking into consideration the estimated life and replacement cost of the various parts of the sewer system using the following formula: 
The summation of the following: 
(Replacement cost of water system facility additions) X (0.10) X (Age of water system facilities) ° (75 years) 
3.  Water capital fund. The water capital fund is to be created and maintained for the purpose of paying for new water facilities found necessary because of the development of the city. Such facilities could include, but are not limited to, pumping stations, water tanks, wells, treatment plants, imported water, transmission mains, meters, distribution system, booster stations, and any necessary equipment. An annual appropriation shall be made from this fund for general and department overhead. The source of the money for this fund is to be water connection charges, interest earnings, water installation charges, property assessments, and government grants. 
4.  Water facilities expansion fund. The water facilities expansion fund is to be created and maintained for the purpose of paying for water facilities needed for the expansion of the city including, but not limited to, wells, treatment plants, booster stations, transmission mains, imported water, and other necessary appurtenances to properly expand the city's water system. The source of the money for this fund is to be the water facilities expansion fee collected pursuant to section 13.03.271. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.288 - Appropriations. 
Appropriations from the various funds provided for in this article shall be pursuant to authorization in the annual budget or by special action of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.289 - Allocation of interest earnings. 
Moneys in the water funds may be commingled with moneys in other funds for cash management and interest earnings purposes, but each water fund shall be credited with its pro rata share of all interest earnings based on the fund's average balance. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.290 - Loans from water funds. 
Loans between water funds or to other funds may only be made pursuant to authorization of the city council and shall be for a specific time period. During such time that moneys are on loan from any fund, interest shall be paid annually to the fund. The interest rate during this loan period shall be at least the average rate for the city's interest-bearing deposits during the loan duration. No loans shall be made from the maintenance and operating fund and the water replacement fund. Existing loans shall be brought into compliance with this section within five years. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.291 - Allocation of personnel and equipment costs. 
A.  Personnel. The total number of employees in the water maintenance and operating budget shall be determined using the following formula: 
(Total number actual hours proposed to be charged to the water maintenance and operating fund for permanent employees for the proposed operating budget) ° (2,080 hours) 
Personnel costs will be charged on actual number of hours worked. Personnel costs include salaries and related benefits. 
B.  Equipment. The original purchase cost charged to the water capital fund shall be no more than its pro rata share of time used in water activities. The motor pool rental charges shall also be based on the actual hours used; the motor pool shall be responsible for the replacement of these capital items. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.292—13.03.300 - Reserved  
Article VIII - Water Wells 
 
13.03.301 - Purpose—Authority and implementation. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum standards for construction, reconstruction, abandonment and destruction of all wells in order to protect underground water resources and provide safe water to persons within the city. Pursuant to the authority cited in Section 13801(c) of the California Water Code, the Riverside County Health Department shall enforce the provisions of this chapter within its jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.302 - Definitions. 
Whenever in this chapter the following terms are used, they shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section: 
"Abandoned wells and abandonment" applies to a well whose original or functional purpose and use has been discontinued for a period of one year and which has not been declared for reuse by the legal owner with the department, or a well in such a state of disrepair that it cannot be functional for its original purpose or any other function regulated under this chapter. Exploration holes shall be considered abandoned twenty-four (24) hours after construction and testing work has been completed. 
"Agriculture well" means any well used to supply water for irrigation or other agricultural purposes, including so-called "stock wells." 
"Annular seal" or "sanitary seal" means the approved material placed in the space between the well casing and the wall of the drilled hole (the annular space). 
"Cathodic protection well" means any artificial excavation in excess of fifty (50) feet constructed by any method for the purpose of installing equipment or facilities for the protection electrically of metallic equipment in contact with the ground, commonly referred to as "cathodic protection." 
"Community water supply well" means any well which provides water for public water supply systems. 
"Contamination" means an impairment of the quality of the waters of the state by waste to a degree which creates a hazard to the public health through poisoning or through the spread of disease. 
"Cross-connection" means any unprotected connection between any part of a water system used or intended to supply water for domestic purposes and any source or system containing water or other substances that are not or cannot be approved as safe, pure, wholesome and potable for human consumption. 
"Department" means the city utilities department. 
"Distribution system" includes the facilities, conduits or any other means used for the delivery of water from the source facilities to the customer's system. 
"Exploration hole" means an uncased excavation for the purpose of immediately determining the existing geological and/or hydrological conditions at the site either by direct observation or other means. 
"Individual domestic well" means any well used to supply water for domestic needs other than a public water supply system. 
"Industrial well" means any well used primarily to supply water for industrial processes and may supply water intentionally or incidentally for domestic purposes. 
"Lateral (horizontal) well" means a well drilled or constructed horizontally or at an angle with the horizon as contrasted with the common vertical well and does not include horizontal drains or "wells" constructed to remove subsurface water from hillside, cuts or fills. 
"Monitoring well" means an artificial excavation by any method for the purpose of observing, monitoring or supplying the conditions of a water-bearing aquifer, such as fluctuations in groundwater levels, quality of groundwaters or the concentration of contaminants in underground waters. 
"Person" means any individual, firm, corporation, association, for profit or nonprofit organization, trust, partnership, special district or governmental agency to the extent authorized by law. 
"Pollution" means an alteration of water by waste to a degree which unreasonably affects such water for beneficial uses or facilities which serve such beneficial uses. "Pollution" may include "contamination." 
"Public water system" means a system regardless of type of ownership for the provisions of piped water to the public for domestic use, if such system has at least five service connections or regularly serves an average of at least twenty-five (25) individuals daily at least sixty (60) days of the year. A public water system includes: 
1.  Any collection, treatment, storage and distribution facilities which are used primarily in connection with such system and which are under control of the water supplier. 
2.  Any collection or pretreatment storage facilities which are used primarily in connection with such system but are not under control of the water supplier. 
"Reconstruction" means certain work done to an existing well in order to restore its production, replace defective casing, seal off certain strata or surface water, or similar work, not to include the cleaning out of sediments, surging or maintenance to the pump or appurtenances where the integrity of the annular seal or water-bearing strata are not violated. 
"Source facilities" includes wells, stream diversion works, infiltration galleries, springs, reservoirs, tanks, and all other facilities used in the production, treatment, disinfection, storage or delivery of water to the distribution system. 
"Utilities general manager" means the general manager or his or her duly authorized representative. 
"Water well" means any artificial excavation constructed by any method for the purpose of extracting water from or injecting water into the ground. This definition shall not include: 
1.  Oil and gas wells, or geothermal wells constructed under the jurisdiction of the California State Department of Conservation, except those wells converted to use as water wells; or 
2.  Wells used for the purpose of: 
a.  Dewatering excavation during construction; or 
b.  Stabilizing hillsides or earth embankments. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.303 - Permit requirement. 
A.  No person or entity, as principal agent or employee, shall dig, drill, bore, drive, reconstruct or destroy a well that is to be, or has been, used to produce or inject water, a cathodic protection well, or a monitoring well without first filing a written application to do so with the department, and receiving and retaining a valid permit as provided in this section. 
B.  No person or entity shall engage in any activity subject to the jurisdiction of this chapter without first paying all applicable fees to the department of fire for each activity in the amounts set forth by resolution or ordinance of the city council. 
C.  Any person who shall commence any work for which a permit is required by this department without having obtained a permit therefor shall, if subsequently granted a permit, pay double the permit fee for such work; provided, however, that this provision shall not apply to emergency work when it shall be established in writing to the satisfaction of the utilities general manager that such work was urgently necessary and that it was not practical to obtain a permit before commencement of the work. In all cases in which emergency work is necessary, a permit shall be applied for within three working days after commencement of the work. The applicant for a permit for any such emergency work shall, in any case, demonstrate that all work performed is in compliance with the technical standards of Section 13.03.310. 
D.  An application for a permit to construct a water well, monitoring well or cathodic protection well shall be submitted to the department on a form and in a manner prescribed by the department, and shall include the following information: 
1.  A plot plan showing the proposed well location with respect to the following items within a radius of five hundred (500) feet from the well: 
a.  Property lines, including ownership; 
b.  Sewage or waste disposal systems (including reserved waste disposal expansion areas) or works for carrying or containing sewage or waste; 
c.  All intermittent or perennial, natural or artificial bodies of water or watercourses; 
d.  The approximate drainage pattern of the property; 
e.  Other wells, including abandoned wells; 
f.  Access road(s) to the well site; and 
g.  Structures. 
2.  Location of the property with a vicinity map, including the legal description of the property (assessor's parcel map/tract map number). 
3.  The name and state license number of the general contractor (when applicable) and the C-57 license number of the person responsible for constructing the well. 
4.  The proposed well depth, including casing size and zones of perforations and strata to be sealed off, if such data can be reasonably projected. 
5.  The proposed use of the well. 
6.  Location of underground storage tank(s) within five hundred (500) feet of the proposed well. 
7.  Location and classification by visual inspection of any solid, liquid or hazardous waste disposal sites, to include municipal and individual package sewage treatment plants within two thousand (2,000) feet of the proposed well. 
8.  Where proposed work is reconstruction or destruction of a water well, monitoring well or cathodic protection well, provide the following information, if available: 
a.  Method of reconstruction or destruction of well; 
b.  Total depth; 
c.  Depth and type of casing used; 
d.  Depth of perforation; 
e.  Well log; and 
f.  Any other pertinent information. 
9.  Other information as may be deemed necessary for the department to determine if the underground waters will be adequately protected. 
E.  As a condition of a construction or reconstruction permit, any abandoned wells on the property shall be destroyed in accordance with standards provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.304 - Conditions of approval. 
Permits shall be issued after compliance with the standards provided and incorporated by reference in this chapter. Plans shall be submitted to the department demonstrating compliance with such standards. Permits may include conditions and requirements found by the department to be reasonably necessary to accomplish the purpose of this chapter. Completion bonds, contractor's bonds, cash deposits or other adequate security may be required to insure that all projects are performed completely and properly to protect the public's health and safety and the integrity of underground water resources. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.305 - Conditions of denial. 
Where the department determines that the standards of this chapter have not been met, it shall deny the application. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.306 - Expiration or extension of permit. 
A.  Each permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire and become null and void if the work authorized thereby has not been completed within six months following the issuance of the permit. 
B.  Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be extended at the option of the department. Each individual extension granted by the department shall be for not longer than one hundred twenty (120) days. In no event shall the department grant an extension which would make the total term of the permit exceed one year. Application for extension shall be made on a form provided by the department. The application shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount set forth by ordinance or resolution of the city council. 
C.  Upon expiration of any permit issued pursuant hereto, no further work may be done in connection with construction, repair, reconstruction or abandonment of a well unless and until a new permit for such purpose is secured in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.307 - Permit revocation or suspension. 
A.  A permit issued in this chapter may be revoked or suspended by the utilities general manager as hereinafter provided if he or she determines that a violation of this chapter exists, that written notice has been directed to the permittee specifying the violation, and that the permittee has failed or neglected to make the necessary adjustments within fifteen (15) days after receiving such notice. 
B.  A permit may be so revoked or suspended by the utilities general manager if he or she determines at a hearing held for such purpose that the person to whom any permit was issued pursuant to this chapter has obtained the same by fraud or misrepresentation. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.308 - Hearings. 
A.  Any person whose application for a permit has been denied or whose permit has been suspended or revoked may request a hearing. The person shall file with the department a written petition requesting the hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds for the request. The hearing officer shall be the city manager or his or her designee. At the time and place set for the hearing, the hearing officer shall give the petitioner and other interested persons adequate opportunity to present any facts pertinent to the matter at hand. The hearing officer may, when he or she deems it necessary, continue any hearing by setting a new time and place and by giving notice to the petitioner of such action. 
B.  At the close of the hearing, or within thirty (30) working days thereafter, the hearing officer shall order such disposition of the application or permit as he or she has determined to be proper, and shall, by postage prepaid, registered mail, notify the petitioner of his or her final determination. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.309 - Licensing and registration of water well drillers and contractors. 
No persons shall engage in any activity listed in Section 13.03.303 of this chapter unless he or she is in compliance with the provisions in this section and possesses a valid C-57 license in accordance with the California Contractor's State License Law (Chapter 9, Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code), or possesses a license appropriate to the activity to be engaged in. Such person shall register annually with the department and pay the registration fee specified in city fee resolution or any successor resolution, prior to commencing any activity regulated by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.310 - Standards. 
Standards for the construction, reconstruction, abandonment or destruction of wells shall be the standards recommended in the Bulletins of the California Department of Water Resources as follows: Bulletin No. 74-81, Chapter II, Water Wells, and Bulletin No. 7490 (Supplement to Bulletin 74-81), as these bulletins may be amended by the state from time to time. The content of such bulletins is incorporated by reference with the following additions or modifications: 
Bulletin No. 74-90, Monitoring Well. 
(1)  Exploration holes for determining immediate geological or hydrological information relating to on-site sewage disposal systems, liquefaction studies, hazardous materials investigations or geotechnical investigations for construction purposes, such as foundation studies, are exempt from the monitoring well destruction standards of Part III Bulletin 74-90; provided, that a zone of low permeability over-lying sediments with water-bearing capabilities has not been penetrated. For the above-listed cases, the excavation or boring shall be backfilled with native soils immediately after the investigatory work has been completed. Where a zone of low permeability has been penetrated, the hole shall be abandoned as specified in Bulletin 74-90, Part III. When the excavation or boring is to be left open and unattended (such as at the end of a work shift), the person in charge of the construction shall take all necessary precautions to ensure that the excavation has not created a public health or safety hazard. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.311 - Lateral (horizontal) well standards. 
The location and design of lateral wells shall be in accordance with the standards recommended in the state of California, Department of Health Services' publication "Requirements for Use of Lateral Wells in Domestic Water Systems," as such publication may be amended by the state from time to time. The content of such publication is incorporated in this chapter by reference. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.312 - Required inspection of well site. 
A site inspection by the department is required prior to issuance of a permit for a well that is to be part of a public water system or other wells that possess a high potential for contamination as determined by the fire chief. In the event that the well is to serve a system under the direct jurisdiction of the state department of health services, then that agency may perform the site inspection and notify the fire chief of its approval or disapproval. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.313 - Required inspections of wells. 
A.  A well inspection shall be requested of the department at least two working days in advance of the following activities: 
1.  For individual domestic wells, agricultural wells, cathodic protection wells and monitoring wells: 
a.  The filling of the annular space or conductor casing; and 
b.  Immediately after the installation of all surface equipment and (for individual domestic wells) after the well has been disinfected and purged. 
2.  For community wells: 
a.  All community water wells shall be inspected at the frequencies stated in subsection 1 of this section for individual domestic water wells. In addition, a site inspection prior to issuance of a permit is required in accordance with Section 13.03.303. 
3.  For all wells, any other operation or condition for which a special inspection is stipulated on the well permit. 
4.  For well destruction (all wells): 
a.  During the actual sealing of the well; and 
b.  Immediately after all well destruction work has been completed. 
B.  Upon failure to notify the department of the filling of the annular space, approved geophysical tests including sonic log and gamma ray log shall be conducted at the owner's expense to substantiate that an annular seal has been properly installed. 
C.  If the enforcement agency fails to appear at the well site at the time designated for sealing, the well may be sealed without the presence of the enforcement agency. However, the driller shall seal the well in accordance with the standards of this chapter and the permit in the absence of any inspection. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.314 - Discharge of drilling fluids. 
Drilling fluids and other drilling materials used in connection with cathodic protection, monitoring or water well construction shall not be allowed to discharge onto streets or into waterways, and shall not be allowed to discharge to the adjacent property unless a written agreement with the owner(s) of the adjacent property is obtained; provided, however, that such fluids and materials are cleaned up and removed within thirty (30) days after completion of the well drilling and there is no violation of waste discharge regulations. This section shall not operate to prohibit the surface discharge of contaminated groundwater, provided such discharge is carried out in compliance with a lawful order of a regional water quality board. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.315 - General location of water wells. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person or entity to drill, dig, excavate or bore any water well at any location where sources of pollution or contamination are known to exist, have existed or otherwise substantial risk exists that water from that location may become contaminated or polluted even though the well may be properly constructed and maintained. Exceptions to the above include the following: 
1.  Extraction wells used for the purpose of extracting and treating water from a contaminated aquifer; 
2.  Wells from which water is to be treated to meet all state department of health standards and requirements; and 
3.  Wells from which water will be blended with other water sources resulting in water that meets all state department of health standards and requirements. 
B.  Every well shall be located an adequate distance from all potential sources of contamination and pollution as follows: 
Source of Contamination and Pollution 	Minimum Distance (in Feet) 
Sewer 	50 
Watertight septic tank 	100 
Subsurface sewage leach line or leach field 	100 
Cesspool or seepage pit 	150 
Animal or fowl enclosures 	100 
Any surface sewage disposal system discharging 2,000 gallons/day or more 	200 
 
C.  Minimum distances from other sources of pollution or contamination shall be as determined by the department upon investigation and analysis of the probable risks involved. Where particularly adverse or special hazards are involved as determined by the health department, the foregoing distances may be increased or specially approved means of protection, particularly in the construction of the well, may be required as determined by the department. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.316 - Well logs. 
A.  Any person who has drilled, dug, excavated or bored a wall subject to this chapter shall, within thirty (30) days after completion of the drilling, digging, excavation or boring of such well, furnish the department with a complete log of such well on a standard form provided by the state department of water resources. This log shall include depths of formations, character, size distribution (i.e., clay, sand, gravel, rocks and boulders) and color for all lithological units penetrated, the type of casing, pump test results when applicable, and any other data required by the department. The department may require inspection of the well log during any phase of the well's construction and where necessary to achieve the purposes of this chapter may require modification of the work as originally planned. 
B.  Well logs furnished pursuant to this chapter shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available to governmental agencies for use in making studies, provided that any report shall be made available to any person who obtains written authorization from the owner of the well. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.317 - Water well surface construction features. 
A.  Check Valve. A check valve shall be provided on the pump discharge line adjacent to the pump for all water wells. 
B.  Sample Spigot. An unthreaded sample spigot shall be provided on the pump discharge line of any water well used as a public water supply adjacent to the pump and on the distribution side of the check valve. 
C.  Water Well Disinfection Pipe. All community water supply wells and individual domestic wells shall be provided with a pipe or other effective means through which chlorine or other approved disinfecting agents may be introduced directly into the well. The pipe shall be extended at least four inches above the finished grade and shall have a threaded or equivalently secured cap on it. 
D.  Water Well Flow Meter. A flow meter or other suitable measuring device shall be located at each source facility and shall accurately register the quantity of water delivered to the distribution system from all community water supply wells serving the public water supply system. 
E.  Air-Relief Vent. An air-relief vent, when required, shall terminate downward, shall be screened and otherwise shall be protected from the entrance of contaminants. 
F.  Backflow Prevention Assembly. Agricultural wells equipped with chemical feeder devices for fertilizers, pesticides or other non-potable water treatment shall be furnished with an approved backflow prevention assembly or a sufficient air gap to ensure that a cross-connection with the well does not exist. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.318 - Disinfection of water wells. 
Every new, repaired or reconstructed community water supply well or individual domestic well, after completion of construction, repair or reconstruction, and before being placed in service, shall be thoroughly cleaned of all foreign substances. The well gravel used in packed wells, pipes, pump, pump column, and all well water contact equipment surfaces shall be disinfected by a department-approved method. The disinfectant shall remain in the well and upon all relevant surfaces for at least twenty-four (24) hours. Disinfection procedures shall be repeated until micro-biologically safe water is produced, as set forth in the California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Domestic Water Quality Monitoring. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.319 - Water quality standards. 
A.  Water from all new, repaired and reconstructed community water supply wells shall be tested for and meet the standards for microbiological, general mineral, general physical, chemical and radiological quality in accordance with the California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Domestic Water Quality and Monitoring. 
B.  In addition to the microbiological standards required in Section 13.03.318 above, all individual domestic water wells shall be tested for and meet the nitrate, fluoride and total dissolved solids (TDS) standards in accordance with the California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Domestic Water Quality and Monitoring. 
C.  At the discretion of the utilities general manager, for the purpose of protecting the health and safety of the public, any new, repaired or reconstructed individual domestic water well or community well shall be tested for and must meet any or all additionally specified water quality standards in accordance with the California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Domestic Water Quality and Monitoring. Exceptions would be community well water to be either treated or blended with other water sources to meet state department of health services standards and requirements. Such treatment or blending must be approved by the state department of health services. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.320 - Private well evaluations. 
A.  All individual domestic water wells for which the owner requests a department evaluation of water quality shall be tested for water quality standards for individual domestic water wells as provided for in Section 13.03.318 of this chapter. The department shall perform a well-site inspection and conduct the microbiological sampling portion of the evaluation. Any additional testing, including any pump test to determine the yield quantity of the well, shall be performed by state-certified individuals at the expense of others. 
B.  The department shall collect an evaluation service fee in accordance with City fee resolution or any successor resolution. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.321 - Well abandonment. 
A.  If after thirty (30) days of abandonment the owner has not declared to the department a proposed reuse of the well per Section 13.03.323 and the well has been found by the department to be a hazard, whereby its continued existence is likely to cause damage to groundwater or a threat to public health and safety, the department shall direct the owner to destroy the well in accordance with Section 13.03.310 of this chapter. 
B.  Upon removal of the pump, the casing shall be provided with a threaded or equivalently secured watertight cap. The well shall be maintained so that it will not be a hazard to public health and safety until such time as it is properly destroyed. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.322 - Public nuisance abatement. 
Where an abandoned well has been identified and the owner fails to comply with the department's order to destroy the well, such well may be declared a public nuisance pursuant to Government Code Section 50231, and thereafter abated pursuant to Title 5, Division 1, Part 1, Chapter 1, Article 9 of the California Government Code. Where abatement is undertaken at the expense of the city, such cost, including reasonable attorney's fees, shall constitute a special assessment against the parcel and shall be added to the next regular tax bill as enumerated under Government Code Section 50244 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.323 - Declaration of proposed reuse. 
Where a well is unused or its disuse is anticipated, the owner may apply to the department, in writing, stating an intention to use the well again for its original or other approved purpose. The department shall review such a declaration and may grant an exemption from certain of the provisions of Section 13.03.324 of this chapter, provided no undue hazard to public health or safety is created by the continued existence of the well. Thereafter, an amended declaration shall be filed annually with the department. The original or subsequent exemption may be terminated for cause by the department at any time. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.324 - Administrative variance. 
Subject to approval by the state department of health services, the utilities general manager may grant an administrative variance of the provisions of this chapter where documentary evidence establishes that a modification of the standards as provided herein will not endanger the general public's health and safety and strict compliance would be unreasonable in view of all the circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.325 - Violations and penalties. 
A.  The utilities general manager, or his or her designee, may at any and all reasonable times enter any and all places, property, enclosures and structures for the purpose of conducting examinations and investigations to determine whether all provisions of this chapter are being complied with, provided however, that the utilities general manager or designee will seek to obtain permission before entering any occupied residence, unless there exists an emergency or condition immediately threatening the public health, safety or welfare. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or association of persons to violate any provision of this chapter or to violate the provisions of any permit granted pursuant to this chapter. Any person, firm, corporation or association of persons violating any provision of this chapter or of the provisions of any permit granted pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an infraction or misdemeanor as herein specified. Such person, firm, or corporation or association of persons shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or the provisions of any permit granted pursuant to this chapter is committed, continued or permitted. 
C.  Any person, firm, corporation or association of persons so convicted shall be guilty of an infraction offense and punished by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first violation and guilty of an infraction offense and punished by a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second violation at the same site. The third and any additional violations on the same site shall constitute a misdemeanor offense and shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or six months in jail, or both. Notwithstanding the above, a first offense may be charged and prosecuted as a misdemeanor, or may be enforced through other means, administrative or criminal, available to the city. Payment of any penalty in this chapter shall not relieve a person, firm, corporation or association of persons from the responsibility for correcting the violation. 
D.  Anything done, maintained or suffered in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is a public nuisance dangerous to the health and safety of the public and may be enjoined or summarily abated in the manner provided by law. Every public officer or body lawfully empowered to do so shall abate the nuisance immediately. The costs of summary abatement may become a lien against the property on which the nuisance is maintained and a personal obligation against the property owner, in accordance with Government Code section 38773.1 or 38773.5 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.326 - Conflict with existing laws. 
The provisions of any existing ordinance or state or federal law affording greater protection to the public health or safety shall prevail within this jurisdiction over the provisions of this chapter and the standards adopted or incorporated by reference in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 3(Exh. C), 10-23-13)  
13.03.327—13.03.340 - Reserved.  
Chapter 13.16 - Water Quality Control[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1057, § 5, adopted Oct. 23, 2013, repealed the former ch. 13.16, §§ 13.16.010—13.16.310, and enacted a new chapter as set out herein. The former ch. 13 pertained to stormwater management and derived from prior code, §§ 32-1—32-32; and Ord. No. 1014, § 1, adopted Feb. 24, 2010. 
 
13.16.010. - Authority. 
This Chapter implements the Clean Water Act and the Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act and is enacted pursuant to authority conferred by an areawide urban stormwater run-off permit [NPDES Permit No. CAS617002, Order No. R7-2013-0011 issued by the Regional Board pursuant to Section 402(p) of the Clean Water Act. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 5(Exh. D), 10-23-13)  
13.16.020 - Purpose and objectives. 
A.  The purpose of this chapter is to ensure the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the city of Coachella by prescribing regulations to effectively prohibit nonstormwater discharges into the city's stormwater drainage system and to specifically achieve the following objectives: 
1.  Control discharges to and from the stormwater drainage system, spills, dumping or disposal of materials other than stormwater; 
2.  Reduce the discharge of pollutants in all stormwater discharges; 
3.  Protect and enhance the water quality of local, state and federal watercourses, water bodies, ground water and wetlands in a manner pursuant to and consistent with the Clean Water Act and Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 5(Exh. D), 10-23-13)  
13.16.030 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Words and phrases not ascribed a meaning by this Chapter have the meanings ascribed by the Clean Water Act, the regulations implementing the NPDES program, the Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act, and its implementing regulations, if defined therein, and if not, then the meaning ascribed by the areawide urban stormwater run-off permit. 
"Area-wide urban stormwater runoff permit" means the current, regional NPDES permit issued by the regional board to the Riverside County Flood Control District, Riverside County and eleven (11) incorporated cities discharging stormwater into the Whitewater River Basin for the regulation of stormwater discharges from municipal separate storm sewer systems (NPDES Permit No. CAS617002, Regional Board Order No. R7-2013-0011, as it currently exists or may be amended, renewed, or reissued). 
"BMP" means any best management practice, best management guideline, or best management requirement as adopted by any federal, state, regional or local agency to prevent or reduce the pollution of waters of the United States. BMPs are schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures and other management practices to prevent or reduce pollutant loading from stormwater or nonstormwater discharges to receiving waters. BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control: plant site runoff, spillage or leaks; sludge or waste storage and disposal; or drainage from raw material or chemical storage. 
"City" or "the city" means to the city of Coachella, California. 
"City engineer" means city engineer for the city of Coachella, or the engineer's designee. 
"Clean Water Act" means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, 33 U.S.C. sections 1251-1387. 
"Compliance schedule" means the time period allowed by the city for a discharger to achieve compliance with the city's stormwater regulations. The "compliance schedule" shall contain specific dates by which adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related equipment and/or procedures must be installed or implemented. 
"Construction activity" means any activity used in the process of developing, redeveloping, enhancing, or maintaining land, including but not limited to: land disturbance, building construction, paving and surfacing, storage and disposal of construction related materials. 
"Contamination" means the same as defined in the Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act; "contamination" is an impairment of the quality of waters of the state by waste to a degree which creates a hazard to the public health through poisoning or through the spread of disease. "Contamination" includes any equivalent effect resulting from the disposal of waste whether or not waters of the state are affected. 
"Developer" means a person, firm, corporation, partnership, or association who proposes to develop, develops, or causes to be developed real property except that employees and consultants of such persons or entities, acting in such capacity, are not developers. 
"Discharge" means any release, spill, leak, flow or escape of any liquid including sewage, wastewater or stormwater, semi-solid or solid substance onto the land or into the city's stormwater drainage system. 
"Discharger" means any person, property owner or occupant of a unit, building, premises or lot in the city who discharges, causes, allows, or facilitates any discharge, directly or indirectly, into the city's stormwater drainage system. 
"EPA" means the Environmental Protection Agency of the United States of America. 
"General permit for stormwater discharges from construction activity" means a statewide general NPDES permit that regulates all stormwater discharges associated with construction projects that disturb one acre or more of land or which result in the disturbance of less than one acre, but which are part of a larger common plan of development or sale, as it now exists and may be amended, renewed or reissued. (NPDES Permit No. CAS000002; Order No. 2009-0009-DWQ). 
"General permit for stormwater discharges from industrial activities" means a statewide general NPDES permit that regulates stormwater discharges associated with industrial activities that are listed in 40 CFR 122.26 (b) (14), as it now exists and may be amended, renewed or reissued. (NPDES Permit No. CAS000001; Order No. 97-03-DWQ). 
"Hearing officer" means the public works director or any authorized designee, who presides, at the administrative hearings authorized by this chapter and issues final decisions on matters raised therein. 
"Illegal discharge" means any discharge (or seepage) into the city's stormwater drainage system that is not composed entirely of stormwater except for the discharges authorized pursuant to this chapter. Illegal discharges include the improper disposal of wastes into the stormwater drainage system. 
"Illicit connection" means any of the following: 
1.  Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the stormwater drainage system, including but not limited to, any conveyance which allows nonstormwater discharges including sewage, process wastewater and wash water to enter the stormwater drainage system and any connections to the stormwater drainage system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted or approved by a government agency; 
2.  Any drain or conveyance connected to the stormwater drainage system, that is not permitted pursuant to a valid NPDES permit or which has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent records approved by the city; or 
3.  Any connection to the city's stormwater drainage system that is prohibited under this chapter or any local, state or federal statute, ordinance, order, or regulation. 
"National pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES)" means the EPA's national program under the Clean Water Act to eliminate discharges of pollution into waters of the United States. 
"New development" means new construction on a previously undisturbed parcel. New development does not include routine maintenance to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original purpose of a facility, nor does it include emergency new development required to protect public health and safety. 
"NPDES permit" means any permit issued pursuant to the Federal Clean Water Act. 
"Notice of intent (NOI)" means a form provided by the state board that is required to be completed and submitted in order to obtain coverage under one of the state's NPDES general stormwater permits prior to the start of certain business activities or construction activities. 
"Nonstormwater" means any water discharge to the city's stormwater drainage system that does not originate from a precipitation event. 
"Nuisance" means any condition described by all of the following: 
1.  Is injurious to health, or is indecent or offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property, so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property. 
2.  Affects at the same time an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, although the extent of the annoyance or damage inflicted upon individuals may be unequal. 
3.  Occurs during, or as a result of, the treatment or disposal of wastes. 
"Permit" means any permit issued by the city. 
"Person" means any individual, partnership, committee, entity, association, corporation, public agency, and any other organization, or group of persons public or private; the masculine genders shall include the feminine, the singular shall include the plural where indicated by the context. 
"pH" means the measure of the hydrogen ion concentration of water and the standard by which the acidity or alkalinity of a water sample is determined. 
"Pollutant" means, but is not limited to, any liquid, solid or semi-solid substances or combination thereof, which causes or threatens to cause a nuisance or contributes or threatens to contribute to a condition of contamination or pollution of the city's stormwater runoff, stormwater drainage system or the impairment or degradation of waters of the state, including but not limited to the following: 
1.  Floatable materials (such as floatable plastics or wood products, and metal shavings, or materials forming films, foam or scum); 
2.  Household waste (such as trash, cleaners, toxic or hazardous chemicals, yard wastes, animal fecal materials, used oil, coolant, gasoline and other vehicle fluids); 
3.  Metals and non-metals, including compounds of metals and non-metals; 
4.  Petroleum hydrocarbons (such as fuels, lubricants, surfactants, waste oils, solvents, coolants and grease); 
5.  Domestic sewage from sewer line overflows, septic tanks, porta-potties, boats and recreational vehicles; 
6.  Animal wastes (such as wastes from confinement facilities, kennels, pens, stables, and show facilities); 
7.  Substances having a pH less than 6.5 or greater than 8.5, or unusual coloration, turbidity or odor; 
8.  Materials causing an increase in biochemical oxygen demand, chemical oxygen demand or total organic carbon; 
9.  Materials containing base/neutral or acid extractable organic compounds; 
10.  Waste materials and wastewater generated on construction sites from construction activities (such as painting and staining; use of sealants and glues; use of lime; use of wood preservatives and solvents; disturbance of asbestos fibers, paint flakes or stucco fragments; application of oils, lubricants, vehicle maintenance, construction equipment washing, concrete pouring and cleanup; use of concrete detergents; steam cleaning or sand blasting; use of chemical degreasing or diluting agents; and chlorinated water from potable line flushing; 
11.  Those pollutants defined in Section 1362 (6) of the Federal Clean Water Act; and 
12.  Any other constituent or material, including but not limited to pesticides, herbicides, fertilizers, eroded soils, sediment and particulate materials, in quantities that have been determined by the state or EPA to adversely affect the beneficial uses of waters of the state. 
"Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act" means Division 7 of the California Water Code (commencing with section 13000). 
"Public works director" means the public works director of the city of Coachella, or the director's designee. 
"Redevelopment" means new development on a previously disturbed parcel. Emergency redevelopment activities conducted to maintain original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or to restore the original purpose of a facility are not included. 
"Regional board" means the Colorado River Basin Regional Water Quality Control Board. 
"Sewage" means the wastewater of the community derived from residential, agricultural, commercial, or industrial sources, including domestic sewage, and industrial wastewater. 
"SIC (Standard Industrial Classification)" means the statistical classification standard underlying all establishment-based federal economic statistics classified by industry. The standard is published in the SIC Manual, 1987, Office of Management and Budget. 
"State board" means the state water resources control board. 
"Stormwater" means rain water, snowmelt runoff, and associated surface runoff and drainage. 
"Stormwater drainage system" means all of the property involved in the operation of the stormwater drainage collection and disposal system for the city, including, but not limited to, conduits, natural or artificial drains, channels and watercourses, together with appurtenances, pumping stations and equipment which is tributary to the regional stormwater runoff system. 
"Stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP)" means the plan as described in the general construction activity stormwater permit as issued by the state board on August 19, 1999, and as may be amended, or the general industrial activities stormwater permit as issued on April 17, 1997, and as may be amended, which specifies BMPs that will prevent pollutants from contacting stormwater and all products of erosion from moving off site into receiving waters. 
"Stormwater quality management plan (WQMP)" means a plan required of new development/redevelopment projects, outlining appropriate non-structural and structural BMPs, including stormwater infiltration and treatment devices that will be implemented and installed to prevent pollutants from being discharged into the city's stormwater drainage system, during and after construction. 
"Violation" means a breach of any provision of this chapter. 
"Waters of the state" means any surface water or groundwater, including saline waters, within the boundaries of the state. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 5(Exh. D), 10-23-13)  
13.16.040 - Administration. 
The public works director shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the public works director, may be delegated by the public works director to persons authorized by the director and in the employ of the city of Coachella. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 5(Exh. D), 10-23-13)  
13.16.041 - Applicability. 
This chapter shall apply to all dischargers, including all residents as well as commercial, industrial and construction enterprises, to the city's stormwater drainage system, and to dischargers outside the city who, by agreement with the city, utilize the city's stormwater drainage system. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 5(Exh. D), 10-23-13)  
13.16.042 - Notice. 
Unless otherwise provided herein, any notice required by this chapter shall be in writing and served in person, by first class, registered or certified mail. Notice shall be deemed to have been given at the time of deposit, postage or prepaid, in a facility regularly serviced by the United States Postal Service. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 5(Exh. D), 10-23-13)  
13.16.043 - Connections. 
A.  The discharge or diversion of stormwater or nonstormwater is permissible when the connection to the city's stormwater drainage system is made in accordance with a valid construction permit, approved construction plan, and, if applicable, an NPDES stormwater permit and the discharge is not prohibited under this chapter. 
B.  It is prohibited to establish, use maintain and/or continue or to permit, cause, or facilitate the establishment, use, maintenance, or continuance of any illicit connection to the city's stormwater drainage system. This prohibition is retroactive and applies to connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was made under a permit or other authorization or whether the connection was permissible under the law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of the connection. 
C.  Construction permits are required for the construction or modification of any storm drain or conveyor of drainage waters and appurtenant items within: 
1.  Dedicated easements, rights-of-way, or public place and/or facility. 
2.  Private property so as it may directly or indirectly discharge into the city's stormwater drainage system. Indirect discharges include, but are not limited to, under sidewalk drains, driveway approaches, and unrestricted sheet flow. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 5(Exh. D), 10-23-13)  
13.16.044 - Protection of the stormwater drainage system. 
Without the prior written approval of the city's engineer, no person shall construct, modify or cause to be constructed or modified any structure, facility or appurtenant items which may alter the normal functioning of the city's stormwater drainage system, including any action which may alter the capacity, fall, or structural integrity of a storm drain, channel or related structures. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 5(Exh. D), 10-23-13)  
13.16.045 - Prohibited discharges. 
It is prohibited to: 
A.  Discharge nonstormwater directly or indirectly to the city's stormwater drainage system, or any street, lined or unlined drainage channel which leads to the city's storm drain or directly or indirectly into any waters of the state unless such discharge is authorized by either a separate NPDES permit or as otherwise specified in Section 13.16.046 of this chapter. If such discharge is permitted by a NPDES permit or is generally exempted, but causes the city to violate any portion of its NPDES permits for stormwater discharges, such discharge is also prohibited; 
B.  Discharge stormwater into the city's stormwater drainage system containing pollutants that have not been reduced in compliance with this chapter; 
C.  Throw, deposit, leave, maintain, keep, or permit to be thrown, deposited, placed, left or maintained, any refuse, garbage, sediment or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles, and accumulations, in or upon any street, alley sidewalk, storm drain, inlet, catch basin, conduit or other drainage structures, business place, or upon any public or private lot of land in the city, so that the same may be and/or may become a pollutant. 
D.  Throw or deposit any refuse, garbage or any other pollutants into any fountain, pond, lake, stream or any other body of water in a park or elsewhere within the city. 
E.  Discharge any of the following types of waste into the city's stormwater drainage system: 
1.  Sewage; 
2.  Surface cleaning wash water resulting from mopping, rinsing, pressure washing or steam cleaning of gas stations, and vehicle service businesses or any other business; 
3.  Discharges resulting from the cleaning, repair, or maintenance of any type of equipment, machinery, or facility including motor vehicles, concrete mixing equipment, portable toilet servicing, etc.; 
4.  Wash water from mobile auto detailing and washing, steam and pressure cleaning, carpet cleaning, drapery and furniture cleaning, etc.; 
5.  Waste water from cleaning municipal, industrial, commercial, residential areas (including parking lots), streets, sidewalks, driveways, patios, plazas, work yards and outdoor eating or drinking areas, containing chemicals or detergents and without prior sweeping, etc.; 
6.  Stormwater runoff from material or waste storage areas containing chemicals, fuels, grease, oil or other hazardous materials or contaminated equipment; 
7.  Discharges from pool or fountain water containing chlorine, biocides, acids or other chemicals; pool filter backwash containing debris and chlorine; 
8.  Pet waste, yard waste, debris, sediment, etc.; 
9.  Restaurant wastes such as grease, mop water, and wash water from cleaning dishes, utensils, laundry, floors, floor mats, trash bins, grease containers, food waste, etc.; 
10.  Chemicals or chemical waste, including but not limited to, oil, gasoline, diesel fuel, and any other petroleum derivative and toxic chemical; 
11.  Medical wastes; 
12.  Blow down or bleed water from cooling towers and boilers, regenerative brine waste from water softeners or reverse osmosis treatment systems; 
13.  Materials or chemical substances that cause damage to the city's stormwater drainage system; 
14.  Dredged and fill material; 
15.  Any other material that causes or contributes or threatens to cause or contribute to a condition of contamination, nuisance or pollution in the city's storm drainage system or causes a violation of any waste disposal regulations, waste discharge requirements, water quality standards or objectives adopted by the state board, regional board, EPA, Riverside County Fire Hazmat, Riverside County Flood Control District or any other public agency with jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 5(Exh. D), 10-23-13)  
13.16.046 - Exceptions to the prohibited discharges. 
A.  Unless the city determines any of the following discharges of nonstormwater into the city's storm drainage system constitutes a significant source of pollutants, the following discharges are generally exempt from the prohibited discharges listed in Section 13.16.045 of this chapter. 
1.  Discharges covered by an NPDES permit or written clearances issued by the regional or state board; 
2.  Landscape irrigation, lawn watering, and irrigation water; 
3.  Water from crawl space pumps; 
4.  Air conditioning condensation; 
5.  Non-commercial car washing; 
6.  Rising ground waters and natural springs; 
7.  Ground water infiltration as defined in 40 CFR 35.2005 (20) and uncontaminated pumped ground water; 
8.  Water flows from riparian habitats and wetlands; 
9.  Water flows generated from emergency response and/or fire fighting activities, however, appropriate BMPs shall be implemented to the extent practicable; BMPs must be implemented to reduce pollutants from non-emergency fire fighting flow; 
10.  Waters not otherwise containing wastes as defined in California Water Code Section 13050(d), 
11.  Other types of discharges identified and recommended by the city and approved by the regional board. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 5(Exh. D), 10-23-13)  
13.16.047 - Compliance with best management practices (BMPs). 
Any person undertaking any activity or operation in the city that could potentially cause or contribute to stormwater pollution or a discharge of nonstormwater shall minimize the discharge of pollutants to the stormwater drainage system through the installation, implementation, and maintenance of applicable best management practices (BMPs) consistent with the California Stormwater Best Management Practice Handbooks, or equivalent, the current, Riverside County Stormwater Program's "Report of Waste Discharge," or equivalent, or as required by the public works director. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 5(Exh. D), 10-23-13)  
13.16.049 - Spill containment. 
Persons storing chemicals or chemical waste outdoors shall be required to install spill containment subject to requirements established by the city engineer/public works director and federal, state and county standards. Persons storing any other materials or equipment that are potential sources of stormwater pollution are also required to install spill containment. No person shall operate a spill containment system that could allow incompatible materials and/or wastes to mix, thereby creating hazardous or toxic substances in the event of failure of one or more containers. 
Spill containment systems shall consist of a system of dikes, walls, barriers, berms and/or other devices designed to contain the spillage of the liquid contents of the containers stored in them and to minimize the buildup of stormwater from precipitation, and run-on from roof drainage and outside areas. If the spill containment system does not have a roof which covers the entire contained area, the spill containment system shall have the capacity to contain precipitation from at least a twenty-four (24) hour, twenty-five (25) year rainfall event plus ten (10) percent of the total volume of the material stored there or the volume of the largest container, whichever is greater. Spill containment systems shall also be constructed of impermeable and non-reactive materials to the materials and/or wastes being contained. 
Spilled and/or leaked materials and/or wastes and any accumulated precipitation shall be removed from the spill containment system in as timely a manner as is necessary to prevent the overflow of the spill containment system. Unless otherwise approved by the city engineer/public works director, all chemicals or wastes discharged within the spill containment system shall be disposed of in accordance with all applicable federal, state, and local rules, regulations, and laws, and shall not be discharged into the city's sanitary sewer system, stormwater drainage system or onto the ground. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 5(Exh. D), 10-23-13)  
13.16.050 - Immediate notification of accidental discharge. 
Protection of the city's stormwater drainage system from the accidental discharge of prohibited materials or wastes is the responsibility of the person or persons in charge of such material. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the city for review, and shall be approved by the city engineer/public works director prior to any construction. All new and existing industrial and commercial dischargers, all persons in charge of any new or redevelopment project, and any person designated by the public works director shall complete such a plan. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the discharger from the responsibility to modify a facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter. 
A notice shall be permanently posted in a prominent place advising employees whom to contact in the event of an accidental discharge. Employers shall ensure that all employees are advised of the emergency notification procedures. In the event of an accidental discharge, it is the responsibility of the discharger to immediately telephone and notify the proper authorities. 
All discharges released into the city's stormwater drainage system, including a street or gutter, shall be immediately reported to the city's public works department and fire department. All discharges that pose a threat to human health or the environment shall be reported to the executive officer of the regional board within twenty-four (24) hours by telephone or e-mail and followed with a written report of the spill event within five days. At a minimum, all sewage spills and all reportable quantities of hazardous materials or hazardous waste shall be reported to the public works director within twenty-four (24) hours. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 5(Exh. D), 10-23-13)  
13.016.051 - Written notification of accidental discharge. 
Within five working days following an accidental illegal discharge into the city's stormwater drainage system, the person or persons in charge of the material and/or waste which was illegally discharged shall submit a written report to the public works director. The report shall describe in detail the type and volume of the material and/or waste and the cause of the discharge. The report shall also describe in detail all corrective actions taken and measures to be taken to prevent future occurrences. 
Such notification of the illegal discharge shall not relieve the user of any fines or civil penalties incurred as a result of the event or any other liability which may be imposed by this chapter or other applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 5(Exh. D), 10-23-13)  
13.16.052 - Authority to inspect. 
A.  The public works director and any designated representatives shall be authorized, at any reasonable time, to enter the premises of any discharger to the city's stormwater drainage system to determine compliance with the provisions of this chapter, and to: 
1.  Conduct inspection, sampling, monitoring, and other duties to enforce the provisions of this chapter; 
2.  Review any records, reports, test results or other information required to enforce the provisions of this chapter. Such review may include the necessity to photograph, videotape, or copy any applicable information; and 
3.  Inspect any chemicals, materials, wastes, storage areas, storage containers, and waste generating processes, treatment facilities, and discharge locations. Such inspection may include the necessity to photograph or videotape any applicable chemicals, materials, wastes, storage areas, storage containers, waste generating processes, treatment facilities, and discharge locations. 
B.  The public works director and any designated representatives shall provide adequate identification when entering the premises of any discharger. If such entry is refused or cannot be obtained, the public works director shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure lawful entry and inspection of the premises. 
C.  If the public works director has reasonable cause to believe that nonstormwater discharge conditions on or emanating from the premises are of a nature so as to require immediate inspection to safeguard public health or safety, the public works director shall have the right to immediately enter and inspect said property and may use any reasonable means required to effect such entry and make such inspection, regardless if said property is occupied or unoccupied and regardless if formal permission to inspect said property has been obtained. 
D.  Where a discharger has instituted security measures requiring proper identification and clearance before entry onto the premises, the discharger shall make all necessary arrangements with its security agents in order that, upon presentation of such identification, the public works director or any authorized designated representative(s) shall be permitted to enter the premises without delay, for the purpose of performing their authorized duties. For facilities, which require special clearances to conduct inspections, it shall be the responsibility of the discharger to obtain all necessary clearances on behalf of the city so that the inspection is not impaired. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 5(Exh. D), 10-23-13)  
13.16.140 - Prohibited discharges. 
In addition to the general prohibitions in Section 13.16.045 of this chapter, it is prohibited to discharge any of the following to any street, gutter, alley, sidewalk, storm drain inlet, catch basin, conduit or other drainage structures, business place, or upon any public or private lot of land in the city, so that the same may be and/or may become a pollutant: 
A.  Animal waste, soil, leaves, plant and tree cuttings, grass clippings, weeds, dead trees, fertilizer, soil amendments or mulch, and pesticides; 
B.  Concrete or cement waste, brick and tile work wastes, plaster and drywall tool cleanup water, waste paint or painting cleanup water, asphalt or asphalt cleanup solvents or slurry from saw cutting concrete or asphalt and other construction waste; 
C.  Domestic sewage including wastewater from sinks, washing machines, dishwashers, toilets, campers, motorhomes or trailers; 
D.  Chemicals, degreasers, bleach, steam cleaning or pressure washing wastewater; 
E.  Motor oil, antifreeze, gasoline, diesel, kerosene, solvents, battery acid, brake fluid, transmission fluid, power steering fluid, engine cleaning compounds, engine or parts cleaning washwater or rinsewater and any other vehicular fluids; 
F.  Water softener brine waste, or any other waste water from other household water treatment systems; 
G.  Waste water from draining swimming pools, ponds or fountains which contain chlorine biocides, acids or other chemicals, pool filter backwash containing debris and chlorine; 
H.  Discharges from acid cleaning of swimming pools, ponds or fountains or filter cleaning from the same; 
I.  Any other material that causes or contributes or threatens to cause or contribute to a condition of contamination, nuisance or pollution in the city's storm drainage system or causes a violation of any waste disposal regulations, waste discharge requirements, water quality standards or objectives adopted by the state board, regional board. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 5(Exh. D), 10-23-13)  
13.16.141 - Responsibility for illegal discharge of prohibited substances. 
The property owner(s) of a lot or parcel from which an illegal discharge originates shall be ultimately responsible for all abatement and cleanup costs associated with an illegal discharge, if the responsible party cannot be located. Likewise, if the tenant of a multi-family residential unit has discharged a prohibited material or waste into the city's storm drainage system or has caused the contamination of stormwater runoff from the property, and the public works director cannot determine the responsible party or residential unit responsible, the owner of the property from which the discharge originated, shall be responsible for the cleanup and abatement costs to mitigate the condition. Additionally, a property owner will be responsible for all cleanup costs and damages to the city's storm drainage system from a contractor's activities, if the contractor was hired by the owner and cannot be located. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 5(Exh. D), 10-23-13)  
13.16.142 - Maintenance of private residential storm drainage systems. 
A.  All private residential storm drainage inlets, underdrains and gutters shall be inspected annually and cleaned prior to the beginning of the rainy season if there is evidence of one or more of the following conditions: 
1.  The sediment/debris storage volume is twenty-five (25) percent or more full; 
2.  There is evidence of illegal discharge; 
3.  Accumulated sediment or debris impairs the hydraulic function of the facility. 
B.  Private streets shall also be swept and maintained as needed to prevent sediment, gardening waste, trash, litter and other contaminants from entering the city's storm drainage system. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 5(Exh. D), 10-23-13) 
Industrial and Commercial Requirements  
13.16.240. - Nonstormwater discharges. 
All nonstormwater discharges associated with industrial and commercial activities that discharge into the city's stormwater drainage system are prohibited except as permitted by an individual user's NPDES stormwater permit or Section 13.16.046 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 5(Exh. D), 10-23-13)  
13.16.241 - General permit for stormwater discharges from industrial activities. 
A.  All facilities described in 40 CFR 122.26(b)(14)(i)-(xi) must obtain coverage under the state's general permit for discharges of stormwater associated with industrial activities, at least fourteen (14) days prior to the startup of business activities. All listed businesses are required to submit a completed notice of intent (NOI) form, site map and application fee to the state board. The state board also requires the listed businesses to prepare a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP), retain a copy of the SWPPP on site and comply with all the requirements of the general permit. Copies of the NOI form are available from the public works department, environmental section. 
B.  Prior to receiving a business license or certificate of occupancy, all businesses that have filed an NOI for coverage under the state's general permit and have received a waste discharge identification number (WDID) from the state board, must either mail, fax or hand deliver a copy of the WDID letter from the state to the public works department, environmental section as proof of filing. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 5(Exh. D), 10-23-13)  
13.16.242 - Conditional category—Notice of nonapplicability. 
A.  Businesses who own or operate facilities described in 40 CFR 122.26(b)(14)(xi) may prepare a "notice of nonapplicability" in lieu of an NOI if they can certify on this form provided by the state board that there is no manufacturing process, material, equipment or product storage outside in an area that is exposed to stormwater runoff. The "notice of nonapplicability" must document all of the following: 
1.  All prohibited nonstormwater discharges have been eliminated or otherwise permitted; 
2.  All significant materials related to industrial activity (including waste materials) are not exposed to stormwater or authorized nonstormwater discharges; 
3.  All industrial activities and industrial equipment are not exposed to stormwater or authorized nonstormwater discharges; 
4.  There is no exposure of stormwater to significant materials associated with industrial activity through other direct or indirect pathways such as from industrial activities that generate dust and particulates. 
B.  Businesses in this category are required to submit the notice of nonapplicability to the local office of the regional board and are required to maintain the above documentation on-site at all times. They are also required to reevaluate and recertify once a year that the conditions above are continuously met. Copies of the "notice of nonapplicability" form are available from the city's public works department, environmental section. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 5(Exh. D), 10-23-13)  
13.16.243 - Best management practices (BMPs). 
A.  All businesses, regardless of permit status, shall implement all applicable BMPs, consistent with the California Stormwater Best Management Practice Handbooks, or equivalent, the current Riverside County Stormwater Program's Report of Waste Discharge, or equivalent, or as required by the city, to reduce pollutants in stormwater runoff and reduce nonstormwater discharges to the city's stormwater drainage system in compliance with this chapter. All structural controls shall be maintained to effectively prevent pollutants from contacting stormwater or remove pollutants from stormwater runoff. Maintenance records for structural and treatment devices, including waste hauling receipts shall be kept for a period of five years and made available to the city's inspector, upon request. 
B.  If structural or treatment controls are not functioning as designed or are not effective in reducing stormwater pollutants or nonstormwater discharges in compliance with this chapter, the city may require that the control device be repaired, rebuilt or replaced. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 5(Exh. D), 10-23-13) 
Construction, New and Redevelopment
Requirements  
13.16.340 - Stormwater quality management Plan (WQMP) and BMPs. 
A.  Plan Review and BMPs. The city will review project plans and impose terms, conditions, and requirements on the project to ensure compliance with this chapter, including but not limited to required BMPs. If a project will be approved without application for a building or grading permit, the city will review project plans and impose terms, conditions, and requirements prior to project approval. 
B.  WQMP. Prior to the issuance of any grading or building permit, all qualifying new and redevelopment projects must submit and have approved a water quality management plan (WQMP) to the city engineer on a form provided by the city. The WQMP shall identify all BMPs that will be incorporated into the project to control stormwater and nonstormwater pollutants during and after construction and shall be revised as necessary during the life of the project. The WQMP submittal applies to construction projects covered by the general permit for stormwater discharges from construction activity, as well as to construction projects less than one acre. Qualifying new and redevelopment projects include: 
1.  Home subdivisions of ten (10) units or more. This includes single family residences, multi-family residences, condominiums, apartments, etc.; 
2.  Commercial developments of one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet or more. This includes nonresidential developments such as hospitals, educational institutions, recreational facilities, mini-malls, hotels, office buildings, warehouses, and light industrial facilities; 
3.  Vehicle maintenance shops (SIC codes 5013, 5014, 5541, 7532-7534, 7536-7539); 
4.  Food service businesses developing five thousand (5,000) square feet or more of land area; 
5.  All hillside developments that create ten thousand (10,000) square feet or more of impervious area, which are located on areas with known erosive soil conditions or where the natural slope is twenty-five (25) percent or more, including single family hillside residences that create ten thousand (10,000) square feet or more of impervious area where the natural slope is ten (10) percent or greater or where erosive soil conditions exist; 
6.  Developments of two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of impervious surface or more adjacent to (within two hundred (200) feet) or discharging directly into environmentally sensitive areas such as areas designated in the ocean plan as areas of special biological significance or water bodies listed on the CWA Section 303(d) list of impaired waters; 
7.  Parking lots of twenty-five (25) spaces or five thousand (5,000) square feet or more exposed to stormwater. "Parking lot" is defined as land area or facility for the temporary storage of motor vehicles; 
8.  All retail gasoline outlets and restaurants disturbing more than five thousand (5,000) square feet; 
9.  All redevelopment projects adding five thousand (5,000) square feet or more of impervious surface on an already developed site. This includes additional buildings and/or structures, extension of an already existing building footprint and construction of parking lots, etc. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 5(Exh. D), 10-23-13)  
13.16.341 - General permit for stormwater discharges from construction activity. 
A.  Any developer or owner engaging in construction activities which disturb one acre or more of land shall apply for coverage under the general permit for stormwater discharges from construction activity with the state board. Any developer or owner engaging in construction activities which disturb less than one acre but which area is part of a larger common plan of development or sale that is greater than one acre must also apply for coverage under the general permit for stormwater discharges from construction activity with the state board. 
B.  Prior to obtaining any city-issued grading and or construction permits the developer or owner shall provide evidence of compliance with the general permit for stormwater discharges from construction activity by providing a copy of the waste discharger's identification number (WDID) to the city's public works department. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 5(Exh. D), 10-23-13)  
13.16.342 - Nonstormwater discharges. 
A.  Discharges of nonstormwater from construction activities are generally prohibited except for those discharges listed in Section 13.16.046 of this chapter or any discharges authorized by the city engineer or the regional board. 
B.  All construction site operators must control all waste from construction sites, such as discarded building materials, concrete truck wash out, chemicals, litter, and sanitary waste, which may cause an adverse impact on water quality. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 5(Exh. D), 10-23-13)  
13.16.343 - Nonstormwater discharge reporting requirements. 
Authorized nonstormwater discharges under Section 13.16.342 shall be reported to the public works director at least five days prior to a planned discharge. Unplanned discharges of nonstormwater into the city's storm drainage system shall be reported as soon as possible and before any discharge is initiated. The city's public works department, environmental section will provide a "nonstormwater discharge notification form" for any developer that is proposing to discharge any nonstormwater from a construction site. The nonstormwater discharge notification form must be submitted to the public works department, environmental section, for these discharges, at least five days prior to any planned discharge or as soon as possible for any unplanned discharge. Monitoring may also be required for these discharges. If the city provided form is not utilized, a report must be submitted to the public words director prior to the discharge, which includes the following information: 
1.  Date, time, and location of proposed discharge; 
2.  Type of proposed discharge; 
3.  Estimated average and maximum daily flow rate; 
4.  Frequency and duration of discharge; 
5.  A description of the proposed treatment system (if appropriate); 
6.  A description of the path from the point of discharge to the nearest storm drain inlet. All discharges shall be monitored daily for flow volume and shall be recorded in a daily log by the person responsible for the discharge. Discharges shall also be sampled during the first thirty (30) minutes of each discharge and weekly thereafter for continuous discharges for chlorine and total suspended solids. Monitoring data for flow, chlorine and suspended solids and any other required constituents shall be reported to the city's public works department, environmental section on a weekly basis. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 5(Exh. D), 10-23-13)  
13.16.344 - Best management practices. 
All construction projects which could potentially have an adverse impact on the city's stormwater drainage system or waters of the state shall install and/or implement appropriate construction and post- construction BMPs, as listed in their WQMP or the "California Stormwater Best Management Practice Handbook," or as may be required by the city, to comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 5(Exh. D), 10-23-13)  
13.16.345 - WQMP transfer, access, and maintenance agreement. 
A.  The city manager or any authorized designee is authorized to sign all water quality management plan access, transfer and maintenance agreement documents entered into by the city with project proponents for the on-going and long-term maintenance of all approved stormwater treatment devices, structures and administrative policies designed to minimize the detrimental effects of new development projects on receiving waters, including effects caused by increased pollutant loads and changes in hydrology. 
B.  The public works director may require the owner of any new or redevelopment project listed in Section 13.16.340(b) to enter into an agreement for the operation and maintenance of any post-construction control measure and to record such agreement with the county recorder's office. The signature of the owner of the property is sufficient for recording this document. A signature from the city is not required for recording. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 5(Exh. D), 10-23-13) 
Administrative Enforcement Remedies  
13.16.440 - Notice of correction (NOC). 
Whenever the public works director or any authorized designee finds that any discharger has the potential to violate or has already violated any prohibition, limitation or requirement contained in this chapter, any NPDES stormwater permit or the basin plan, the city may serve upon such person a written notice of correction stating the nature of the violation and the necessary actions that must be implemented to correct the situation. The notice of correction shall set forth a time period by which the problem must be corrected and the penalties for noncompliance. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 5(Exh. D), 10-23-13)  
13.16.441 - Notice of violation. 
When the public works director or any authorized designee finds that any discharger has failed to comply with a notice of correction or has violated or continues to violate any prohibition, limitation or requirement contained in this chapter, any NPDES stormwater permit or the basin plan, the city may serve upon such person a written notice of violation stating the nature of the violation and the penalties for noncompliance. At a minimum, the notice of violation shall require that the discharger submit to the public works director, within a time period specified in the notice, a plan indicating the cause of the violation and corrective actions which will be taken to prevent recurrence. A discharger shall be guilty of a separate offense for every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this chapter is committed, continued, or permitted by the discharger. Pursuant to California Government Code Sections 53069.4 and 36900(b) the following violation assessments will apply to the issuance of a notice of violation by the public works director or any authorized representative: 
1.  A first notice of violation shall be issued for a first violation of this chapter and shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00); 
2.  A second notice of violation shall be issued for a second violation of this same ordinance within one year and shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00); 
3.  A third notice of violation shall be issued for a third violation of this same ordinance within one year and shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each additional violation of the same ordinance within one year shall also be punishable by a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 5(Exh. D), 10-23-13)  
13.16.442 - Administrative orders. 
The public works director may require compliance with any prohibition, limitation or requirement contained in this chapter, any NPDES stormwater permit or the basin plan, by issuing an administrative order, enforceable in a court of law or by directly seeking court action. Administrative orders may include compliance orders, stop work orders, cease and desist orders, termination of service orders and immediate termination of service orders. 
A.  Compliance orders. The public works director or any authorized designee may issue a compliance order to any discharger who fails to correct a violation of this chapter, any NPDES stormwater permit or the basin plan. The order shall be in writing, specify the violation(s) and require appropriate compliance measures within a specified time period. The compliance order may include the following terms and requirements: 
1.  Specific steps and time schedules for compliance as reasonably necessary to eliminate an existing prohibited discharge or illegal connection or to prevent the imminent threat of a prohibited discharge; 
2.  Specific requirements for containment, cleanup, removal, storage, installation of overhead covering or proper disposal of any pollutant having the potential to contact stormwater runoff; 
3.  Installation of stormwater treatment devices, containment structures, wash racks and addition and removal of stormwater drains; 
4.  Any other terms or requirements reasonably calculated to prevent imminent threat of or continuing violations of this chapter, including, but not limited to requirements for compliance with best management practices guidance documents promulgated by any federal, state or regional agency. 
The public works director or any authorized designee may adopt a proposed compliance schedule submitted by the user or may adopt a revised compliance schedule if the proposed compliance schedule would allow the user to cause harm to the receiving waters and/or the city's storm drainage system. 
A compliance order shall require the discharger to pay a one-thousand-dollar penalty fee to the city for the issuance thereof. 
B.  Stop work order. The public works director, city engineer or building official may serve a written stop work order on any person engaged in doing or causing to be done, new construction, tenant improvements, alterations or additions, if: 
1.  No construction permit has been granted by the city; 
2.  Work has begun prior to the submittal of a written WQMP and subsequent approval by the city engineer or any authorized designee; or, 
3.  Violations of this article are found at the site of the new construction, tenant improvements, alterations or additions. 
Any person served a stop work order shall stop such work immediately until written authorization to continue is received from the public works director, city engineer or building official. a stop work order shall require the discharger to pay a one-thousand-dollar penalty fee to the city for the issuance thereof. 
C.  Cease and desist order. When the public works director or any authorized designee finds that any discharger has violated or threatens to violate any prohibition, limitation or requirement contained in this chapter, any NPDES stormwater permit or the basin plan, or NPDES stormwater permit, the city may issue a cease and desist order directing the discharger to: 
1.  Immediately discontinue any illicit connection or prohibited discharge to the city's stormwater drainage system; 
2.  Immediately contain or divert any flow of water off the property, where the flow is occurring in violation of any provision of this chapter; and 
3.  Immediately discontinue any other violation of this chapter. 
A cease and desist order shall require the discharger to pay a one-thousand-dollar penalty fee to the city for the issuance thereof. 
D.  Termination of service. When the public works director, city engineer, or any authorized designee finds any discharger who has a direct connection into the city's stormwater drainage system or has violated an administrative order, the city engineer may terminate storm drain service to the discharger. The discharger shall be liable for all costs for termination of storm drain service incurred by the city. This provision is in addition to any other statues, rules or regulations authorizing termination of service for delinquency payment or for any other reasons. Storm drain service shall be reinstituted by the city engineer after the discharger has complied with all the provisions of the administrative order. The discharger shall also be liable for all costs for reinstituting storm drain service. 
E.  Immediate termination of service. The city engineer may immediately suspend storm drain service and any nonstormwater discharge permit when such suspension is necessary, in the opinion of the city engineer, to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or the environment, or which significantly or could significantly cause pollution to the receiving waters, ground and/or storm drainage system of the city. Any discharger notified that their storm drain service has been suspended shall immediately cease and eliminate the discharge into the city stormwater drainage system. 
In the event of failure to comply voluntarily with the termination of service order, the city engineer shall take appropriate steps, including immediate severance of all applicable storm drain connections. All persons responsible for a discharge that may endanger the health or welfare of the community or the environment shall be liable for all costs incurred by the city in terminating storm drain service. Storm drain service shall be reinstituted by the city engineer after the actual or threatened discharge has been eliminated. A detailed written statement, submitted by the discharger, describing the cause of the harmful contribution and the measures to prevent any future occurrence, shall be submitted to the city engineer within ten (10) working days of the date of storm drain service termination. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 5(Exh. D), 10-23-13)  
13.16.443 - Administrative hearing. 
A.  Any discharger may request, or the public works director may order, an administrative hearing, at which time, a discharger who causes or allows, or who has caused or allowed, an unauthorized discharge to enter into the city's stormwater drainage system or who continues to allow a violation of this chapter to exist, may show cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken against him. The city manager, or the city manager's designee, shall preside over the administrative hearing, at which time each party, including the discharger and the public works director or any authorized designee, shall have the right to present evidence. 
B.  A notice of hearing shall be served on the discharger specifying the time and place of the hearing and referencing the specific violation of this chapter, the reasons why the action is to be taken and the proposed enforcement action, directing the discharger to show cause before the hearing officer why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested at least ten (10) working days prior to the hearing. Service of the notice of hearing may be made on any agent or officer of the discharger. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 5(Exh. D), 10-23-13)  
13.16.444 - Administrative civil penalties. 
A.  Pursuant to California Government Code §§ 54739 and 54740.5, the public works director may issue an administrative complaint to any person who violates this chapter, any prohibition or limitation thereof or any compliance order, cease and desist order, stop work order or injunction. The administrative complaint shall allege the act or failure to act that constitutes the violation, the proposed civil penalty, and the authority under which it is imposed. 
B.  The administrative complaint, served on the alleged violator by personal delivery or by certified mail, shall inform the person served that a hearing before the public works director shall be conducted within sixty (60) days of the service of the complaint. The right to a hearing may be waived by the person who has been issued the administrative complaint, in which case the city shall not conduct a hearing. A person dissatisfied with the decision of the public works director may appeal to the city council of the city of Coachella within thirty (30) days of notice of the director's decision. 
C.  If after the hearing, or appeal, if any, it is found that the person has violated reporting or discharge requirements, the public works director or city council may assess a civil penalty against that person. In determining the amount of the civil penalty, the public works director or city council may take into consideration all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the economic benefit derived through any noncompliance, the nature and persistence of the violation, the length of time over which the violation occurs and corrective action, if any, attempted or taken by the discharger. 
D.  Civil penalties may be assessed as follows: 
1.  In an amount which shall not exceed three thousand dollars ($3,000) for each day for failing or refusing to timely comply with any compliance order established by the city; 
2.  In an amount which shall not exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000) per violation for each day of discharge in violation of any discharge limitation, area-wide urban runoff permit condition, or requirement issued, reissued or adopted by the city; 
3.  In an amount which shall not exceed ten dollars ($10.00) per gallon for discharges in violation of any stop work order, cease and desist order or other orders, or prohibition issued, reissued, or adopted by the city. 
4.  The amount of any civil penalties imposed under this section which have remained delinquent for a period of sixty (60) days shall constitute a lien against the real property of the discharger from which the discharge originated resulting in the imposition of the civil penalty. The lien provided herein shall have no force and effect until recorded with the county recorder and when recorded shall have the force and effect and priority of a judgment lien and continue for ten (10) years from the time of recording unless sooner released, and shall be renewable in accordance with the provisions of California Code of Civil Procedure §§ 683.110 to 683.220, inclusive. 
5.  All monies collected under this section shall be deposited in a special account of the city and shall be made available for the monitoring, treatment, and control of discharges into the city's storm drainage system or for other mitigation measures. 
E.  Unless appealed, an order imposing administrative civil penalties shall become effective and final upon issuance thereof, and payment shall become due within thirty (30) days of issuance of an invoice by the city of Coachella. Copies of these orders shall be served by personal service or by registered mail upon the party served with the administrative complaint and upon other persons who appeared at the hearing and requested a copy. 
F.  The city may, at its option, elect to petition the superior court to confirm any order establishing civil penalties and enter judgment in conformity therewith in accordance with the provisions of California Code of Civil Procedure §§ 1285 to 1287.6, inclusive. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 5(Exh. D), 10-23-13)  
13.16.445 - Compensation for damages. 
Any person who damages monitoring equipment, has the potential to affect or affects human health or the environment, discharges pollutants into the city's storm drainage system which causes or has the potential to cause increased maintenance of the system, non-routine inspection or sampling of the system, system blockages or other damage or interference in the city's stormwater drainage system, or causes any other damages, including the imposition of fines or penalties on the city by federal, state or local regulatory agencies, shall be liable to the city for all damages and additional costs, including fines and penalties. An administrative fee, which shall be fixed by the city manager based on the city's current overhead cost allocation percentage, shall be added to these charges and shall be payable to the city within thirty (30) calendar days of invoicing. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 5(Exh. D), 10-23-13)  
13.16.446 - Appeals. 
Any decision of the public works director may be appealed. An appeal must be initiated within ten (10) working days after receipt of the notice of any decision or action by filing, with the public works director, a letter of appeal briefly stating therein the basis for such appeal. The hearing on appeal shall be held on a date no more than fifteen (15) working days after receipt of the letter of appeal. The appellant shall be given at least five working days notice of the time and place of the hearing. The city manager, or the city manager's designee, shall provide the appellant and any other interested party the reasonable opportunity to be heard and in order to show cause why the determination of public works director should not be upheld. Within forty-five (45) working days of the hearing, the city manager, or the city manager's designee, shall make a written decision regarding the appeal. The decision of the city manager, or the city manager's designee, shall be final. The imposition of fines or penalties shall be stayed during the appeal period unless the public works director determines that such a stay would threaten the public safety, health or welfare. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 5(Exh. D), 10-23-13)  
13.16.447 - Violations deemed a public nuisance. 
A.  In addition to the penalties established by this chapter, any violation of this chapter and any threat to public health, safety or welfare is declared and deemed a public nuisance. Such public nuisance may be summarily abated and/or remedied by the public works director, and/or civil action to abate, enjoin or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken by the city attorney. 
B.  The cost of such abatement, remediation and/or restoration shall be borne by the owner, lessee or tenant of the property causing the violation. The cost thereof shall be a lien upon and against the property and such lien shall continue in existence until the same shall be paid. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 5(Exh. D), 10-23-13) 
Judicial Enforcement Remedies  
13.16.540 - Legal action. 
A.  The city attorney may commence an action for appropriate legal, equitable or injunctive relief in the municipal or superior court of the county against any person who has violated or continues to violate any provision of this chapter, the basin plan, federal or state discharge standards or permit conditions, or who violates the requirements of any administrative order. 
B.  In addition to the penalties provided in this chapter, the public works director may recover all reasonable attorney fees, court costs, court reporter's fees, expenses of litigation by appropriate suit of law against the person(s) found to have violated any provision of this chapter or the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued thereunder and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the city of Coachella. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 5(Exh. D), 10-23-13)  
13.16.541 - Civil penalties. 
A.  Persons who continue to violate any provision of this chapter shall be liable to the city for a maximum civil penalty of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) but not less than three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) per violation per day. In the case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation. 
B.  In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the discharger's violation, corrective actions by the discharger, the compliance history of the discharger, and any factor as justice requires. 
C.  Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for taking any other action against a discharger. The city may institute further legal action to collect such penalties in the event that the violator of this chapter fails or refuses to pay said penalty within thirty (30) days from the date that it has been assessed. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 5(Exh. D), 10-23-13)  
13.16.542 - Criminal prosecution. 
A.  Any person who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this chapter or permit conditions, or who violates any administrative order or any other provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, which, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine of not less than three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) and/or by imprisonment for a period of not more than six (6) months. Each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for every day during any portion of which any violation of any provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such discharger, and shall be punishable therefore as provided by this section. 
B.  Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan, or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this chapter, stormwater permit, or order issued hereunder, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this ordinance shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) per day of violation or by imprisonment or by both. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 5(Exh. D), 10-23-13)  
13.16.543 - Falsifying information. 
Any person who knowingly makes any false statement, representation, record, report, plan or other document filed with the city, or who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate monitoring devices or methods required under this chapter, shall have violated this chapter and shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 5(Exh. D), 10-23-13)  
13.16.544 - Remedies nonexclusive. 
Each remedy for the enforcement of this chapter is nonexclusive, and the city may seek cumulative remedies, except that multiple monetary fines or penalties may not be imposed for any single violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 5(Exh. D), 10-23-13)  
13.16.545 - Consecutive violations. 
Each day in which a violation of this chapter occurs and each separate failure to comply with any enforcement order issued pursuant to this chapter is a separate violation, separately punishable. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 5(Exh. D), 10-23-13)  
13.16.640 - Business inspection fees. 
Business inspection fees in an amount established by the city council shall be collected for those businesses requiring regular compliance inspections under the areawide urban stormwater run-off permit. Affected businesses shall include industrial businesses subject to the California statewide general NPDES permit for stormwater discharges associated with industrial activities, commercial businesses listed in the areawide urban stormwater run-off permit and other industrial and commercial sites/sources that the city determines may contribute a significant pollutant load to the municipal separate storm sewer system. The inspection fee shall pay for inspection time including the preparation of inspection reports, review of written stormwater pollution prevention plans, stormwater runoff sampling activities, enforcement response and follow-up as needed. The inspection fees may be adopted by ordinance or resolution and shall be subject to periodic review and revision by ordinance resolution, as part of the city's updated and modified schedule of service fees, inspection fees and processing fees. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 5(Exh. D), 10-23-13) 
General Clauses  
13.16.740 - Severability. 
If any provisions, paragraph, word, section or article of this chapter is invalidated by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions, paragraph, words, sections, and other chapters, shall not be affected and shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 5(Exh. D), 10-23-13)  
13.16.741 - City's right of revision. 
The city council may establish by ordinance and/or resolution more stringent limitations and requirements related to discharges into the city's stormwater drainage system, if deemed necessary. 
(Ord. No. 1057, § 5(Exh. D), 10-23-13)  
Chapter 13.20 - ELECTRIC POWER COMPANIES 
 
13.20.010 - Establishment of rules and regulations. 
In accordance with the Water Code of the state of California, the city council of the city does establish the following basic rules and regulations covering any district providing electric power within the limits of the city, without limiting the same to those rules and regulations hereinafter set forth, but in addition incorporating in this chapter any and all rules and regulations heretofore or hereafter adopted by the public utilities commission of the state of California as may be more specifically adopted by resolution of the city council of the city, either setting the same forth in full or by reference to the existing rule of the public utilities commission. 
(Prior code § 8½-1)  
13.20.020 - Delegation of authority. 
The city council may employ such officers, experts, engineers, statisticians, accountants, inspectors, clerks and employees as it deems necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter or to perform the duties and exercise the powers conferred upon the city council by law or by this chapter, or may contract for service from any other agency of the state or any other governmental entity for any service deemed necessary by said council. 
(Prior code § 8½-2)  
13.20.030 - Definitions. 
Unless the context otherwise requires, the definitions and general provisions set forth shall govern the construction of this chapter. 
"Corporation" includes a corporation, a company, an association, a district or political subdivision of the state, and a joint stock association. 
"Electric plant" includes all real estate, fixtures and personal property owned, controlled, operated, or managed in connection with or to facilitate the production, generation, transmission, delivery, or furnishing of electricity for light, heat, or power, and all conduits, ducts, or other devices, materials, apparatus, or property for containing, holding, or carrying conductors used or to be used for the transmission of electricity for light, heat, or power. 
"Electrical corporation" includes every corporation or persons or district or political subdivision owning, controlling, operating, or managing any electric plant for compensation within this state, except where electricity is generated on or distributed by the producer through private property alone solely for his or her own use or the use of his or her tenants and not for sale to others. 
"Person" includes an individual, a firm and a copartnership. 
"Public or any portion thereof" means the public generally, or any limited portion of the public, including a person, private corporation, or other entity for which service is performed or to which the commodity is delivered. 
"Public utility" means any district formed pursuant to Division 11, Part 2 of the California Water Code, or other municipal corporation or governmental agency of the state of California, or electrical corporation engaged in selling or delivering within the city electrical power service, either directly or for resale to the public or any portion thereof. "Public utility" shall not, for the purpose of this chapter, mean any utility or agency subject to the jurisdiction, control and regulation of the public utilities commission of the state of California. 
"Rates" include rates and charges unless the context indicates otherwise. 
(Prior code § 8½-3)  
13.20.040 - Reports. 
A.  Every public utility shall furnish to the council in such form and detail as the council prescribes all tabulations, computations, maps, profiles, agreements, contracts, franchises, reports, books, accounts, papers, records, or other documents or information in any way reflecting on the operation of such utility or relating to its property or affecting its business in such form and at such time as the council may direct. 
B.  No information furnished to the council by such public utility, except matters as are specifically required to be open to public inspection by the provisions of this chapter, shall be open to public inspection or made public except on order of the council. Any officer or employee of the city or any member of the council who divulges any such information, except that which is authorized to be open to the public, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
C.  The council may establish any further rules and regulations deemed necessary by said council for the furnishing of the information above set forth, or may require, as is deemed necessary, such public utility to maintain certain prescribed forms of accounts, records, including but not limited to proper and adequate depreciation and inventories. 
(Prior code § 8½-4)  
13.20.050 - Regulations and facilities. 
A.  The council may supervise and regulate every public utility in the city and may do all things whether specifically designated in this chapter or in addition thereto which are necessary and convenient in the exercise of such power and jurisdiction. 
B.  Every public utility shall obey and comply with every order, decision, direction or rule made or prescribed by the council in the matters specified in this chapter, or any other matter in any way relating to or affecting its business as a public utility, and shall do everything necessary or proper to secure compliance therewith by all of its officers, agents and employees. 
C.  Whenever the council, after a hearing, finds that the rules, practices, equipment, appliances, facilities, or service of any public utility or the methods of manufacture, distribution, transmission, storage, or supply employed by it, are unjust, unreasonable, unsafe, improper, inadequate, or insufficient, the council shall determine and by order or rule fix the rules, practices, equipment, appliances, facilities, service or methods to be observed, furnished, constructed, enforced, or employed. The council shall prescribe rules for the performance of any service or the furnishing of any commodity of the character furnished or supplied by any public utility and shall furnish such commodity or render such service within the time and upon the conditions provided in such rules. 
D.  Whenever the council, after a hearing, finds that additions, extensions, repairs, or improvements to, or changes in, the existing plant, equipment, apparatus, facilities, or other physical property of any public utility or of any two or more public utilities ought reasonably to be made, or that new structures should be erected, to promote the security or convenience of its employees or the public, or in any other way to secure adequate service or facilities, the council shall make and serve an order directing that such additions, extensions, repairs, improvements, or changes be made or such structures be erected in the manner and within the time specified in the order. If the council orders the erection of a new structure, it may also fix the site thereof. If the order requires joint action by two or more public utilities, the commission shall so notify them and shall fix a reasonable time within which they may agree upon the portion or division of the cost which each shall bear. If at the expiration of such time the public utilities shall fail to file with the council a statement that an agreement has been made for a division or apportionment of the cost, the council may, after further hearing, make an order fixing the proportion of such cost to be borne by such public utility and the manner in which payment shall be made or secured. 
E.  The council may, after a hearing, by general or special orders, rules, or otherwise, require every public utility to construct, maintain and operate its line, plant, system, equipment, apparatus and premises in such manner as to promote and safeguard the health and safety of its employees, passengers, customers, and the public, and may prescribe, among other things, the installation, use, maintenance and operation of appropriate safety or other devices or appliances, establish uniform or other standards of construction and equipment, and require the performance of any other act which the health or safety of its employees, customers, or the public may demand. 
F.  The council may, after a hearing, do any and all things as set forth in the Public Utilities Code of the state of California that may be accomplished by the public utilities commission of the state of California in its regulation of electrical power companies deemed public utilities in the state of California. 
(Prior code § 8½-5)  
13.20.060 - Rates. 
A.  All charges demanded or received by any public utility or by any two or more public utilities for any product or commodity furnished or to be furnished, or any service rendered or to be rendered, shall be just and reasonable. Every unjust or unreasonable charge demanded or received for such product or commodity or service is unlawful. 
B.  No public utility shall as to rates, charges, service, facilities, or in any other respect, make or grant any preference or advantage to any corporation or person or subject any corporation or person to any prejudice or disadvantage. No public utility shall establish or maintain any unreasonable difference as to rates, charges, service, facilities, or in any other respect, either as between localities or as between classes under this section. 
C.  No public utility shall raise any rate or so alter any classification, contract, practice, or rule as to result in an increase in any rate except upon a showing before the council and a finding by the council that such increase is justified. The council may establish such rules as it considers reasonable and proper for each class of public utility providing for the nature of the showing required to be made in support of proposed increase the form and manner of the presentation thereof. 
D.  The council may, upon a hearing, investigate a single rate, classification, rule, contract, or practice, or any number thereof, or the entire schedule or schedules of rates, classifications, rules, contracts and practices, or any thereof, of any public utility, and may establish new rates, classifications, rules, contracts, or practices or schedule or schedules in lieu thereof. 
(Prior code § 8½-6)  
13.20.070 - Hearings and judicial review. 
All hearings by the council in this chapter shall be held in accordance with the regulations set forth in the Public Utilities Code of the state of California, in accordance with those held by the public utilities commission of said state, and all provisions therewith to the extent possible by this council shall be followed. 
(Prior code § 8½-7)  
13.20.080 - Violations. 
A.  Whenever the city is of the opinion that any public utility is failing or omitting or about to fail or omit, to do anything required of it by law, or by any order, decision, rule, direction, or requirement of the city, or is doing anything or about to do anything, or permitting anything or about to permit anything to be done, in violation of law or of any order, decision, rule, direction, or requirement of such city, it shall direct the attorney of such city to commence an action or proceeding in the superior court in and for Riverside County, for the purpose of having such violations or threatened violations stopped and prevented, either by mandamus or injunction. The attorney for the city shall thereupon begin such action or proceeding in the name of the people of the city, by petition to such superior court, alleging the violation or threatened violation complained of and praying for appropriate relief by way of mandamus or injunction. 
B.  Any public utility which violates or fails to comply with any provision of the constitution of this state or of this chapter, or which fails or neglects to comply with any part or provision of any order, decision, decree, rule, direction, demand, or requirement of the city, in a case in which a penalty has not otherwise been provided, is deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
C.  Every violation of the provisions of this chapter or of any part of any order, decision, decree, rule, direction, demand, or requirement of the city by any corporation or person is a separate and distinct offense, and in case of a continuing violation each day's continuance thereof shall be a separate and distinct offense. 
D.  In construing and enforcing the provisions of this chapter relating to penalties, the act, omission, or failure of any officer, agent, or employee of any public utility, acting within the scope of his official duties or employment, shall in every case be the act, omission, or failure of such public utility. 
E.  Every public utility and every officer, agent, or employee of any public utility, who violates or fails to comply with, or who procures, aids, or abets any violation by any public utility of any provision of the constitution of the state, or of this chapter, or who fails to comply with any part of any order, decision, rule, direction, demand, or requirement of the city, or who procures, aids, or abets any public utility in such violation or noncompliance in a case in which a penalty has not otherwise been provided, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Prior code § 8½-8)  
Title 15 - BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION 
Chapters:  
Chapter 15.04 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1099, §§ 3, 4, adopted Jan. 11, 2017, repealed the former ch. 15.04, §§ 15.04.010, 15.04.020, and enacted a new chapter as set out herein. The former ch. 15.04 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 1061, § 4, adopted on Dec. 11, 2013. 
 
15.04.010 - Adoption of Chapter 1 of the California Building Code. 
Except as provided in this chapter, the certain building code known and designated as the 2016 California Building Code (CBC) Chapter 1, as adopted by the State of California, based on the 2015 International Building Code as published by the International Code Council, shall become the administrative provisions of the city Coachella for regulating the construction, erection, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, demolition, conversion, occupancy, equipment, use and occupancy and maintenance of all buildings and/or structures in the city. Chapter 1 of the 2016 California Building Code will be on file for public examination in the offices of the building official. 
(Ord. No. 1099, § 4, 1-11-17)  
15.04.020 - Amendments to Chapter 1, Division II of the California Building Code. 
A.  "Sub-section 105.1 Required." is amended to read as follows: 
Any owner or authorized agent who intends to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by this code, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permit. The City of Coachella requires a building permit for the following projects: 
1.  Hardscape work including concrete flatwork, patio slabs, and pavers, except walkways exempted under Section 105.2. 
2.  New driveways made of concrete, pavers, grass-crete or comparable permeable or impermeable surfaces. 
3.  Removal and repair of existing masonry walls for the purpose of installation of gates and driveways. 
4.  Tent structures and canvas shade structures and coverings over 200 square feet, unless exempt as part of a Special Event Permit. 
5.  Storage sheds and metal containers in excess of 120 square feet. 
6.  Re-surfacing and re-striping of existing parking lots. 
105.1(a) Prohibited Block Walls:Notwithstanding the provisions of the 2016 California Building Code, the City shall prohibit post-tension masonry walls. 
B.  "Sub-section 105.2 Work exempt from permit", Items 2, 4, and 6 under "Building" are hereby deleted and replaced in their entirety as follows: 
2.  Fences conforming to design requirements of Title 17 of this Code, not exceeding a height of 2 feet (610 mm). 
4.  Retaining walls that are not over 2 feet (610 mm) in height measured from the top of the footing to the top of the wall, unless supporting a surcharge or impounding Class I, II or IIIA liquids. 
6.  Sidewalks in the side or rear yard not more than 30 inches (762 mm) above adjacent grade, and not over any basement or story below and are not part of an accessible route. 
C.  The "Electrical" provision of Section 105.2 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Electrical: 
1.  Listed cord and plug connected temporary decorative lighting. 
2.  Reinstallation of attachment plug receptacles, but not the outlets therefore. 
3.  Repair or replacement of branch circuit overcurrent devices, listed for the use, of the required capacity in the same location. 
4.  Installation or maintenance of communications wiring, devices, appliances, apparatus or equipment. 
5.  Installation or replacement of equipment such as lamps and of electrical utilization equipment approved for connection to suitable permanently installed receptacles, Replacement of flush or snap switches, fuses, lamp sockets, and receptacles, and other minor maintenance and repair work, such as replacing worn cords and tightening connections on a wiring device. 
6.  The process of manufacturing, testing, servicing, or repairing electrical equipment or apparatus. 
C.  Section 105.2 Work exempt from permit, is amended by adding thereto language to read as follows: 
Grading: 
See Appendix J, Section J103.2 Exemptions, for work exempt from grading permits. 
D.  Section 113, Board of Appeals is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 113
BOARD OF APPEALS 
113.1 General. For all occupancies not provided for under the authority provided in the California Building Code (CBC), (California) Chapter 1, Section1.8.8, an appeals board shall be created, and the appeals board shall be applicable for all buildings and structures within the City of Coachella. 
113.2 Definition. The following term shall, for the purpose of this section, have the meaning shown. 
ACCESSIBLE APPEALS BOARD. The board of the city which is authorized by the governing body of the city to hear appeals brought by any person regarding action taken by the building department of the city in enforcement of the authority to grant exceptions to the standards and specifications contained in California Health and Safety Code section 19957. (Note: The establishment of this board is pursuant to Health and Safety Code 19957.5) 
113.3 Appeals Board Defined. The Housing Appeals Board, Accessible Appeals Board, and the Local Appeals Board shall be for the purposes of this code and may be one in the same and shall be referred to herein throughout this code as the Appeals Board. 
113.4 Qualifications. In addition to the qualifications established in CBC Section 1.8.8, at least two members shall be physically disabled, if the Appeals Board is to hear appeals relating to accessibility issues pursuant to CBC, (California) Chapter 1, Section 1.9.1.5 (Special conditions for persons with disabilities requiring appeals action ratification; Pursuant to Health and Safety Code 19957.5) 
E.  Section 114.4, Violation penalties, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
114.4 Violation penalties. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions, regulations, requirements, additions, amendments and/or deletions of this code is guilty of a misdemeanor and the penalty for such a misdemeanor shall be as set forth in Chapter 3.48.090 of the City of Coachella Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 1099, § 4, 1-11-17)  
Chapter 15.08 - BUILDING CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1099, §§ 3, 4, adopted Jan. 11, 2017, repealed the former ch. 15.08, §§ 15.08.010—15.08.030, and enacted a new chapter as set out herein. The former ch. 15.08 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1061 § 4, adopted on Dec. 11, 2013. 
 
15.08.010 - Adoption of California Building Code. 
Except as amended in this chapter, those certain building codes known and designated as the 2016 California Building Code (CBC), including Chapters 2 through 35, and Appendix C, G, H, I, and J as adopted by the State of California, based on the 2015 International Building Code as published by the International Code Council, except as amended herein, shall become the building code of the City of Coachella for regulating the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, demolition, conversion, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area and maintenance of all buildings and/or structures in the city. The 2016 California Building Code and its adopted appendices and amendments will be on file for public examination in the offices of the building official 
(Ord. No. 1099, § 4, 1-11-17)  
15.08.020 - Enforcement. 
Pursuant to California Building Code, (California) Chapter 1, Section 1.11.2.1, the delegated enforcement official responsible for the enforcement of the building standards relating to fire and panic safety and other regulations of the state fire marshal as they relate to Group R, Division 3 Dwellings shall be the Building Official. 
(Ord. No. 1099, § 4, 1-11-17)  
15.08.030 - Amendments to the California Building Code. 
A.  Automatic Sprinkler Systems. 
1.  Section 903.2 of the California Fire and Building Code is deleted in its entirety with all subsections to remain and replaced with the following: 
903.2 Where required. In all new buildings and structures which are 3,600 square feet or greater, an approved automatic sprinkler system shall be provided regardless of occupancy classification. Where the Sections 903.2.1—903.2.19 of the California Fire Code require more restrictive requirements than those listed below, the more restrictive requirement shall take precedence. 
Exception: Unless required elsewhere in this code or the California Building Code, automatic fire sprinkler systems shall not be required for the following: 
1.  Detached Group U occupancies used for agricultural or livestock purposes, less than 5,500 square feet, and having setback distances of 50 feet or more from the property line and other buildings. 
2.  Detached non-combustible equestrian arena shade canopies that are open on all sides and used for riding only - no commercial, assembly or storage uses. 
3.  Detached fabric or non-combustible shade structures that are open on all sides and used to shade playground equipment, temporary storage of vehicles and dining areas with no cooking. 
4.  Detached Group U occupancy greenhouses less than 5,500 square feet. 
5.  Where determined by the Fire Chief that no major life safety hazard exists, and the fuel load does not pose a significant threat to firefighter safety or to other structures or property, automatic fire sprinklers may be exempted. 
One- and two-family dwellings shall have an automatic fire sprinkler system regardless of square footage in accordance with the California Residential Code. Fire sprinkler systems shall be installed in mobile homes, manufactured homes and multifamily manufactured homes with two dwelling units in accordance with Title 25 of the California Code of Regulations. 
The following exceptions in the California Fire Code shall not be allowed: 
a.  Exception in Section 903.2.3 
b.  Exceptions 2 in Section 903.2.11.3 
B.  Section 1904.3 is hereby amended by adding thereto Section 1904.3.1 and 1904.3.2 to read as follows: 
1904.3.1 Type of cement. All concrete used in floor slabs where floor slab is supported by earth or fill of any kind and all concrete used in footings, foundations, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, driveways and walls supporting or retaining earth or fill shall contain only sulfate resistant Type V. Portland cement. Portland cement concrete shall be composed of not less than four hundred seventy (470) pound (five sacks) of Portland cement per cubic yard of concrete, except that any concrete containing an approved water reducing admixture, used in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations shall contain not less than four hundred eighteen (418) pound (4.5 sacks) of Portland cement per cubic yard of concrete. 
C.  Section 1907.1 is hereby amended by adding thereto Section 1910.1.1 and 19101.2 to read as follows: 
1907.1.1 Base course required. A base course shall be provided beneath the concrete floor slab of any structure consisting of at least a four inch thickness of a limited capillarity material. Base course shall be either clean graded gravel or crushed rock. Material shall pass a two inch sieve and be retained in a one-fourth inch sieve. Capillary break in conformance with the California Green Building Standards Code Chapter 4, Division 4.5 is required. 
1907.1.2 Expansion protection for slab. A two-inch layer of dry washed sand shall be placed on top of the base course under of a ten (10) mil thick water-proof membrane. This waterproof membrane shall be placed on top of the base course under all slabs to provide for expansion protection for concrete. 
D.  Section G101.5 is hereby added to Appendix G, FLOOD-RESISTANT CONSTRUCTION, to read as follows: 
G101.5 Administration and Enforcement. For the purpose of the administration and enforcement of this Appendix G, Flood-Resistant Construction, the Building Official shall mean the City Director of Public Works or their designated representative. 
E.  Appendix J, GRADING, is hereby amended as follows: 
1.  Section J101.3 is hereby added to read as follows: 
J101.3 Administration and Enforcement. For the purpose of the administration and enforcement of this Appendix Chapter, Grading, the Building Official shall mean the City Director of Public Works or their designated representative. 
2.  The "Exception" in Section J104.3 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Exception: A soils report is not required where the building official determines that the nature of the work applied for is such that a report is not necessary. 
3.  Section J107.4 is hereby amended by adding thereto Section J107.4.1 to read as follows: 
J107.4.1 Using alkaline fill soil. Soils or materials which may have an alkali or sulfate content shall not be relocated, placed or used as fill at any location within the city unless a test sample of the soil is first obtained under the direction of the department of building and tests conducted by an approved testing agency indicates that the alkali or sulfate content of the soil sample does not exceed the amount in the natural soil at the location where the fill is to be placed. The director of building may waive the test sample requirements for good cause. 
4.  Section J109.5 is hereby added to read as follows: 
J109.5 Drainage Devices. 
J109.5.1 Minimum gradients. Except on slopes, drainage devices shall be constructed with minimum gradients as follows: Poured in place cement concrete construction - 0.5%; Shotcrete concrete construction - 0.5%; Asphaltic concrete pavement - 1.0%; Soils swales - 0.5%; Pipes - 0.4%. 
J109.5.2 Slopes. Drainage devices constructed on slopes shall have a minimum gradient of five percent (5.0%). Such drainage devices shall be constructed of shotcrete or poured in place concrete with suitable reinforcement. Closed piping, unpaved swales and Asphaltic concrete drainage structures shall not be used for slope drainage. 
J109.5.3 Erosion prevention. Drainage devices shall be constructed to convey drainage to an established private or public watercourse, channel, storm drain or public street, and shall be designed to prevent erosion. 
J109.5.4 Device design. Drainage devices conveying water to the public streets shall drain over driveway approaches, through curb drains, through sidewalk culverts, or through non-concentrated sheet flow over the curb as designated by the City Engineer. 
(Ord. No. 1099, § 4, 1-11-17)  
Chapter 15.12 - ELECTRICAL CODE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1099, §§ 3, 4, adopted Jan. 11, 2017, repealed the former ch. 15.12, §§ 15.12.010, 15.12.020, and enacted a new chapter as set out herein. The former ch. 15.12 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 1061, § 4, adopted on Dec. 11, 2013. 
 
15.12.010 - Adoption of the electrical code. 
Except as provided in this chapter, the 2016 California Electrical Code, including Annex Chapters A, B, C, D, E, F, and G, as adopted by the State of California, based on the 2015 National Electrical Code as published by the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA), shall become the Electrical Code of the City of Coachella, regulating all installation, arrangement, alteration, repair, use and other operation of electrical wiring, connections, fixtures and other electrical appliances on premises within the City. The California Electrical Code is on file for public examination in the office of the Building Official. 
(Ord. No. 1099, § 4, 1-11-17)  
15.12.020 - Amendments to the California Electrical Code. 
The 2016 Edition of the California Electrical Code is hereby adopted with no amendments. 
(Ord. No. 1099, § 4, 1-11-17)  
Chapter 15.16 - MECHANICAL CODE[4] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1099, §§ 3, 4, adopted Jan 11, 2017, repealed the former ch. 15.16, §§ 15.16.010, 15.16.020, and enacted a new chapter as set out herein. The former ch. 15.16 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 1061, § 4, adopted on Dec. 11, 2013. 
 
15.16.010 - Adoption of the mechanical code. 
Except as provided in this chapter, the 2016 California Mechanical Code, including Appendix Chapters Appendices A, B, C, and D as adopted by the State of California, based on the 2016 Uniform Mechanical Code as published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials (IAPMO), shall be and become the Mechanical Code of the city of Coachella, regulating and controlling the design, construction, installation, quality of materials, location, operation and maintenance of heating, ventilating, cooling, refrigeration systems, incinerators and other miscellaneous heat producing appliances. The California Mechanical Code is on file for public examination in the office of the building official. 
(Ord. No. 1099, § 4, 1-11-17)  
15.16.020 - Amendments to the California Mechanical Code. 
The 2016 Edition of the California Mechanical Code is hereby adopted with no amendments. 
(Ord. No. 1099, § 4, 1-11-17)  
Chapter 15.20 - PLUMBING CODE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1099, §§ 3, 4, adopted Jan. 11, 2017, repealed the former ch. 15.20, §§ 15.20.010, 15.20.020, and enacted a new chapter as set out herein. The former ch. 15.20 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1061, § 4, adopted on Dec. 11, 2013. 
 
15.20.010 - Adoption of the plumbing code. 
Except as provided in this chapter, the 2016 California Plumbing Code, including Appendix Chapters A, B, D, G, I and K as adopted by the State of California, based on the 2015 Uniform Plumbing Code as published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials (IAPMO), shall be and become the Plumbing Code of the City of Coachella, regulating erection, installation, alteration, repair, relocation, replacement, maintenance or use of plumbing systems within the City. The California Plumbing Code will be on file for public examination in the office of the Building Official. 
(Ord. No. 1099, § 4, 1-11-17)  
15.20.020 - Amendments to the California Plumbing Code. 
The 2016 Edition of the California Plumbing Code is hereby adopted with no amendments. 
(Ord. No. 1099, § 4, 1-11-17)  
Chapter 15.24 - FIRE CODE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1099, §§ 3, 4, adopted Jan. 11, 2017, repealed the former ch. 15.24, §§ 15.24.010—15.24.030, and enacted a new chapter as set out herein. The former ch. 15.24 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 1061, § 4 , adopted on Dec. 11, 2013. 
 
15.24.010 - Adoption of the fire code. 
Except as stated in this Section or as amended below in Section 15.24.030, all of the provisions and appendices of the 2016 California Fire Code, inclusive of all of the inclusions and exclusions set for in each chapter's matrix, are hereby adopted and shall apply to the City of Coachella. In addition, the following provisions that are excluded in the 2016 California Fire Code are hereby adopted - Chapter 1, Division II of the California Fire Code is hereby adopted, except that Section 103.2 and 108.3 are not adopted, and Chapters 3, 25, and Sections 403.12, 503, 510.2, and 1103.2 are adopted. 
(Ord. No. 1099, § 4, 1-11-17)  
15.24.020 - Expressed findings. 
The City of Coachella finds the following: 
The Fire Department hereby finds that the proposed amendments to the Fire Code are reasonable and necessary because of local climactic, geologic and topographical conditions within the City of Coachella. This finding is supported and based upon the following express findings which address each of these conditions and present the local situation which make the proposed amendments necessary. 
I.  Climatic Conditions: 
A.  The City of Coachella located in Riverside County is located in Southern California and covers a vast and varied geographic area. The base climate in western Riverside County consists of semi-arid Mediterranean weather patterns. Eastern Riverside County is a desert area with Mohave Desert temperatures and weather patterns. Those two primary areas are divided by the San Bernardino Mountain Range. Both areas outside of the mountain terrain annually experience extended periods of high temperatures with little or no precipitation. Hot, dry winds, which may reach speeds of 70 m.p.h. or greater, are common to the area. Examples are: Santa Ana/Foehn winds, afternoon surface-heating generated winds, and prevailing desert winds. 
These climatic conditions cause extreme drying of vegetation and common building materials. Frequent periods of drought and low humidity add to the fire danger. This predisposes the area to large destructive fires (conflagration) which necessitates rapid identification, locating and extinguishment of all fires in the smallest stage possible. In addition to directly damaging or destroying buildings, these fires are also prone to disrupt utility services throughout the County. Obstacles generated by a strong wind, such as fallen trees, street lights and utility poles, will greatly impact the response time to reach an incident scene. During these winds, the inability to use aerial type firefighting apparatus would further decrease our ability to stop fires in large buildings and place rescue personnel at increased risk of injury. 
B.  Although Riverside County and the City of Coachella occasionally experiences periods of significant drought, the County can also experience periods of substantial rainfall. Annual rainfall varying from three (3) inches in Blythe to over thirty three (33) inches in Pine Cove. When Riverside County does experience heavy rain, or rain over a period of days or weeks, many areas of the County are subject to flooding. Runoff from rain drains either naturally into rivers, washes, and creeks or into flood control facilities. Flash flooding is also a common problem, especially in the Coachella Valley and the easterly portions of the county. Flash flooding is typically associated with short duration, high intensity precipitation events often associated with summer thunderstorms. Such events can occur even during a drought. 
C.  Water demand in densely populated Southern California far exceeds the quantity supplied by natural precipitation; and although the population continues to grow, the already-taxed water supply does not. California is projected to increase in population by nearly ten million (10,000,000) over the next quarter of a century with fifty (50) percent of that growth centered in Southern California. Due to storage capacities and consumption, and a limited amount of rainfall future water allocation is not fully dependable. This necessitates the need for additional and on-site fire protection features. It would also leave tall buildings vulnerable to uncontrolled fires due to a lack of available water and an inability to pump sufficient quantities of available water to floors in a fire. 
D.  These dry climatic conditions and winds contribute to the rapid spread of even small fires originating in high-density housing or vegetation. These fires spread very quickly and create a need for increased levels of fire protection. The added protection of fire sprinkler systems and other fire protection features such as identification and notification will supplement normal fire department response by providing immediate protection for the building occupants and by containing and controlling the fire spread to the area of origin. Fire sprinkler systems will also reduce the use of water for firefighting by as much as fifty (50) to seventy-five (75) percent. 
II.  Topographical Conditions: 
A.  Natural: The topographical conditions of Riverside County varies from three hundred (300) feet below sea-level, flat desert communities, to mountains over ten thousand (10,000) feet in Alpine-like areas of the San Bernardino Mountain Range. In between these areas, developable slopes of twenty-five (25) percent and greater generally occur throughout the foothills. Riverside County extends from Orange County to the State of Arizona and is mixed with congested urban areas, rural lands and wild lands. A large number of sensitive habitats for various animal species and vegetation consist within large open space areas between major urban centers that impact building and structure location, which impedes emergency access and response. This variety in regions contributes to an increased emergency response time, which necessitates cooperation between local agencies. 
B.  Traffic and circulation congestion is an artificially created, obstructive topographical condition, which is common throughout Riverside County. 
C.  These topographical conditions combine to create a situation, which places fire department response time to fire occurrences at risk, and makes it necessary to provide automatic on-site fire-extinguishing systems and other protection measures to protect occupants and property. 
III.  Geological Conditions: Located within Riverside County are several known active and potentially active earthquake faults, including the San Andreas, San Jacinto, and Elsinore Fault. In the event of an earthquake, the location of the epicenter as well as the time of day and season of the year would have a profound effect on the number of deaths and casualties, as well as property damage. 
The major form of direct damage from most earthquakes is damage to construction. Bridges are particularly vulnerable to collapse, and dam failure may generate major downstream flooding. Buildings vary in susceptibility, dependent upon construction and the types of soils on which they are built. Earthquakes destroy power and telephone lines; gas, sewer, or water mains; which, in tum, may set off fires and/or hinder firefighting or rescue efforts. The hazard of earthquakes varies from place to place, dependent upon the regional and local geology. Ground shaking may occur in areas sixty-five (65) miles or more from the epicenter (the point on the ground surface above the focus). Ground shaking can change the mechanical properties of some fine grained, saturated soils, where upon they liquefy and act as a fluid (liquefaction). 
A.  Previous earthquakes in southern California have been accompanied by disruption of traffic flow and fires. A severe seismic event has the potential to negatively impact any rescue or fire suppression activities because it is likely to create obstacles similar to those indicated under the high wind section above. With the probability of strong aftershocks there exists a need to provide increased protection for anyone on upper floors of buildings. 
B.  Road circulation features located throughout the county also make amendments reasonably necessary. Located through the county are major roadways, highways and flood control channels that create barriers and slow response times. Hills, slopes, street and storm drain design accompanies with occasional heavy rainfall, causes roadway flooding and landslides and at times may make an emergency access route impassable. There are areas in Riverside County that naturally have extended emergency response times that exceed the five minute goal. 
California Health and Safety Code Sections 17958.7 and 18941.5 require that the modification or change be expressly marked and identified as to which each finding refers. Therefore the city council finds that the following table sets forth the 2016 California Fire Code sections that have been modified and the associated local climatic, geological and/or topographical conditions described above supporting the modification. 
_____ 
2016 CODE SECTION 	TITLE/SUBJECT 	FINDINGS I, II, III 
101.4 	Severability 	Administrative 
102.5 	Application of the residential code 	I, II & III 
103.4 and 103.4.1 	Liability 	Administrative 
104.1.1 	Authority of the Fire Chief and Fire Department 	Administrative 
104.12 	Authority of the Fire Chief to close hazardous fire areas 	Administrative 
108.1 	Board of Appeals established 	Administrative 
109.4 	Violation and Penalties 	Administrative 
113.2 	Fees 	Administrative 
113.6 	Cost Recovery 	Administrative 
202 	Fire Chief 	Administrative 
503.2.1 	Dimensions 	Administrative 
503.2.2 	Authority 	Administrative 
503.6.1 	Automatic opener 	Administrative 
503.7 	Loading areas and passenger drop-offs 	Administrative 
507.5.7 	Fire hydrant size and outlets 	I & III 
507.5.8 	Fire hydrant street marker 	I, II & III 
508.1, 508.1.1, 508.1.3, 508.1.6, 508.1.8 	Fire command center 	I, II & III 
509.2.1 	Minimum clearances 	I & III 
606.10.1.2 	Manual operation 	II & III 
903.2 	Where required (automatic sprinkler systems) 	I, II & III 
903.3.5.3 	Hydraulically calculated systems 	I & II 
3204.2.1 	Minimum requirements for client leased or occupant 	I, II & III 
4904.3 	High Fire Hazard Severity Zone Maps 	Administrative 
App Ch B, Table B105.2 	Buildings other than one- or two-family dwellings 	I, II & III 
App Ch C, C103.1 	Fire hydrant location 	I, II & III 
 
  
(Ord. No. 1099, § 4, 1-11-17) 
_____ 
15.24.030 - Amendments to the fire code. 
A.  DEFINITIONS.Section 202, definition of "Fire Chief" in the California Fire Code is deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following: 
FIRE CHIEF. The Fire Chief of Riverside County or the Fire Chief's designee. 
B.  SCOPE AND GENERAL REQUIREMENTS. 
1.  Section 101.4 of the California Fire Code is deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following: 
101.4 Severability. If any provision, clause, sentence or paragraph of this ordinance or the application thereof to any person or circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions of this ordinance which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end, the provisions of this ordinance are hereby declared to be severable. 
C.  APPLICABILITY. 
1.  Section 102.5 of the California Fire Code is amended as follows: 
102.5 Application of residential code. Where structures are designed and constructed in accordance with the California Residential Code, the provisions of this code shall apply as follows: 
1.  Construction and design provisions of this code pertaining to the exterior of the structure shall apply including, but not limited to, premises identification, fire apparatus access and water supplies. Where interior or exterior systems or devices are installed, construction permits required by Section 105.7 of this code shall apply. 
2.  Administrative, operational and maintenance provisions of this code shall apply. 
3.  Automatic fire sprinkler system requirements of this code shall apply to detached accessory buildings 3,600 square feet or greater in accordance with Section 903.2. The provisions contained in Section 903.2.18 of the California Fire Code or Section R309.6 of the California Residential Code may be used for the design of the automatic fire sprinkler system for detached private garages. 
D.  DEPARTMENT OF FIRE PREVENTION. 
1.  Sections 103.4 and 103.4.1 of the California Fire Code are deleted in their entirety and replaced with the following: 
103.4 Liability. Any liability against Riverside County or the City of Coachella or any officer or employee for damages resulting from the discharge of their duties shall be as provided by law. 
E.  GENERAL AUTHORITY AND RESPONSIBILITIES. 
1.  Section 104.1.1 is added to Section 104.1 of the California Fire Code to read as follows: 
104.1.1 Authority of the Fire Chief and Fire Department. 
1.  The Fire Chief is authorized and directed to enforce all applicable State fire laws and provisions of this ordinance and to perform such duties as directed by the City Council. 
2.  The Fire Chief is authorized to administer, interpret and enforce this ordinance. Under the Fire Chief's direction, the Riverside County Fire Department is authorized to enforce ordinances of the City of Coachella pertaining to the following: 
2.1.  The prevention of fires. 
2.2.  The suppression or extinguishment of dangerous or hazardous fires. 
2.3.  The storage, use and handling of hazardous materials. 
2.4.  The installation and maintenance of automatic, manual and other private fire alarm systems and fire extinguishing equipment. 
2.5.  The maintenance and regulation of fire escapes. 
2.6.  The maintenance of fire protection and the elimination of fire hazards on land, in buildings, structures and other property, including those under construction. 
2.7.  The maintenance of means of egress. 
2.8.  The investigation of the cause, origin and circumstances of fire and unauthorized releases of hazardous materials. 
3.  The following persons are hereby authorized to interpret and enforce the provisions of this ordinance and to make arrests and issue citations as authorized by law: 
3.1.  The Unit Chief, Peace Officers and Public Officers of the California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection. 
3.2.  The Fire Chief, Peace Officers and Public Officers of the Riverside County Fire Department. 
3.3.  The Riverside County Sheriff and any deputy sheriff. 
3.4.  The Police Chief and any police officer of any city served by the Riverside County Fire Department. 
3.5.  Officers of the California Highway Patrol. 
3.6.  Code Officers of the City of Coachella Code Enforcement Department. 
3.7.  Peace Officers of the California Department of Parks and Recreation. 
3.8.  The law enforcement officer of the Federal Bureau of Land Management. 
2.  Section 104.12 is added to Section 104 of the California Fire Code to read as follows: 
104.12 Authority of the Fire Chief to close hazardous fire areas. Except upon National Forest Land, the Fire Chief is authorized to determine and announce the closure of any hazardous fire area or portion thereof. Any closure by the Fire Chief for a period of more than fifteen (15) calendar days must be approved by the Riverside County Board of Supervisors and/or the City Council within fifteen (15) calendar days of the Fire Chief's original order of closure. Upon such closure, no person shall go in or be upon any hazardous fire area, except upon the public roadways and inhabited areas. During such closure, the Fire Chief shall erect and maintain at all entrances to the closed area sufficient signs giving notice of closure. This section shall not prohibit residents or owners of private property within any closed area, or their invitees, from going in or being upon their lands. This section shall not apply to any entry, in the course of duty, by a peace officer, duly authorized public officer or fire department personnel. For the purpose of this section, "hazardous fire area" shall mean public or private land that is covered with grass, grain, brush or forest and situated in a location that makes suppression difficult resulting in great damage. Such areas are designated on Hazardous Fire Area maps filed with the office of the Fire Chief. 
F.  BOARD OF APPEALS. 
1.  Section 108.1 of the California Fire Code is deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following: 
108.1 Board of appeals established. The Board of Appeals shall be the City Manager. If he or she determines an outside board is needed, he or she shall designate an outside hearing officer to hear the appeal. The Fire Chief shall be notified of any appeal and the Fire Chief or designee shall be in attendance at the appeal hearing. Depending on the subject of the appeal, specialized expertise may be solicited, at the expense of the applicant, for the purpose of providing input to the Appeals Board. 
G.  VIOLATIONS. 
1.  Section 109.4 of the California Fire Code is deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following: 
109.4 Violation and penalties. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or association of persons to violate any provision of this ordinance, or to violate the provisions of any permit granted pursuant to this code or Ordinance. Punishments and penalties for violations shall be in accordance with the City of Coachella ordinances, fee schedule and Health and Safety Code Sections 17995 through 17995.5. 
H.  FEES. 
1.  Section 113.2 of the California Fire Code is deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following: 
113.2 Schedule of permit fees. Fees for services and permits shall be as set forth in the City of Coachella fee schedule. 
2.  Section 113.6 is added to Section 113 of the California Fire Code to read as follows: 
113.6 Cost recovery. Fire suppression, investigation, rescue or emergency medical costs are recoverable in accordance with Health and Safety Code Sections 13009 and 13009.1, as may be amended from time to time. Additionally, any person who negligently, intentionally or in violation of law causes an emergency response, including, but not limited to, a traffic accident, spill of toxic or flammable fluids or chemicals is liable for the costs of securing such emergency, including those costs pursuant to Government Code Section 53150, et seq, as may be amended from time to time. Any expense incurred by the Riverside County Fire Department for securing such emergency shall constitute a debt of such person and shall be collectable by Riverside County in the same manner as in the case of an obligation under contract, express or implied. 
I.  FIRE APPARATUS ACCESS ROADS. 
1.  Section 503.2.1 of the California Fire Code is deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following: 
503.2.1 Dimensions. Fire apparatus access roads shall have an unobstructed width of not less than 24 feet (7315 mm), exclusive of shoulders, except for approved security gates in accordance with Section 503.6, and an unobstructed vertical clearance of not less than 13 feet 6 inches (4115 mm). For additional requirements or alternatives see Riverside County Fire Department Standards and Policies, as may be amended from time to time. 
2.  Section 503.2.2 of the California Fire Code is deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following: 
503.2.2 Authority. The fire code official shall be the only authority authorized to designate fire apparatus access roads and fire lanes and to modify the minimum fire lane access widths for fire or rescue operations. 
3.  Section 503.6.1 is added to Section 503.6 of the California Fire Code to read as follows: 
503.6.1 Automatic opener. New motorized gates shall be provided with means to be automatically opened remotely by emergency vehicle in accordance with Riverside County Fire Department standards and Policies, as may be amended from time to time. 
Exception: Gates serving individual one- and two-family dwelling parcels. 
4.  Section 503.7 is added to Section 503 of the California Fire Code to read as follows: 
503.7 Loading areas and passenger drop-off areas. On private properties, where fire apparatus access roads are utilized for loading or unloading or utilized for passenger drop-off or pick-up, an additional eight (8) feet of width shall be added to the minimum required width for the fire apparatus access road. 
J.  FIRE PROTECTION WATER SUPPLIES. 
1.  Section 507.5.7 is added to Section 507 of the California Fire Code to read as follows: 
507.5.7 Fire hydrant size and outlets. As determined by the fire code official, fire hydrant sizes and outlets shall be based on the following: 
1.  Residential Standard - one (1) four (4) inch outlet and one (1) two and half (2 ½) inch outlet. 
2.  Super Hydrant Standard - one (1) four (4) inch outlet and two (2) two and one half (2 ½) inch outlet. 
3.  Super Hydrant Enhanced - two (2) four (4) inch outlet and one (1) two and one half (2 ½) inch outlet. 
2.  Section 507.5.8 is added to Section 507 of the California Fire Code to read as follows: 
507.5.8 Fire hydrant street marker. Fire hydrant locations shall be visually indicated in accordance with Riverside County Fire Department Technical Policy 06-11, as may be amended from time to time. Any hydrant marker damaged or removed during the course of street construction or repair shall be immediately replaced by the contractor, developer or person responsible for removal or damage. 
K.  FIRE COMMAND CENTER. 
1.  Section 508.1 of the California Fire Code is deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following: 
508.1 General. Where required by other sections of this code and in all buildings classified as high-rise buildings by the California Building Code, in buildings greater than 300,000 square feet in area and in Group I-2 occupancies having occupied floors located more than 75 feet above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access, a fire command center for fire department operations shall be provided and comply with Sections 508.1.1 through 508.1.8. 
2.  Section 508.1.1 of the California Fire Code is deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following: 
508.1.1 Location and access. The fire command center shall be located adjacent to the main lobby and shall be accessible from fire department vehicular access or as approved by the fire code official. The room shall have direct access from the building exterior at the lowest level of fire department access. 
3.  Section 508.1.3 of the California Fire Code is amended to add the following: 
Exception: A fire command center solely required because a building is greater than 300,000 square feet in area shall be a minimum of 96 square feet (9 m 2 ) with a minimum dimension of 8 feet (2438mm). 
4.  Section 508.1.6 of the California Fire Code is amended to add the following: 
Exception: A fire command center solely required because a building is greater than 300,000 square feet in area shall comply with NFPA 72 and contain the features set forth in Section 508.1.6 subsections 5, 8, 10, 12, 13 and 14. The features set forth in Section 508.1.6 subsections 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 9, 11, 15, 16, 17, 18 and 19 shall be required when such building contains systems or functions related to these features. 
5.  Section 508.1.8 is added to Section 508 of the California Fire Code to read as follows: 
508.1.8 Fire command center identification. The fire command center shall be identified by a permanent easily visible sign stating "Fire Dept. Command Center," located on the door to the fire command center. 
L.  FIRE PROTECTION AND UTILITY EQUIPMENT IDENTIFICATION AND LOCATION. 
1.  Section 509.2.1 of the California Fire Code is amended to add the following: 
509.2.1 Minimum clearances. A 3-foot (914 mm) clear space shall be maintained around the circumference of exterior fire protection system control valves, or any other exterior fire protection system component that may require immediate access, except as otherwise required or approved. 
M.  MECHANICAL REFRIGERATION. 
1.  Section 606.10.1.2 of the California Fire Code is deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following: 
606.10.1.2 Manual operation.When required by the fire code official, automatic crossover valves shall be capable of manual operation. The manual valves shall be located in an approved location immediately outside of the machinery room in a secure metal box or equivalent and marked as Emergency Controls. 
N.  AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER SYSTEMS. 
1.  Section 903.2 of the California Fire Code is deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following: 
903.2 Where required. In all new buildings and structures which are 3,600 square feet or greater, an approved automatic sprinkler system shall be provided regardless of occupancy classification. Where the Sections 903.2.1 - 903.2.19 of the California Fire Code require more restrictive requirements than those listed below, the more restrictive requirement shall take precedence. 
Exception: Unless required elsewhere in this code or the California Building Code, automatic fire sprinkler systems shall not be required for the following: 
1.  Detached Group U occupancies used for agricultural or livestock purposes, less than 5,500 square feet, and having setback distances of 50 feet or more from the property line and other buildings. 
2.  Detached non-combustible equestrian arena shade canopies that are open on all sides and used for riding only - no commercial, assembly or storage uses. 
3.  Detached fabric or non-combustible shade structures that are open on all sides and used to shade playground equipment, temporary storage of vehicles and dining areas with no cooking. 
4.  Detached Group U occupancy greenhouses less than 5,500 square feet. 
5.  Where determined by the Fire Chief that no major life safety hazard exists, and the fuel load does not pose a significant threat to firefighter safety or to other structures or property, automatic fire sprinklers may be exempted. 
One- and two-family dwellings shall have an automatic fire sprinkler system regardless of square footage in accordance with the California Residential Code. Fire sprinkler systems shall be installed in mobile homes, manufactured homes and multifamily manufactured homes with two dwelling units in accordance with Title 25 of the California Code of Regulations. 
The following exceptions in the California Fire Code shall not be allowed: 
a.  Exception in Section 903.2.3 
b.  Exceptions 2 in Section 903.2.11.3 
2.  Section 903.3.5.3 is added to Section 903 of the California Fire Code to read as follows: 
903.3.5.3 Hydraulically calculated systems. The design of hydraulically calculated fire sprinkler systems shall not exceed 90% of the water supply capacity. 
O.  DESIGNATION OF HIGH-PILED STORAGE AREAS. 
1.  Section is added to Section 3204.2 of the California Fire Code to read as follows: 
3204.2.1 Minimum requirements for client leased or occupant owned warehouses. Designs of an automatic sprinkler system for client leased or occupant owned buildings containing high pile storage shall be based on the requirements of NFPA 13. The responsible fire protection engineer shall perform a survey of the building to determine commodity classification, storage configuration, building height and other information related to the development of an appropriate sprinkler system design. The fire protection engineer shall also make reasonable efforts to meet with the building owner or operator to understand seasonal or customer related fluctuations to the stored commodities, storage height, and configuration. The sprinkler design shall be based on the most demanding requirements determined through the onsite survey and discussions with the building owner or operator. The technical report shall describe the basis for determining the commodity and sprinkler design selection, how the commodities will be isolated or separated, and include referenced design document(s), including NFPA 13 or the current applicable factory mutual data sheets. If a specific fire test is used as the basis of design, a copy of the fire test report shall be provided at the time of plan review. 
P.  FIRE HAZARD SEVERITY ZONES. 
1.  Section 4904.3 is added to Section 4904 of the California Fire Code to read as follows: 
4904.3 High Fire Hazard Severity Zone Maps. In accordance with Government Code Sections 51175 through 51189, Very High Fire Hazard Severity Zones are designated as shown on a map titled Very High Fire Hazard Severity Zones, dated December 24, 2009 and retained on file at the office of the Fire Chief, which supersedes other maps previously adopted designating high fire hazard areas. 
_____
Q.  APPENDIX B. 
1.  Table B105.2 of the California Fire Code is amended as follows: 
TABLE B105.2
REQUIRED FIRE-FLOW FOR BUILDINGS OTHER THAN ONE- AND TWO-FAMILY DWELLINGS, GROUP R-3 AND R-4 BUILDINGS AND TOWNHOUSES 
AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER SYSTEM 
(Design Standard) 	MINIMUM FIRE-FLOW 
(gallons per minute) 	FLOW DURATION 
(hours) 
No automatic sprinkler system 	Value in Table B105.1(2) 	Duration in Table B105.1(2) 
Section 903.3.1.1 of the California Fire Code 	50% of the value in Table B105.1(2) a 	Duration in Table B105.1(2) at the reduced flow rate 
Section 903.3.1.2 of the California Fire Code 	50% of the value in Table B105.1(2) b 	Duration in Table B105.1(2) at the reduced flow rate 
 
  
For SI: 1 gallon per minute = 3.785 L/m. 
a.  The reduced fire-flow shall be not less than 1,000 gallons per minute. 
b.  The reduced fire-flow shall be not less than 1,500 gallons per minute. 
_____
R.  APPENDIX C.L 
1.  Section C103.1 of the California Fire Code is deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following: 
C103.1 Hydrant spacing. Fire apparatus access roads and public streets providing required access to buildings in accordance with Section 503 of the California Fire Code shall be provided with one or more fire hydrants, as determined by Section C102.1. Where more than one fire hydrant is required, the distance between required fire hydrants shall be in accordance with Sections C103.2 and C103.3. Fire hydrants shall be provided at street intersections. 
(Ord. No. 1099, § 4, 1-11-17)  
Chapter 15.28 - UNIFORM CODE FOR THE ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS ADOPTED 
Sections: 
 
15.28.010 - Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings—Adopted. 
A.  That certain document, three copies of which are now on file in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1997 Edition, with all state and city amendments thereto, is adopted as the code for the abatement of dangerous buildings of the city. 
B.  Each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of such Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, as amended by this chapter and on file in the office of the city clerk, are referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter, together with any and all amendments thereto, which have or may be adopted by the state of California. 
(Ord. 928 § 12, 2005: prior code § 7-136)  
15.28.020 - Amendments to the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings. 
A.  Sections 205, 501, 502 and 503 of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings are repealed. 
B.  Section 601.1 of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings is amended to read as follows: 
 Hearings. The board of appeals shall proceed pursuant to Article VIII of Chapter 2; and said provisions shall prevail over all other conflicting provisions hereof. However, the board of appeals may appoint one (1) or more hearing examiners or designate one or more of its members to serve as hearing examiners to conduct the hearings. The examiner hearing the case shall exercise all powers relating to the conduct of the hearings until it is submitted to the board of appeals for decision. 
(Prior code § 7-137)  
Chapter 15.32 - EXISTING BUILDING CODE[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1099, §§ 3, 4, adopted Jan. 11, 2017, repealed the former ch. 15.32, §§ 15.32.010, 15.32.020, and enacted a new chapter as set out herein. The former ch. 15.32 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 1061 § 4, adopted Dec. 11, 2013. 
 
15.32.010 - Adoption of the existing building code. 
Except as provided in this chapter, the 2016 California Existing Building Code including Appendices A-1 based on the 2015 International Existing Building Code, as adopted by the State of California, as published by the International Code Council (ICC), shall become the Existing Building Code of the city of Coachella for the purpose of regulating the repair, alteration, change of occupancy, addition to and relocation of the Seismic Strengthening Provisions for Unreinforced Masonry Bearing Wall Buildings, in existing buildings in the City. The California Existing Building Code will be on file for public examination in the office of the building official. 
(Ord. No. 1099, § 4, 1-11-17)  
15.32.020 - Amendments to the existing building code. 
A.  Section 202, Definitions, is hereby amended by adding thereto the following definition to read as follows: 
Substantial Structural Damage. A condition where: 
1.  In any story, the vertical elements of the lateral-force-resisting system, have suffered damage such that the lateral load-carrying capacity of the structure in any direction has been reduced by more than 20 percent from its pre-damaged condition, or 
2.  The capacity of any vertical gravity load-carrying component, or any group of such components, that supports more than 30 percent of the total area of the structure's floor(s) and roof(s) has been reduced more than 20 percent from its pre-damaged condition, and the remaining capacity of such affected elements with respect to all dead and live loads is less than 75 percent of that required by the building code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose, and location. 
B.  Section 404 is amended by adding thereto Section 404.6 to read as follows: 
404 Repairs. Repairs of structural elements shall comply with this section. 
404.6.1 Seismic evaluation and design. Seismic evaluation and design of an existing building and its components shall be based on the following criteria. 
3403.6.1.1 Evaluation and design procedures. The seismic evaluation and design shall be based on the procedures specified in the building code, ASCE 31 Seismic Evaluation of Existing Buildings (for evaluation only) or ASCE 41 Seismic Rehabilitation of Existing Buildings. 
C.  Appendix Chapter A1 (Seismic Strengthening Provisions for Unreinforced Masonry Bearing Wall Buildings)only, of the 2016 California Existing Building Code by ICC is hereby adopted with no amendments. 
(Ord. No. 1099, § 4, 1-11-17)  
Chapter 15.40 - CONSTRUCTION SITE SECURITY 
Sections: 
 
15.40.010 - Construction site security. 
A.  The owner, contractor or responsible party constructing a new building, addition, alteration, or demolition to an existing building shall maintain security measures as deemed necessary or as required by the building official to control vandalism, fires, blowing dust, sand or debris. 
B.  Perimeter security fencing is required along all property lines. Fencing shall be a minimum six feet high with a minimum ninety-four (94) percent blackout heavy-duty plastic screening. The number of access points onto the site shall be minimized, and where feasible, situated in locations that are highly visible from an adjacent street. Vehicle and pedestrian gates and openings shall have gates secured after hours of operation. Locking gates shall be secured with minimum 3/8 -inch thick, thirty (30) grade coil chain, or minimum 5/16 -inch cable. 
C.  The owner, contractor or responsible party constructing a new building, addition, alteration, or demolition to an existing building shall keep the construction site clean by having an adequately sized debris box container placed on the site for the depositing of trash and debris. As used in this section, trash and debris shall include papers, cartons, bottles, cans, garbage, roofing materials, insulation, plaster, concrete, boards and other substance that may be accumulated as a result of construction activities. 
D.  A trash container shall remain on the construction site until the building inspector has completed the final inspection or has approved the removal of the container. Said container shall be emptied of its contents on a regular schedule or as ordered by the building inspector in order to avoid blowing debris or other public nuisances. 
E.  Disposal shall be by transportation to a legally established dump site by the city's refuse contractor, or other person authorized by law to remove any container from the location where the person in charge for storage and collection placed the container. 
F.  Refusal to comply with the provisions of this section shall be deemed a misdemeanor or infraction and is punishable as stipulated in Section 3.48.090 of this code. The non-compliance can be sufficient cause for the revocation of the issued building permit. 
(Ord. 988 § 4 (part), 2007)  
Chapter 15.41 - MOVED BUILDINGS AND TEMPORARY STRUCTURES 
Sections: 
 
15.41.010 - Permits required. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to move or cause to be moved any building or structure excepting a contractors tool house, construction office or similar structure which is relocated as construction requires, into or within the city without first obtaining a permit to do so from the building official. 
Exception: Buildings moved to the business premises of a house for the purpose of temporary storage. 
(Ord. 988 § 4 (part), 2007)  
15.41.020 - Application and investigation fee. 
To obtain a permit to relocate a building or structure the applicant shall first file an application therefore as required by California Building Code. The building official may require plans, photographs and other data to substantiate the application. 
Each application shall be accompanied by an investigation fee to cover the costs of processing the application, inspecting the building and premises, and handling other matters connected therewith. Such fee shall be nonrefundable. If the building to be moved is located outside the city, the applicant shall pay an additional fee to cover increased costs of inspection and mileage. 
(Ord. 988 § 4 (part), 2007)  
15.41.030 - Investigation and report. 
The building official may cause an investigation to be made of each building or structure for which an application for a relocation permit has been received. A written report shall be prepared based on such inspection, and a copy of the report shall be given to the applicant. This report shall contain the approval or disapproval by the building official for relocating the building. If approved for relocation, the report may list the requirements and corrections necessary for making the building conform to the codes adopted herein. 
In granting an approval for relocation, the building official may impose such terms and conditions as he or she may deem reasonable and proper, including time limits for completion of all work, and requirements for whatever changes, alterations, additions or repairs are necessary to assure that relocation will not be materially detrimental or injurious to public health, safety and welfare. 
The investigation report shall remain valid for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days after the building or structure has been inspected, after which time a new investigation and report may be required by the building official. 
(Ord. 988 § 4 (part), 2007)  
15.41.040 - Denial of permit. 
Except as otherwise provided in this section, the building official shall be vested with the discretion to refuse to issue a relocation permit for any building or structure which: 
A.  Is so constructed or is in such condition as to be dangerous; 
B.  Is infested with pests or is unsanitary; 
C.  Is in such condition in the judgment of the building official that it does not admit of practicable and effective repair; 
D.  Is so dilapidated, defective or unsightly or is in such a condition of deterioration or disrepair that its relocation at the proposed site would cause appreciable harm to or be materially detrimental to the property or improvements in the area to which it would be relocated; 
E.  Because of age, size, design or architectural treatment, does not substantially conform to the design, plan and construction of the buildings located in the area to which it is to be relocated so that its relocation would be materially detrimental to the property or improvements in said area. 
(Ord. 988 § 4 (part), 2007)  
15.41.050 - Security required. 
The building official shall be vested with the authority to require the applicant for a permit to first post with the building official a performance bond executed by the owner of the premises where the building or structure is to be located, listing said owner as principal, and an approved surety company authorized to do business in the state as surety; a cash bond naming the city of Coachella as the payee; or an assignment of certificates or shares issued by a savings and loan association doing business in this state and insured by the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation. The building official may waive the requirement of security when the owner of the property is a governmental agency. 
The performance bond required by this section shall: 
A.  Be in form joint and several; 
B.  Name the city of Coachella as obligee; 
C.  Guarantee that the required work will be completed or, when ordered by the building official, the building or structure will be removed or demolished and the site cleared, cleaned, and restored to its original condition; within a reasonable time frame set by the building official; 
D.  Be in an amount equal to the estimated cost, plus ten (10) percent, of the work required to be done in order to comply with all of the conditions of the relocation permit or shall be in an amount equal to the cost of demolition and removal, whichever is greater. Such costs for purposes of the bond shall be as estimated by the building official; 
E.  State therein the legal description or address of the property to which the building or structure is to be relocated. 
(Ord. 988 § 4 (part), 2007)  
15.41.060 - Conditions of security. 
Every performance bond, cash bond or assignment of shares required by this chapter shall be conditioned as follows: 
A.  Unless otherwise specified in the investigation report, work required to be done pursuant to the conditions of the relocation building permit shall be initiated within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of issuance of the permit; 
B.  The time limit specified may be extended for good and sufficient cause after written request of the principal or surety, before said time limit has expired. The building official shall notify the principal and surety in writing of such time extension and may extend the time limit without consent of the surety; 
C.  The term of each bond posted pursuant to this section shall begin upon the date of the posting thereof and shall end upon the completion to the satisfaction of the building official of the performance of all the terms and conditions of the relocation building permit; 
D.  The building official and the surety, or the duly authorized representative of either, shall have access to the premises described in the relocation permit for the purpose of inspecting the progress of the work; 
E.  Upon default by the principal, the surety shall cause all required work to be performed as set forth as stated in the investigation report and relocation permit; 
F.  In the event of default in the performance of any term or condition of the relocation permit, the surety or any person employed or engaged on its behalf, or the building official or any person employed or engaged on his or her behalf, may go upon the premises to complete the required work or to remove or demolish the building or structure, and to clear, clean and restore the site. 
(Ord. 988 § 4 (part), 2007)  
15.41.070 - Permit issuance and fees. 
Before any permit is issued for the relocation, reconstruction or repair of a building or structure a fee therefore shall be paid to the building official in accordance with the city council resolution for building, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, grading or other permits when applicable. The required permits, together with the investigation report, shall comprise the relocation permit for the purpose of this section. 
The valuation for the purpose of determining the relocation permit fee shall be based upon the building officials estimate of the cost of work necessary to relocate the structure and to bring into compliance with conditions listed on the investigation report and permit. 
(Ord. 988 § 4 (part), 2007)  
15.41.080 - General requirements. 
The following information shall be filed for review and subject to the approval of the building official prior to the issuance of the building relocation permit: 
The location and address of the old and new sites; 
A.  A plot plan of the new location, including adjacent lots of all sides of the property with their use and an indication of all structures and improvements on such lot; 
B.  Plans and specifications for the proposed improvements at the new location, including drainage, foundation design and attachment, structural, geologic and soil engineering as appropriate; 
C.  The definition of the route of travel for the structure to be moved. The time and route shall be subject to the approval of the city engineer, fire chief and chief of police; 
D.  A termite inspection report prepared by a legally qualified person; 
E.  The abandonment of sewage disposal systems and/or sewer laterals as set forth in the California Plumbing Code, for the old and the new parcels involved; 
F.  A current photograph showing all four elevations of each structure to be relocated; 
G.  Such additional information as shall be deemed reasonably necessary by the building official to carry out the intent and purpose of this chapter; 
H.  That the structure shall comply or be altered to comply with current building, electrical, comfort heating, and air conditioning and plumbing code requirements; and 
I.  The vacated site shall be cleaned and restored to a safe and sightly condition, including the removal of abandoned foundation systems. 
(Ord. 988 § 4 (part), 2007)  
15.41.090 - Expiration of permits. 
Permits for the relocation, reconstruction and repair of a building or structure shall be null and void in accordance with the provisions of CBC Section 106.4.4 if the building or structure is not relocated to the proposed site and/or the required work commenced within one hundred eighty (180) consecutive calendar days of the date of issuance of such permits. 
(Ord. 988 § 4 (part), 2007)  
15.41.110 - Procedure upon default. 
A.  Performance Bond. Should the principal fail to comply with the conditions required by the relocation permit, the building official shall give notice of default in writing to the principal and to the surety named in the performance bond. The notice of default shall state the conditions of the bond, which have not been complied with and shall specify the period of time the building official deems to be reasonably necessary for completion of the work. Upon receipt of a notice of default, the surety shall cause the required work to be completed within the time specified. The surety shall have the option of removing or demolishing the building or structure in lieu of completing the required work, in which case the site shall be suitably cleared, cleaned and restored to the satisfaction of the building official. 
Exception: The surety may be granted a release from its obligation to perform under the conditions of the performance bond provided, 
1.  A written agreement is executed between surety and the division of building and safety under which the division assumes responsibility for causing completion of required work or demolition of the structure; and 
2.  A cash bond is posted by surety in the amount of the performance bond, payable to the city, to enable the building official to cause the required work of repair or demolition to be performed in accordance with subsection B of this section. 
B.  Cash Bond. When a cash bond has been posted the building official shall give notice of default to the principal in the manner set forth above. Should the principal fail to comply with requirements within the specified time period, the building official at his or her own discretion may proceed without delay and without further notice or proceeding to use the cash deposit or any portion thereof to cause the required work to be completed by contract or otherwise. 
C.  Assignment of Shares. When an assignment of shares has been posted the building official shall give notice of default to the principal in the manner set forth above. Should the principal fail to comply with requirements within the specified time period, the building official may request payment of the assigned certificates or share or any portion thereof by the savings and loan association and at his or her own discretion the building official may proceed without delay and without further notice or proceeding to use such assets to cause the required work to be completed by contractor or otherwise. 
(Ord. 988 § 4 (part), 2007)  
15.41.120 - Release of security. 
A.  Performance Bond. When all conditions and requirements of the relocation permit and applicable laws and ordinances have been completed, the building official shall notify the surety that the bond has been exonerated. 
B.  Cash Bond. When a cash bond has been posted and all requirements of the relocation permit have been completed, the building official shall return the cash to the depositor, or to his or her successor or assigns, except any portion thereof that may have been used, cashed or deducted as provided elsewhere in this section. 
C.  Assignment of Shares. When an assignment of shares has been made and all requirements of the relocation permit have been completed, the building official shall notify the savings and loan association and shall do all things reasonably necessary to effect a release of said assignment to the principal or to his or her successors or assigns, except any portion thereof that may have been used, cashed or deducted as provided elsewhere in this section. 
(Ord. 988 § 4 (part), 2007)  
Chapter 15.44 - BUILDING NUMBERING 
Sections: 
 
15.44.010 - Required. 
Every person owning real property in the city which is improved with a building is required to affix at or near the main entrance to said building a proper street number. 
(Prior code § 7-126)  
15.44.020 - Assignment of number—System. 
Building numbers shall be assigned to buildings by the director of building who shall assign such number in accordance with the uniform numbering system heretofore and now being used in the Coachella Valley, county of Riverside, state of California. 
(Prior code § 7-127)  
15.44.030 - Size, color, location of numbers. 
The numbers in building numbers shall be of sufficient size and color and shall be so affixed at or near the main entrance to the building so as to be easily visible from that portion of the street upon which such building shall face which shall be immediately adjacent to such front entrance. 
(Prior code § 7-128)  
15.44.040 - Numbering by city. 
If any person shall fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter within thirty (30) days of being notified of the number assigned by the director of building, the director shall, and he or she is hereby empowered, to enter upon the real property of such person and affix the number assigned by him or her to such building and to collect the reasonable cost of such installation from the owner of such real property by court action or otherwise. 
(Prior code § 7-129)  
15.44.050 - Correcting erroneous numbers. 
In cases where incorrect numbers have been placed and remain or shall hereafter be placed on any house or building, the owner, agent or other person shall, upon notification by the building official, correct the erroneous numbers within thirty (30) days after official notification. 
(Ord. 988 § 5 (part), 2007)  
15.44.060 - Violation—Penalty. 
It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Any person violating any provision of the chapter or failing to comply with any of the requirements is deemed guilty of a violation of Section 3.48.090 of this code. 
(Ord. 988 § 5 (part), 2007)  
Chapter 15.48 - HISTORIC DISTRICTS AND SITES 
Sections: 
 
15.48.010 - Purpose—Authority. 
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority of Government Code Section 37361 for the purpose of preserving areas and specific buildings of the city which reflect elements of its cultural, social, economic, political, architectural and archaeological history. This chapter is intended to stabilize and improve buildings, structures or areas which are considered to be of historical, architectural, archaeological or ecological value, to foster civic beauty, to strengthen the local economy and to promote the use of specific buildings for the education and welfare of the citizens. 
(Prior code § 18-41)  
15.48.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them unless the context indicates another meaning: 
"Historic district" means any area of the city containing a number of structures, natural features or sites having historic, architectural, archaeological, cultural or aesthetic significance and designated as an historic district under the provisions of this chapter. 
"Historic site" means a historic site is any real property such as: a building; a structure, including but not limited to archways, tiled areas and similar architectural elements; an archeological excavation or object that is unique or significant because of its location, design, setting, materials, workmanship or aesthetic effect; and 
1.  That is associated with events that have made a meaningful contribution to the nation, state or community; 
2.  That is associated with lives of persons who made a meaningful contribution to the nation, state or local history; 
3.  That reflects or exemplifies a particular period of the national, state or local history; 
4.  That embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period or method of construction; 
5.  That presents the work of a master builder, designer, artist, or architect whose individual genius influenced his or her age; or that possesses high artistic value; 
6.  That represents a significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual distinction; or 
7.  That has yielded or may be likely to yield information important to national, state or local history or prehistory. 
(Prior code § 18-42)  
15.48.030 - Exceptions. 
The regulations contained in this chapter do not apply to routine maintenance or repair to restore a structure as near as possible to its original condition after decay, injury, dilapidation or partial destruction of a structure within an historic district or upon an historic site, provided such maintenance or repair does not exceed one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) in value. 
(Prior code § 18-43)  
15.48.040 - Appeal. 
Any person aggrieved by an action of the planning commission under this chapter may appeal the decision to the city council by filing a request to appeal with the city clerk within ten (10) days from the planning commission's decision. 
(Prior code § 18-44)  
15.48.050 - Penalty for chapter violation. 
Any violation of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
(Prior code § 18-45) 
(Ord. No. 1098, § 37, 12-14-16)  
15.48.060 - Injunctive relief. 
The city council may seek relief from the appropriate court to restrain or enjoin any violation of this chapter and of the orders and decisions of the planning commission, or to compel the reconstruction of any building, structure or object which is destroyed in violation of this chapter or the orders and decisions of the planning commission or city council. 
(Prior code § 18-46)  
15.48.070 - Compliance with other laws. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter are separate from and additional to all other requirements of law, including but not limited to compliance with other ordinances and codes of the city, conditions of approval of land use permits and architectural review and approval. Neither a certificate of approval nor any other provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to relieve the owner or applicant from full compliance with any such laws, ordinances, codes or conditions. 
B.  All permits issued for construction, preservation, restoration or alteration of a building designated as an historic site shall be issued in accordance with the state historic building code as provided in Health and Safety Code, Sections 18950 through 18961, or as amended, which the city adopts and incorporates in this chapter by this reference. 
(Prior code § 18-47)  
15.48.080 - Created by council. 
The city council may designate one or more historic sites or districts by following the procedures specified in this section. Designations will be made by categorizing nominated sites and districts into one of the following classifications and such other categories as may be designated by resolution: 
A.  Class 1. Structure/site qualified for city designation; may be qualified at the federal, state and/or county level. Archival file will be maintained. Structure/site may not be modified nor objects moved without the approval of the city council; usage may be limited by the city council to the extent that it may impair the integrity of the site. Site will be plaqued (intended for use when the structure or site still exists as it did during the historical period or is restorable). 
B.  Class 2. Site qualified for city designation; may be qualified at the federal, state and/or county level. Archival file will be maintained. Site is eligible for plaquing (intended for use when the site is not occupied by a modern structure or use which is different than that of the historical period or if structure is unusable, nonconforming, unrestorable or the like). 
C.  Class 3. Structure/site was constructed before 1945, or a year to be determined by the city council, or construction date cannot be confirmed. Eligible for a six-month stay of demolition. Action of the historical site preservation board may include recommendation to reclassify. All structures built prior to the subject date would be automatically so classified. 
D.  Historic District. Qualified for city designation; may be qualified at the federal, state and/or county level. Archival file will be maintained and shall contain a map delineating contributing and noncontributing structures or sites. Contributing structures/sites shall be subject to class 1 regulations until such time that they may be reclassified. Non-contributing structures/sites shall be subject to review by the historical site preservation board before demolition or construction. A specific plan, containing special regulations pertaining to the subject area, may be adopted by each district. 
(Prior code § 18-51)  
15.48.090 - Investigation and study by the planning commission. 
The city council designates the planning commission to act as an investigatory and advisory body with respect to preservation of historic sites or structures within the city. The planning commission shall conduct or cause to be conducted such preliminary surveys, studies or investigations as it deems necessary to adequately inform the planning and city council prior to the public hearing, and shall make available to any interested person the results of any such survey, study or investigation. The planning commission may request the assistance of any individual who has knowledge and interest in the cultural, socioeconomic, architectural or archaeological history of the area, either through experience, training, education or occupation. 
(Prior code § 18-52)  
15.48.100 - Notice of public hearing by the planning commission. 
A.  Mailed notice of the public hearing shall be provided at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing to the owners of all property lying within the area proposed to be designated as an historic site or district or within three hundred (300) feet of the outer boundaries of the area proposed to be designated as an historic site or district, and in addition to such mailed notice, notice of such hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city at least ten (10) days prior to such hearing. If mailed notice as required above would result in notice to more than two hundred fifty (250) persons, as an alternative to such mailed notice, notice may be given by placing a display advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, and by posting such notice in at least three conspicuous places within the proposed boundaries of such site. 
B.  Notice of public hearing before the city council may be combined with the notice of public hearing before the planning com-mission; provided, that the date set for public hearing before the city council shall be not more than sixty (60) days later than the date set for public hearing by the planning commission. For good cause, the public hearing may be continued from time to time, without further published notice, by announcing the fact at the time and place set for the public hearing before the city hearing body. 
(Prior code § 18-53)  
15.48.110 - Findings—Recommendation to the city council. 
Following such public hearing, the planning commission shall make findings upon which it shall base its recommendation to the city council concerning the designation of such proposed historic site or district. Within thirty (30) days after the conclusion of the public hearing, the planning commission shall file its recommendation with the city council, together with a report of findings, hearings, and other supporting data. 
(Prior code § 18-54)  
15.48.120 - Public hearing—City council. 
The city council shall hold a public hearing upon notice given in the same manner and to the same persons as required for the public hearing before the planning commission, which notices may be combined as stated elsewhere in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 18-55)  
15.48.130 - Same—Conduct. 
At the public hearing the city council shall receive all evidence and hear all interested persons, and the matter shall then be submitted to the city council for decision. 
(Prior code § 18-56)  
15.48.140 - Same—Findings and decisions—Resolution. 
If the city council shall find that the purposes of this chapter are furthered by designation of property as an historic site or district, such findings shall be stated in a resolution designating such property within such historic site or district. From and after the adoption of such resolution, all property within such historic site or district shall be subject to the rules and regulations governing the demolition, preservation, rehabilitation or alteration of historic sites. 
(Prior code § 18-57)  
15.48.150 - Markers for designated historic sites. 
A.  Upon designation of an historic site by the city council, the planning commission may determine which historic sites shall be marked with uniform and distinctive markers. The markers shall be of a design approved by the planning commission. 
B.  As a courtesy, notice may be given to the county historical commission and the state department of parks and recreation (office of historic preservation) regarding the proposed location of markers prior to installation to permit recommendations by those agencies. 
(Prior code § 18-58)  
15.48.160 - Initiation of proceedings for nomination in the national register. 
A.  The planning commission may initiate proceedings for designation of an historic site or district or the recommendation of a property for nomination to the national register by motion, and shall then hold at least one public hearing prior to making a recommendation to the city council. 
B.  The city council may initiate proceedings for designation of an historic site or district or the recommendation of a property for nomination to the national register by motion, and shall then refer the matter to the planning commission for public hearing and recommendation. 
C.  Upon final action by the city council recommending a property for nomination to the national register, the recommendation will be forwarded by appropriate application to the state department of parks and recreation. 
(Prior code § 18-50)  
15.48.170 - Stay of demolition. 
At any time after the initiation of proceedings for designation of an historic site or district, the planning commission may, upon its own motion or upon the application of any interested person, issue an order staying any proposed or threatened demolition or alteration of the exterior or any structure within or upon such proposed site. Such stay order shall be effective for no longer than one hundred twenty (120) days, and is intended to afford time for necessary studies, hearings and determination whether such sit should be designated as an historic site. Such stay order may be extended once for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days. 
(Prior code § 18-71)  
15.48.180 - Effect of stay order—Exceptions. 
Upon the issuance of a stay order, no permit shall be given for the demolition or exterior alteration of any structure or the interior arrangement of a public building described in such stay order and any such permit previously issued shall forthwith be revoke subject to any legal constraints that may exist; provided, however, that a stay order shall not prevent the performance of an repairs, demolition, or removal necessary for the protection of public health or safety, and ordered by the chief building official of the city to be performed by the owner or occupier of such structure. 
(Prior code § 18-72)  
15.48.190 - Approval required. 
No person may undertake any of the following within or upon a class 1 historic site without a certificate of approval from the planning commission: 
A.  Construction of a new structure. 
B.  The moving, demolition or alteration of an existing structure in any manner which affects the exterior appearance of the structure. 
C.  A change in land use which affects the exterior appearance of a structure or the interior arrangement of public buildings. 
D.  The erection, remodeling or replacing of a sign which affects the exterior appearance of a structure. 
(Prior code § 18-73)  
15.48.200 - Application for permit to construct or alter structures. 
A person who desires to construct (including new construction), alter, move or demolish a structure within or upon a class 1 historic site or an historic district shall file an application upon a form prescribed by the city. The application shall include all necessary information required by the rules of the planning commission. When the application is filed, it shall be referred to the planning commission for review at its next meeting. 
(Prior code § 18-74)  
15.48.210 - Factors to be considered upon permit application. 
In reviewing and acting upon each application, the planning commission shall consider: 
A.  The historic value and significance, or the architectural value and significance or both, of the structure and its relation to the historic value of the surrounding area. 
B.  The relationship of the exterior architectural features of any structure to the rest of the structure itself and to the surrounding area. 
C.  The general compatibility of exterior design, arrangement, texture and material which is proposed by the applicant. 
D.  Archaeological or ecological significance of the area. 
(Prior code § 18-75)  
15.48.220 - Board action restricted to exterior features—Exception. 
A.  The planning commission shall consider and pass upon only the exterior features of a structure and may not consider the interior arrangement of the structure, except in the case of public buildings. The commission may not disapprove applications except in regard to the considerations set forth in this chapter and in rules and regulations adopted by the planning commission pursuant to this chapter. 
B.  It is the purpose and intent of this chapter that the planning commission be strict in its judgment or plans for structures considered to have great historic or architectural value. It is also the purpose of this chapter and the intent of the city council that the planning commission be lenient in its judgment of plans for structures which have little or no historic value except for plans which seriously impair the historic or architectural value of surrounding structures or the archaeological or ecological value of surrounding, area. In adopting this chapter the city council does not intend to limit new construction, alteration or repairs to any particular period or architectural style. 
(Prior code § 18-76)  
15.48.230 - Procedure upon permit application. 
A.  Upon the filing of an application, the secretary of the planning commission shall set the matter for review and shall give notice in accordance with this chapter and the rules of the planning commission. The planning commission shall make its decision within forty-five (45) days from the date the application is filed. If the planning commission fails to act within forty-five (45) days, the application is considered approved unless the applicant and the planning commission agree to an extension of time. 
B.  At the conclusion of its review, the planning commission shall make its decision and shall file a certificate of approval or certificate of rejection with the building official of the city. No person may do any work upon a structure which is subject to an application until the planning commission has filed its certificate of approval. If the planning commission files a certificate of rejection, the building or demolition official may not issue a permit for such work. 
(Prior code § 18-77)  
15.48.240 - Special considerations. 
A.  If an application affects the exterior appearance of a structure or proposes to demolish a structure in a manner which the planning commission considers to be detrimental to the city, the planning commission shall attempt, in cooperation with the owner to arrive at an economically feasible plan for the preservation of the structure. 
B.  If the planning commission is satisfied that the propose construction or alteration will not materially impair the historic or architectural value of the structure, it shall approve the application. 
C.  If the planning commission finds that the retention of the structure constitutes a hazard to public safety and the hazard cannot be eliminated by economic means available to the owner, it shall approve the application. 
D.  The planning commission may approve the application if any of the following circumstances exist: 
1.  The structure is a deterrent to a major improvement program which substantially benefits the city; 
2.  Retention of the structure causes an undue hardship to the owner; or 
3.  Retention of the structure is not in the interest of the majority of the inhabitants of the city. 
E.  The planning commission may approve the moving of a structure of historical architectural value as an alternative to demolition. 
(Prior code § 18-78)  
15.48.250 - Limit on number of permit applications. 
No application for the same or similar work may be filed within one year after the planning commission has rejected it. 
(Prior code § 18-79)  
15.48.260 - Preexisting building permits. 
This chapter does not apply to construction, alteration, moving or demolition of a structure started under a building permit issued before the effective date of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 18-80)  
Chapter 15.52 - CONCRETE ON ALKALINE SOIL 
Sections: 
 
15.52.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter is adopted for the general welfare of the property owners of the city in order to prevent the depreciation of property values and the elimination of economic loss to property owners of the city. The high sulfate content of soil materials within the incorporated limits of the city requires that regulations and restrictions, in accordance with this chapter, be created and adopted pertaining to the placement and protection of all concrete placed within the city which will or may come into contact with alkaline soils containing sulfates. 
(Prior code § 7-76)  
15.52.020 - Applicability. 
The regulations and restrictions of this chapter are placed upon all concrete within the city which comes into contact with alkaline soils containing sulfates. 
(Prior code § 7-77)  
15.52.030 - Elevation—Thickness of slabs. 
All concrete floor slabs shall be at least eight inches above the finish grade and shall not be less than three and one-half inches in thickness. 
(Prior code § 7-78)  
15.52.040 - Height of slab above street. 
The top of concrete floor slab shall be at least eight inches above the crest of the street or the top of the curb if curbs are in place. 
(Prior code § 7-79)  
15.52.050 - Type of cement. 
All concrete used in floor slabs where floor slab is supported by earth or fill of any kind and all concrete used in footings, foundations, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, driveways and walls supporting or retaining earth or fill shall contain only sulfate resistant Type V. Portland cement. Portland cement concrete shall be composed of not less than four hundred seventy (470) pound (five sacks) of Portland cement per cubic yard of concrete, except that any concrete containing an approved water reducing admixture, used in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations shall contain not less than four hundred eighteen (418) pound (4.5 sacks) of Portland cement per cubic yard of concrete. 
(Prior code § 7-80)  
15.52.060 - Standards for ready-mix concrete. 
Ready mixed concrete shall comply with Uniform Building Code Standard No; 26-11-64 based on the specification standards of the American Society for Testing and Materials. 
(Prior code § 7-81)  
15.52.070 - Using alkaline fill soil. 
Soils or materials which may have an alkali or sulfate content shall not be relocated, placed or used as fill at any location within the city unless a test sample of the soil is first obtained under the direction of the department of building and tests conducted by an approved testing agency indicates that the alkali or sulfate content of the soil sample does not exceed the amount in the natural soil at the location where the fill is to be placed. The director of building may waive the test sample requirements for good cause. 
(Prior code § 7-82)  
15.52.080 - Base course required. 
A base course shall be provided beneath the concrete floor slab of any structure consisting of at least a four inch thickness of a limited capillarity material. Base course shall be either clean graded gravel or crushed rock. Material shall pass a two inch sieve and be retained in a one-fourth inch sieve. 
(Prior code § 7-83)  
15.52.090 - Expansion protection for slab. 
A two-inch layer of dry washed sand shall be placed on top of the base course under of a ten (10) mil thick water-proof membrane. This waterproof membrane shall be placed on top of the base course under all slabs to provide for expansion protection for concrete. 
(Prior code § 7-84)  
Chapter 15.54 - RECYCLING AND DIVERSION OF WASTE FROM CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION 
Sections: 
 
15.54.010 - Findings and purpose. 
The city council of the city of Coachella hereby finds and determines that the city is committed to protecting the public health, safety, welfare, and environment; that in order to meet these goals, it is necessary that the city promote the reduction of solid waste and reduce the stream of solid waste going to landfills; that under California law, as embodied in the California Waste Management Act (California Public Resources Code Section 40000 et seq.), Coachella is required to prepare, adopt, and implement source reduction and recycling elements to reach reduction goals, and is required to make substantial reductions in the volume of waste materials going to landfill, under the threat of penalties of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) per day; that waste from demolition and construction of commercial and residential buildings represents a large portion of the volume presently coming from Coachella, and that a percentage of that waste is particularly suitable for recycling; that Coachella's commitment to the reduction of waste and to compliance with state law requires the establishment of programs for recycling and salvaging construction and demolition materials; that the city council recognizes that requiring demolition and construction waste to be recycled and reused may in some respects add modestly to the cost of demolition and construction and in other respects may make possible some cost recovery and cost reduction; and that it is necessary in order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare that the following regulations be adopted. 
(Ord. 930 § 2 (part), 2005)  
15.54.020 - Definitions. 
"Applicant" means any individual, firm, limited liability company, association, partnership, political subdivision, government agency, municipality, industry, public or private corporation, or any other entity whatsoever who applies to the city for the applicable permits to undertake any construction, demolition, or renovation project within the city. 
"City-owned projects" means construction, demolition, addition, alteration, and remodel projects that are city-owned and are not described by Section 15.54.050 of this chapter as exemptions. 
"Compliance official" means a person designated by the city to evaluate C&D waste plans, track project progress, and determine return and forfeiture of securities. 
"Construction" means all building, landscaping, remodeling, addition, removal or destruction involving the use or disposal of designated recyclable and reusable materials as defined in Section 15.54.030 of this chapter. 
"Construction and demolition (C&D) waste" means and includes the waste building materials, packaging and rubble resulting from construction, remodeling, repair and demolition operations on pavements, houses, commercial buildings and other structures. 
C&D waste includes the following items that meet the above criteria: 
1.  Components of the building or structure that is the subject of the construction work including, but not limited to, lumber and wood, gypsum wallboard, glass, metal, roofing material, tile, carpeting and floor coverings, window coverings, plastic pipe, concrete, fully cured asphalt, heating, ventilating, and air conditioning systems and their components, lighting fixtures, appliances, equipment, furnishings, and fixtures; 
2.  Tools and building materials consumed or partially consumed in the course of the construction work including material generated at construction trailers, such as blueprints, plans, and other similar wastes; 
3.  Cardboard and other packaging materials derived from materials installed in or applied to the building or structure or from tools and equipment used in the course of the construction work; and 
4.  Plant materials resulting from construction work when commingled with dirt, rock, inert debris or C&D waste. 
"Construction and demolition waste plan (C&D waste plan)" means a completed C&D waste form, approved by the city for the purpose of compliance with this chapter, submitted by the applicant for any covered project. 
"Contractor" means any person or entity holding, or required to hold, a contractor's license of any type under the laws of the state of California, or who performs (whether as contractor, subcontractor or owner-builder) any construction, demolition, remodeling, or landscaping relating to buildings or accessory structures in the city of Coachella. 
"Conversion rate" means the rate set forth in the standardized Conversion Rate Table approved by the city pursuant to this chapter for use in estimating the volume or weight of materials identified in a C&D waste plan. 
"Covered projects" means all construction, demolition, addition, alteration, and remodel projects within the city requiring a building permit. 
"Demolition" means the decimating, razing, ruining, tearing down or wrecking of any facility, structure, pavement or building, whether in whole or in part, whether interior or exterior. 
"Diversion requirement" means the diversion of at least fifty (50) percent of the total C&D waste generated by a project via reuse or recycling, unless the applicant has been granted an exemption pursuant to Section 15.54.050 of this chapter, in which case the diversion requirement shall be the maximum feasible diversion rate established by the compliance official. 
"Divert" means redirection of material that would previously be disposed into the landfill. Appropriate diversion methods include transfer of materials to acceptable recycling facilities, approved on-site reuse techniques, and other waste minimization methods approved by the compliance official. 
"Exempt" means projects that are described by the criteria outlined in Section 15.54.050 of this chapter are considered exempt. 
"Large project" means projects that are forty (40) or more homes under a subdivision or a specific plan constructing one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet or more. 
"Mixed waste processing facility" means a recycling, composting, materials recovery or reuse facility for which the compliance official has issued a certification pursuant to regulations promulgated by the compliance official. 
"Noncovered projects" means projects that are not described by the definition of "covered projects." 
"Performance security" means a letter of credit, certificate of deposit, or cash and cash equivalents submitted to the city pursuant to Section 15.54.080 of this chapter. 
"Project" means a building or buildings covered under an individual permit. 
"Recycling" means the process of collecting, sorting, cleansing, treating, and reconstituting materials that would otherwise become solid waste, and returning them to the economic mainstream in the form of raw material for new, reused, or reconstituted products which meet the quality standards necessary to be used in the marketplace. 
"Recycling facility" means an approved processing facility by city, county, state, or federal government. 
"Renovation" means any change, addition, or modification to an existing structure. 
"Residential standards" means standards that apply to the construction of residential development. 
"Reuse" means further or repeated use of construction or demolition waste. 
"Salvage" means the controlled removal of construction or demolition waste from a permitted building or demolition site for the purpose of recycling, reuse, or storage for later recycling or reuse. 
(Ord. 930 § 2 (part), 2005)  
15.54.030 - Designated recyclable and reusable materials. 
A.  Recyclable and reusable materials include, but are not limited to, the following: 
1.  Appliances including, but not limited to, stoves, refrigerators, water heaters, air conditioning, and lighting; 
2.  Cardboard materials; 
3.  Drywall and plaster materials including drywall, gypsum, and sheetrock; 
4.  Green waste, which includes tree trimmings, grass, leaves, roots, and palm fronds; 
5.  Masonry building materials including all products generally used in construction including, but not limited to, concrete, rock, stone, and brick; 
6.  Metals including ferrous (steel, stainless steel, steel piping, roofing, and flashing) and nonferrous (aluminum, copper, and brass); 
7.  Paving materials including asphalt, brick, and concrete; 
8.  Roofing materials including wood shingles as well as asphalt, stone, concrete, metal, and slate-based roofing material; 
9.  Salvageable materials and structures including, but not limited to, wallboard, doors, windows, fixtures, toilets, sinks, and bathtubs; 
10.  Wood waste includes any and all dimensional lumber, fencing or construction wood that is not chemically treated, creosoted, CCA pressure-treated, contaminated or painted; 
11.  Any other construction or demolition debris that is nonhazardous and available for recycling or reuse, including dirt. 
(Ord. 930 § 2 (part), 2005)  
15.54.040 - Diversion requirements/covered projects requirements. 
A.  Demolition. Every structure planned for demolition shall be made available for deconstruction, salvage, and recovery prior to demolition. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, the general contractor and all subcontractors to recover the maximum feasible amount of salvageable designated recyclable and reusable materials prior to demolition. Recovered and salvaged designated recyclable and reusable materials from the deconstruction phase shall qualify to be counted in meeting the diversion requirements of this chapter. Recovered or salvaged materials may be given or sold on the premises, or may be removed to a reuse warehouse facility for storage or sale. 
All covered projects must do the following: 
1.  Meet the diversion requirement of at least fifty (50) percent of all construction waste; 
2.  Submit a construction and demolition waste plan (on the required forms); 
3.  Submit a performance security along with the application required for a construction permit. City-owned projects will not be required to pay the performance security. 
B.  New Construction. All covered projects must do the following: 
1.  Meet the diversion requirement of at least fifty (50) percent of all construction waste. 
2.  Submit a construction and demolition waste plan (on the required forms). 
3.  Submit a performance security along with the application required for a construction permit. City-owned projects will not be required to pay the performance security. 
C.  Every applicant shall submit a properly completed "Recycling and Waste Reduction Form" as prescribed by the city's compliance official, to the building and safety department, as a portion of the building or demolition permit process. The form shall contain an accurate estimate of the tonnage or other specified units of construction and/or demolition waste to be generated from construction and demolition on the site. Approval of the form as complete and accurate shall be a condition precedent to issuance of any building or demolition permit. 
(Ord. 930 § 2 (part), 2005)  
15.54.050 - Diversion requirement exemptions. 
A.  Evaluation of the C&D waste plan may determine the following projects exempt: 
1.  Work for which a building or demolition permit is not required; 
2.  Roofing projects that do not include tear-off of existing roof; 
3.  Remodels, alterations, or additions with total area less than five hundred (500) square feet; 
4.  Work for which only a plumbing, only an electrical, or only a mechanical permit is required; 
5.  Seismic tie-down projects; 
6.  Installation of pre-fabricated patio enclosures or accessories such as signs or antennas where no structural building modifications are required; 
7.  Projects where no structural building modifications are required; 
8.  Emergency demolition that is required to protect the public health and safety; and 
9.  Other projects that the compliance official determines infeasible to comply with the diversion requirement. 
B.  The compliance official shall determine if the construction project is in compliance with this section. While not required, it shall be encouraged that at least fifty (50) percent of all project-related construction and demolition waste from exempt projects be diverted. The compliance official shall distribute education materials that encourage recycling of construction and demolition waste. 
(Ord. 930 § 2 (part), 2005)  
15.54.060 - Mixed waste processing facilities. 
A.  The compliance official shall issue a certification only if the owner or operator of the facility submits documentation satisfactory to the compliance official: 
1.  That the facility has obtained all applicable federal, state, and local permits, and is in full compliance with all applicable regulations; and 
2.  The mixed waste facility shall determine the amount of material landfilled versus diverted and provide the compliance official with tonnage diverted on receipts. 
B.  The city shall make available to each building permit applicant paying a performance security a current list of mixed waste processing facilities. 
(Ord. 930 § 2 (part), 2005)  
15.54.070 - Construction and demolition waste plan. 
A.  In conjunction with the building permit applications fee, the applicant shall submit a properly completed C&D waste plan to the compliance official, in a form as prescribed by that official, for one or more building permits issued at the same time. The completed C&D waste plan shall contain the following: 
1.  The estimated volume or weight of construction and demolition waste that will be disposed; 
2.  The estimated weight of such materials that can feasibly be diverted via reuse or recycling by material type; 
3.  The vendor(s) that the applicant proposes to use to service the clean up activities and the markets identified that will be used in recycling or reusing the diverted materials. 
The applicant must contract with the city's designated refuse hauler for all refuse removal including, but not limited to, recycling materials. 
Because actual material weights are not available in this stage, estimates are used. In estimating the volume or weight of materials as identified in the C&D waste plan, the applicant shall use the standardized conversion rates approved by the city of Coachella for this purpose. Approval of the C&D waste plan as complete and accurate shall be a condition precedent to the issuance of any building or demolition permit. If the applicant calculates the projected feasible diversion rate as described above, and find the rate does not meet the diversion goal, the applicant must then submit information supporting the lower diversion rate. If this documentation is not included, the C&D waste plan shall be deemed incomplete. 
B.  Evaluation of the C&D waste plan will determine the following: 
1.  Approval. No building or demolition permit shall be issued for any covered project unless and until the compliance official has approved the C&D waste plan. The compliance official shall only approve a C&D waste plan if he or she determines that all of the following conditions have been met: 
a.  The C&D waste plan provides all of the information set forth in this section; 
b.  The C&D waste plan indicates that the diversion requirements of Section 15.54.040 of this chapter are met; and 
c.  The applicant has submitted an appropriate performance security for the project. 
2.  Nonapproval. If the compliance official determines that the C&D waste plan is incomplete or fails to indicate that the diversion requirements of Section 15.54.040 of this chapter will be met, he or she shall either: 
a.  Return the C&D waste plan to the applicant marked "Disapproved," including a statement of reasons, and will notify the building department, which shall then immediately stop processing the building or demolition permit application; or 
b.  Return the C&D waste plan to the applicant marked "Further Explanation Required." 
(Ord. 930 § 2 (part), 2005)  
15.54.080 - Performance security. 
A.  The applicant for a building or demolition permit shall submit a performance security along with the C&D waste plan. This performance security shall be in the amount of one percent of the building permit valuation, but not greater than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). 
B.  For large projects, a one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) performance security will be deposited. The security may be carried forward to the following phase provided the contractor has met the required diversion requirements. If diversion requirements are not met and a portion or all of the performance security is forfeited, the security must be replenished to meet one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). The dollar amount to be replenished will be based on the diversion schedule in Section 15.54.130 of this chapter. 
C.  The applicant shall post performance security in the form of cash, money order, letter of credit, performance or surety bond. 
(Ord. 930 § 2 (part), 2005)  
15.54.090 - Refund of performance security. 
A.  The compliance official may authorize the refund of any performance security which was erroneously paid or collected. 
B.  The compliance official may authorize the refund of any performance security when the building permit application is withdrawn or cancelled before any work has begun. 
C.  The performance security shall be returned, without interest, in total or prorated, upon proof of satisfaction by the compliance official that no less than the required percentage of construction and demolition waste tonnage generated by the covered project has been diverted from disposal and has been recycled or reused. If a lesser percentage of construction and demolition waste tonnage than is required is diverted, a proportionate share of the deposit shall be returned. The deposit shall be forfeited entirely or to the prorated extent that there is a failure to comply with the requirements of this chapter. The city may, by formal resolution, modify the amount of the required security. 
(Ord. 930 § 2 (part), 2005)  
15.54.100 - Use of performance security. 
A.  Monies received by the city as performance security shall be used only for: 
1.  Payment of performance security refunds; 
2.  Programs to divert construction, demolition, and alteration projects from the landfill; 
3.  Programs whose purpose is to develop or improve the infrastructure needed to divert wastes from construction, demolition, and alteration projects from landfill disposal; 
4.  Allocated staff costs. 
(Ord. 930 § 2 (part), 2005)  
15.54.110 - Reporting. 
A.  To the extent practical, all construction and demolition waste shall be weighed in compliance with all regulatory requirements for accuracy and maintenance. For construction and demolition waste for which weighing is not practical due to small size or other considerations, a volumetric measurement shall be used. For conversion of volumetric measurements to weight, the applicant shall use the standardized conversion rates approved by the city for this purpose. 
B.  Throughout the duration of the project, the applicant is required to submit documentation to the compliance official that proves compliance with the requirements of Sections 15.54.040 and 15.54.070 of this chapter. The documentation shall consist of monthly updates showing waste tonnage data, total tonnage, tonnage diverted, and tonnage landfilled supported by original or certified photocopies of receipts and weight tags or other records of measurement from recycling companies, deconstruction contractors, and/or landfill and disposal companies. Receipts and weight tags will be used to verify whether waste generated from the covered project has been or is being recycled, reused, salvaged or disposed. The applicant shall make reasonable efforts to ensure that all designated recyclable and reuse waste salvaged or disposed are measured and recorded using the most accurate method of measurement available. If the applicant fails to complete this requirement, the building inspector or compliance official will consider placing a stop work order on the project or covered project to ensure compliance with this section. 
C.  Within sixty (60) days following the completion of the demolition of a covered project (if applicable), and again within sixty (60) days following the final inspection of the project, the applicant shall submit documentation to the compliance official that proves compliance with the requirements of Sections 15.54.040 and 15.54.070 of this chapter. The documentation shall consist of a final completed C&D waste plan showing actual waste tonnage data, supported by original or certified photocopies of receipts and weight tags or other records of measurement from recycling companies, deconstruction contractors, and/or landfill and disposal companies. Receipts and weight tags will be used to verify whether waste generated from the covered project has been or is to be recycled, reused, salvaged, or disposed. The applicant shall make reasonable efforts to ensure that all designated recyclable and reuse waste salvaged or disposed are measured and recorded using the most accurate method of measurement available. If the applicant fails to comply with this requirement, the performance security will be forfeited. 
(Ord. 930 § 2 (part), 2005)  
15.54.120 - Forfeiture of performance security. 
A.  If the compliance official determines that the applicant has not made a good faith effort to comply with this chapter, or if the applicant fails to submit the documentation required by Sections 15.54.070, 15.54.110, and 15.54.130 of this chapter within the sixty (60)-day time period, then the deposit shall be forfeited to the city. 
B.  If it has been determined through the monthly progress of submitted documentation that the project is failing to meet the criteria of Section 15.54.040 of this chapter, the city reserves the right to hire appropriate assistance necessary for the project to achieve compliance. If this occurs, the applicant will be held liable for the costs associated with compliance. 
C.  If the compliance official determines that the applicant has diverted a lesser percentage of construction and demolition waste tonnage than required, the deposit shall be forfeited entirely or to the prorated extent that there is failure of compliance. 
(Ord. 930 § 2 (part), 2005)  
15.54.130 - Compliance and release of performance security. 
The compliance official shall review the information submitted under Section 15.54.110 of this chapter and determine whether the applicant has complied with the diversion requirement as follows: 
A.  Full Compliance. If the compliance official determines that the applicant has fully complied with the diversion requirement applicable to the project, the compliance official shall cause the performance security to be returned in full, without interest, within fifteen (15) days. 
B.  Partial Compliance. If the contractor is not found in compliance but has submitted required forms and documentation, the city may refund a percentage of the deposit for partial compliance. See schedule in this subsection to determine the amount of the security to be refunded based on the level of diversion obtained and supported. 
% Diverted 	% Deposit Returned 
50% 	100% 
40—49% 	80% 
30—39% 	60% 
20—29% 	40% 
10—19% 	20% 
Under 10% 	0% 
 
C.  Noncompliance. If the compliance official determines that the applicant has not fully or partially complied with the diversion requirement, or if the applicant fails to submit the documentation required by Section 15.54.110 of this chapter within the sixty (60)-day time period, then the performance security shall be forfeited to the city. 
(Ord. 930 § 2 (part), 2005)  
15.54.140 - Appeal/administrative appeal. 
A.  Any decision of a code compliance officer made under Section 15.54.130 of this chapter may be appealed under the procedure set forth in Chapter 3.28 of this code. 
(Ord. 930 § 2 (part), 2005)  
15.54.150 - Option to revise. 
Annually, the city will evaluate the Recycling and Diversion of Construction and Demolition Waste Ordinance to determine its effectiveness in reducing the amount of C&D waste disposed. In making this determination, the city will consider issues such as the amount of C&D waste disposed, volume of C&D activity, markets for C&D waste, and other barriers encountered by applicants. If the city determines the C&D disposed had the potential for diversion, then the city may amend these provisions and implement the necessary measures to divert more C&D waste. 
(Ord. 930 § 2 (part), 2005)  
15.54.160 - Violation as a public nuisance. 
A violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a public nuisance subject to the enforcement provisions of Title 3 of this code. 
(Ord. 930 § 2 (part), 2005)  
15.54.170 - Misdemeanor violation. 
A violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for no more than one year, or both. 
(Ord. 930 § 2 (part, 2005)  
Chapter 15.56 - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT* 
Sections:  
Article I - Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact, Purpose and Methods 
 
15.56.010 - Statutory authorization. 
The legislature of the state of California has in Government Code Sections 65302, 65560, and 65800 conferred upon local governments the authority to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the city of Coachella of the county of Riverside does hereby adopt the following floodplain management regulations. 
(Ord. 1005 § 2 (part), 2008: Ord. 1002 § 2 (part), 2008)  
15.56.020 - Findings of fact. 
A.  The flood hazard areas of Coachella Valley are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
B.  These flood losses are caused by uses that are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or protected from flood damage. The cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and velocities also contributes to flood losses. 
(Ord. 1005 § 2 (part), 2008: Ord. 1002 § 2 (part), 2008)  
15.56.030 - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by legally enforceable regulations applied uniformly throughout the community to all publicly and privately owned land within flood prone, mudslide (i.e., mudflow) or flood related erosion areas. These regulations are designed to: 
A.  Protect human life and health; 
B.  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
C.  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
D.  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
E.  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; and streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard; 
F.  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future blighted areas caused by flood damage; 
G.  Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and 
H.  Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. 
(Ord. 1005 § 2 (part), 2008: Ord. 1002 § 2 (part), 2008)  
15.56.040 - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes regulations to: 
A.  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or flood heights or velocities; 
B.  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
C.  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel floodwaters; 
D.  Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage; 
E.  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas. 
(Ord. 1005 § 2 (part), 2008: Ord. 1002 § 2 (part), 2008)  
Article II - Definitions 
 
15.56.050 - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
A Zone. See "Special flood hazard area." 
"Accessory structure" means a structure that is either: 
1.  Solely for the parking of no more than two cars; or 
2.  A small, low cost shed for limited storage, less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet and one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) in value. 
"Accessory use" means a use which is incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the parcel of land on which it is located. 
"Alluvial fan" means a geomorphologic feature characterized by a cone or fan-shaped deposit of boulders, gravel and fine sediments that have been eroded from mountain slopes, transported by flood flows, and then deposited on the valley floors, and which is subject to flash flooding, high velocity flows, debris flows, erosion, sediment movement and deposition, and channel migration. 
"Apex" means a point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur. 
"Appeal" means a request for a review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of this chapter. 
"Area of shallow flooding" means a designated AO or AH zone on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
Area of Special Flood Hazard. See "Special flood hazard area." 
"Base flood" means a flood which has a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the "one hundred (100) year flood"). Base flood is the term used throughout this chapter. 
"Base flood elevation (BFE)" means the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map for zones AE, AH, A1-30, VE and V1-V30 that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
"Basement" means any area of the building having its floor subgrade - i.e., below ground level - on all sides. 
Building. See "Structure." 
"Development" means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
"Encroachment" means the advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain. 
"Existing manufactured home park or subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before August 19, 1980. 
"Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision" means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
"Flood," "flooding," or "floodwater" means: 
1.  A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters; the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; and/or mudslides (i.e., mudflows); and 
2.  The condition resulting from flood-related erosion. 
"Flood boundary and floodway map (FBFM)" means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the floodway. 
"Flood insurance rate map (FIRM)" means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
"Flood insurance study" means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the flood insurance rate map, the flood boundary and floodway map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
"Floodplain" or "flood-prone area" means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source - see "Flooding." 
"Floodplain administrator" is the community official designated by title to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations. 
"Floodplain management" means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management regulations, and open space plans. 
"Floodplain management regulations" means this chapter and other zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as grading and erosion control) and other application of police power which control development in flood-prone areas. This term describes federal, state or local regulations in any combination thereof which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage. 
"Floodproofing" means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures, and their contents. For guidelines on dry and wet floodproofing, see FEMA Technical Bulletins TB 1-93, TB 3-93, and TB 7-93. 
"Floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. Also referred to as "Regulatory Floodway." 
"Floodway fringe" is that area of the floodplain on either side of the "Regulatory Floodway" where encroachment may be permitted. 
"Fraud and victimization" as related to Article VI of this chapter, means that the variance granted must not cause fraud on or victimization of the public. In examining this requirement, the city council will consider the fact that every newly constructed building adds to government responsibilities and remains a part of the community for fifty (50) to one hundred years (100). Buildings that are permitted to be constructed below the base flood elevation are subject during all those years to increased risk of damage from floods, while future owners of the property and the community as a whole are subject to all the costs, inconvenience, danger, and suffering that those increased flood damages bring. In addition, future owners may purchase the property, unaware that it is subject to potential flood damage, and can be insured only at very high flood insurance rates. 
"Functionally dependent use" means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, and does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
"Governing body" is the local governing unit, i.e., county or municipality, that is empowered to adopt and implement regulations to provide for the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry. 
"Hardship" as related to Article VI of this chapter means the exceptional hardship that would result from a failure to grant the requested variance. The city council requires that the variance be exceptional, unusual, and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval of one's neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be resolved through other means without granting a variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended. 
"Highest adjacent grade" means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
"Historic structure" means any structure that is: 
1.  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
2.  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
3.  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or 
4.  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
"Levee" means a man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
"Levee system" means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accord with sound engineering practices. 
"Lowest floor" means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement (see "Basement" definition). 
1.  An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure below the lowest floor that is usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor provided it conforms to applicable non-elevation design requirements, including, but not limited to: 
a.  The flood openings standard in Section 15.56.170(C)(3); 
b.  The anchoring standards in Section 15.56.170(A); 
c.  The construction materials and methods standards in Section 15.56.170(B); and 
d.  The standards for utilities in Section 15.56.180. 
2.  For residential structures, all subgrade enclosed areas are prohibited as they are considered to be basements (see "Basement" definition). This prohibition includes below-grade garages and storage areas. 
"Manufactured home" means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle." 
"Manufactured home park or subdivision" means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
"Market value" is defined in the county of Riverside substantial damage/improvement procedures. See Section 15.56.140(B)(1). 
"Mean sea level" means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
"New construction," for floodplain management purposes, means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after August 19, 1980, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
"New manufactured home park or subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after August 19, 1980. 
"Obstruction" means and includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being carried downstream. 
"One Hundred (100) Year Flood. See "Base flood." 
"Program deficiency" means a defect in a community's floodplain management regulations or administrative procedures that impairs effective implementation of those floodplain management regulations. 
"Public safety and nuisance" as related to Article VI of this chapter, means that the granting of a variance must not result in anything which is injurious to safety or health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin. 
"Recreational vehicle" means a vehicle which is: 
1.  Built on a single chassis; 
2.  Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
3.  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
4.  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
"Regulatory floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
"Remedy a violation" means to bring the structure or other development into compliance with state or local floodplain management regulations, or if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of the ordinance or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing state or federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development. 
"Riverine" means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. 
"Sheet Flow Area." See "Area of shallow flooding." 
"Special flood hazard area (SFHA)" means an area in the floodplain subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown on an FHBM or FIRM as zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or AH. 
"Start of construction" means and includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of the permit. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufacture home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
"Structure" means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground; this includes a gas or liquid storage tank or a manufactured home. 
"Substantial damage" means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
"Substantial improvement" means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
1.  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations or state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
2.  Any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
"Variance" means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter. 
"Violation" means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this chapter. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
"Water surface elevation" means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
"Watercourse" means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur. 
(Ord. 1005 § 2 (part), 2008: Ord. 1002 § 2 (part), 2008)  
Article III - General Provisions 
 
15.56.060 - Lands to which this chapter applies. 
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of city of Coachella. 
(Ord. 1005 § 2 (part), 2008: Ord. 1002 § 2 (part), 2008)  
15.56.070 - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in the "Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Riverside County, California Unincorporated Areas" dated August 18, 2003, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRMs) and flood boundary and floodway maps (FBFMs), dated August 18, 2003, and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions, are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. This FIS and attendant mapping is the minimum area of applicability of this chapter and may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow implementation of this chapter and which are recommended to the city council by the floodplain administrator. The study, FIRMs and FBFMs are on file at 1515 Sixth Street, City of Coachella, California City Engineers Office. 
(Ord. 1005 § 2 (part), 2008: Ord. 1002 § 2 (part), 2008)  
15.56.080 - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of the requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein shall prevent the city council from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. 1005 § 2 (part), 2008: Ord. 1002 § 2 (part), 2008)  
15.56.090 - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. 1005 § 2 (part), 2008: Ord. 1002 § 2 (part), 2008)  
15.56.100 - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: 
A.  Considered as minimum requirements; 
B.  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
C.  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. 1005 § 2 (part), 2008: Ord. 1002 § 2 (part), 2008)  
15.56.110 - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of city council, any officer or employee thereof, the state of California, or the Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. 1005 § 2 (part), 2008: Ord. 1002 § 2 (part), 2008)  
15.56.120 - Severability. 
This chapter and the various parts thereof are hereby declared to be severable. Should any section of this chapter be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the section so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Ord. 1005 § 2 (part), 2008: Ord. 1002 § 2 (part), 2008)  
Article IV - Administration 
 
15.56.130 - Designation of the floodplain administrator. 
The director of public works is appointed to administer, implement, and enforce this chapter by granting or denying development permits in accord with its provisions. 
(Ord. 1005 § 2 (part), 2008: Ord. 1002 § 2 (part), 2008)  
15.56.140 - Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator. 
The duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to the following: 
A.  Permit Review. Review all development permits to determine: 
1.  Permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied, including determination of substantial improvement and substantial damage of existing structures; 
2.  All other required state and federal permits have been obtained; 
3.  The site is reasonably safe from flooding; 
4.  The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying capacity of areas where base flood elevations have been determined but a floodway has not been designated. This means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the city of Coachella; and 
5.  All letters of map revision (LOMR's) for flood control projects are approved prior to the issuance of building permits. Building permits must not be issued based on conditional letters of map revision (CLOMR's). Approved CLOMR's allow construction of the proposed flood control project and land preparation as specified in the "start of construction" definition. 
B.  Development of Substantial Improvement and Substantial Damage Procedures. 
1.  Using FEMA publication FEMA 213, "Answers to Questions About Substantially Damaged Buildings," develop detailed procedures for identifying and administering requirements for substantial improvement and substantial damage, to include defining "Market Value." 
2.  Assure procedures are coordinated with other departments/divisions and implemented by community staff. 
C.  Review, Use and Development of Other Base Flood Data. When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 15.56.070, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency, or other source, in order to administer Article V. 
NOTE: A base flood elevation may be obtained using one of two methods from the FEMA publication, FEMA 265, "Managing Floodplain Development in Approximate Zone A Areas—A Guide for Obtaining and Developing Base (100-year) Flood Elevations" dated July 1995. 
D.  Notification of Other Agencies. 
1.  Alteration or Relocation of a Watercourse. 
a.  Notify adjacent communities and the California Department of Water Resources prior to alteration or relocation; 
b.  Submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency; and 
c.  Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained. 
2.  Base Flood Elevation Changes Due to Physical Alterations. 
a.  Within six months of information becoming available or project completion, whichever comes first, the floodplain administrator shall submit or assure that the permit applicant submits technical or scientific data to FEMA for a letter of map revision (LOMR). 
b.  All LOMR's for flood control projects are approved prior to the issuance of building permits. Building permits must not be issued based on conditional letters of map revision (CLOMR's). Approved CLOMR's allow construction of the proposed flood control project and land preparation as specified in the "start of construction" definition. 
Such submissions are necessary so that upon confirmation of those physical changes affecting flooding conditions, risk premium rates and floodplain management requirements are based on current data. 
3.  Changes in Corporate Boundaries. Notify FEMA in writing whenever the corporate boundaries have been modified by annexation or other means and include a copy of a map of the community clearly delineating the new corporate limits. 
E.  Documentation of Floodplain Development. Obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available as needed the following: 
1.  Certification required by Sections 15.56.170(C)(1) and 15.56.200 (lowest floor elevations); 
2.  Certification required by Section 15.56.170(C)(2) (elevation or floodproofing of nonresidential structures); 
3.  Certification required by Sections 15.56.170(C)(3) (wet floodproofing standard); 
4.  Certification of elevation required by Section 15.56.190(A)(3) (subdivisions and other proposed development standards); 
5.  Certification required by Section 15.56.220(B) (floodway encroachments); and 
6.  Maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its biennial report submitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
F.  Map Determination. Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in Section 15.56.160. 
F.  Remedial Action. Take action to remedy violations of this chapter as specified in Section 15.56.080. 
G.  Biennial Report. Complete and submit Biennial Report to FEMA. 
H.  Planning. Assure community's general plan is consistent with floodplain management objectives herein. 
(Ord. 1005 § 2 (part), 2008: Ord. 1002 § 2 (part), 2008)  
15.56.150 - Development permit. 
A development permit shall be obtained before any construction or other development, including manufactured homes, within any area of special flood hazard established in Section 15.56.070. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the city of Coachella. The applicant shall provide the following minimum information: 
A.  Plans in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing: 
1.  Location, dimensions, and elevation of the area in question, existing or proposed structures, storage of materials and equipment and their location; 
2.  Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and other utilities; 
3.  Grading information showing existing and proposed contours, any proposed fill, and drainage facilities; 
4.  Location of the regulatory floodway when applicable; 
5.  Base flood elevation information as specified in Section 15.56.070 or 15.56.140; 
6.  Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures; and 
7.  Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed, as required in Section 15.56.170(C)(2) of this chapter and detailed in FEMA Technical Bulletin TB 3-93. 
B.  Certification from a registered civil engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed building meets the floodproofing criteria in Section 15.56.170(C)(2). 
C.  For a crawl-space foundation, location and total net area of foundation openings as required in Section 15.56.170(C)(3) of this chapter and detailed in FEMA Technical Bulletins 1-93 and 7-93. 
D.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
E.  All appropriate certifications listed in Section 15.56.140(E) of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1005 § 2 (part), 2008: Ord. 1002 § 2 (part), 2008)  
15.56.160 - Appeals. 
The city council of the city of Coachella shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1005 § 2 (part), 2008: Ord. 1002 § 2 (part), 2008)  
Article V - Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction 
 
15.56.170 - Standards of construction. 
In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required: 
A.  Anchoring. All new construction and substantial improvements of structures, including manufactured homes, shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. 
B.  Construction Materials and Methods. All new construction and substantial improvements of structures, including manufactured homes, shall be constructed: 
1.  With flood resistant materials, and utility equipment resistant to flood damage for areas below the base flood elevation; 
2.  Using methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
3.  With electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; and 
4.  Within zones AH or AO, so that there are adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
C.  Elevation and Floodproofing. 
1.  Residential Construction. All new construction or substantial improvements of residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement: 
a.  In AE, AH, A1-30 zones, elevated two feet above the base flood elevation. 
b.  In an AO zone, elevated above the highest adjacent grade to a height equal to or exceeding the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM, or elevated at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified. 
c.  In an A zone, without BFE's specified on the FIRM (unnumbered A zone), elevated two feet above base flood elevation; as determined under Section 15.56.140(C). 
Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor, and verified by the community building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator. 
2.  Nonresidential Construction. All new construction or substantial improvements of nonresidential structures shall either be elevated to conform with subsection (C)(1) of this section or: 
a.  Be floodproofed, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, below the elevation recommended under subsection (C)(1) of this section, so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water; 
b.  Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and 
c.  Be certified by a registered civil engineer or architect that the standards of subsections (C)(2)(a) and (C)(2)(b) of this section are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator. 
3.  Flood Openings. All new construction and substantial improvements of structures with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding basements) that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, and which are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwater. Designs for meeting this requirement must meet the following minimum criteria: 
a.  For non-engineered openings: 
i.  Have a minimum of two openings on different sides having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
ii.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; 
iii.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwater; and 
iv.  Buildings with more than one enclosed area must have openings on exterior walls for each area to allow floodwater to directly enter; or 
b.  Be certified by a registered civil engineer or architect. 
4.  Manufactured Homes. 
a.  See Section 15.56.200. 
5.  Garages and Low Cost Accessory Structures. 
a.  Attached Garages. 
i.  A garage attached to a residential structure, constructed with the garage floor slab below the BFE, must be designed to allow for the automatic entry of floodwaters. See Section 15.56.170(C)(3). Areas of the garage below the BFE must be constructed with flood resistant materials. See Section 15.56.170(B). 
ii.  A garage attached to a nonresidential structure must meet the above requirements or be dry floodproofed. For guidance on below grade parking areas, see FEMA Technical Bulletin TB-6. 
b.  Detached garages and accessory structures. 
1.  "Accessory structures" used solely for parking (two car detached garages or smaller) or limited storage (small, low-cost sheds), as defined in Section 15.56.050, may be constructed such that its floor is below the base flood elevation (BFE), provided the structure is designed and constructed in accordance with the following requirements: 
i.  Use of the accessory structure must be limited to parking or limited storage; 
ii.  The portions of the accessory structure located below the BFE must be built using flood-resistant materials; 
iii.  The accessory structure must be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement; 
iv.  Any mechanical and utility equipment in the accessory structure must be elevated or floodproofed to or above the BFE; 
v.  The accessory structure must comply with floodplain encroachment provisions in Section 15.56.200; and 
vi.  The accessory structure must be designed to allow for the automatic entry of floodwaters in accordance with Section 15.56.170(C)(3). 
2.  Detached garages and accessory structures not meeting the above standards must be constructed in accordance with all applicable standards in Section 15.56.170. 
(Ord. 1005 § 2 (part), 2008: Ord. 1002 § 2 (part), 2008)  
15.56.180 - Standards for utilities. 
A.  All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate: 
1.  Infiltration of floodwaters into the systems; and 
2.  Discharge from the systems into floodwaters. 
B.  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Ord. 1005 § 2 (part), 2008: Ord. 1002 § 2 (part), 2008)  
15.56.190 - Standards for subdivisions and other proposed development. 
A.  All new subdivisions proposals and other proposed development, including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions, greater than fifty (50) lots or five acres, whichever is the lesser, shall: 
1.  Identify the special flood hazard areas (SFHA) and base flood elevations (BFE); 
2.  Identify the elevations of lowest floors of all proposed structures and pads on the final plans; 
3.  If the site is filled above the base flood elevation, the following as-built information for each structure shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor and provided as part of an application for a letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F) to the floodplain administrator: 
a.  Lowest floor elevation, 
b.  Pad elevation, 
c.  Lowest adjacent grade. 
B.  All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
C.  All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
D.  All subdivisions and other proposed development shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(Ord. 1005 § 2 (part), 2008: Ord. 1002 § 2 (part), 2008)  
15.56.200 - Standards for manufactured homes. 
A.  All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved, on sites located: (1) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; (2) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision; (3) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or (4) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision upon which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, shall: 
1.  Within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's flood insurance rate map, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
B.  All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's flood insurance rate map that are not subject to the provisions of Section 15.56.200(A) will be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement, and be elevated so that either the: 
1.  Lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation; or 
2.  Manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade. 
Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor, and verified by the community building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator. 
(Ord. 1005 § 2 (part), 2008: Ord. 1002 § 2 (part), 2008)  
15.56.210 - Standards for recreational vehicles. 
A.  All recreational vehicles placed in zones A1-30, AH, and AE will either: 
1.  Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days; or 
2.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or 
3.  Meet the permit requirements of Section 15.56.150 of this chapter and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in Section 15.56.200(A). 
(Ord. 1005 § 2 (part), 2008: Ord. 1002 § 2 (part), 2008)  
15.56.220 - Floodways. 
Since floodways are an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply: 
A.  Until a regulatory floodway is adopted, no new construction, substantial development, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within zones A1-30 and AE, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the city of Coachella. 
B.  Within an adopted regulatory floodway, the city of Coachella shall prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development, unless certification by a registered civil engineer is provided demonstrating that the proposed encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
C.  If Sections 15.56.220(A) and (B) are satisfied, all new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Article V. 
(Ord. 1005 § 2 (part), 2008: Ord. 1002 § 2 (part), 2008)  
Article VI - Variance Procedure 
 
15.56.230 - Nature of variances. 
The issuance of a variance is for floodplain management purposes only. Insurance premium rates are determined by statute according to actuarial risk and will not be modified by the granting of a variance. 
The variance criteria set forth in this section of the ordinance are based on the general principle of zoning law that variances pertain to a piece of property and are not personal in nature. A variance may be granted for a parcel of property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the requirements of this chapter would create an exceptional hardship to the applicant or the surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its inhabitants, or the property owners. 
It is the duty of the city council to help protect its citizens from flooding. This need is so compelling and the implications of the cost of insuring a structure built below flood level are so serious that variances from the flood elevation or from other requirements in the flood ordinance are quite rare. The long term goal of preventing and reducing flood loss and damage can only be met if variances are strictly limited. Therefore, the variance guidelines provided in this chapter are more detailed and contain multiple provisions that must be met before a variance can be properly granted. The criteria are designed to screen out those situations in which alternatives other than a variance are more appropriate. 
(Ord. 1005 § 2 (part), 2008: Ord. 1002 § 2 (part), 2008)  
15.56.240 - Conditions for variances. 
A.  Generally, variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing that the procedures of Articles IV and V of this chapter have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
B.  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of "historic structures" (as defined in Section 15.56.050 of this chapter) upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
C.  Variances shall not be issued within any mapped regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
D.  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the "minimum necessary" considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. "Minimum necessary" means to afford relief with a minimum of deviation from the requirements of this chapter. For example, in the case of variances to an elevation requirement, this means the city council need not grant permission for the applicant to build at grade, or even to whatever elevation the applicant proposes, but only to that elevation which the city council believes will both provide relief and preserve the integrity of the local ordinance. 
E.  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice over the signature of a community official that: 
1.  The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage; and 
2.  Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. It is recommended that a copy of the notice shall be recorded by the floodplain administrator in the office of the Riverside County recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land. 
F.  The floodplain administrator will maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its biennial report submitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(Ord. 1005 § 2 (part), 2008: Ord. 1002 § 2 (part), 2008)  
15.56.250 - Appeal board. 
A.  In passing upon requests for variances, the city council shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and the: 
1.  Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
2.  Danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
3.  Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the existing individual owner and future owners of the property; 
4.  Importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
5.  Necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
6.  Availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage; 
7.  Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
8.  Relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
9.  Safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
10.  Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the site; and 
11.  Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water system, and streets and bridges. 
B.  Variances shall only be issued upon a: 
1.  Showing of good and sufficient cause; 
2.  Determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional "hardship" to the applicant; and 
3.  Determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense, create a nuisance (see "Public safety and nuisance"), cause "fraud and victimization" of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
C.  Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that the provisions of subsections A through D of this section are satisfied and that the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and does not result in additional threats to public safety and does not create a public nuisance. 
D.  Upon consideration of the factors of Section 15.56.240(A) and the purposes of this chapter, the city council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1005 § 2 (part), 2008: Ord. 1002 § 2 (part), 2008)  
APPENDIX 
Appendices 
1.0 ALLUVIAL FAN ADVISORY 
Hazards of Alluvial Fan Development 
Alluvial fans present a unique flood hazard environment where the combination of sediment, slope, and topography create an ultra hazardous condition for which elevation on fill will not provide reliable protection. Active alluvial fan flooding is characterized by flow path uncertainty combined with abrupt deposition and erosion. As a result, any area of an alluvial fan may be subject to intense flood hazards. 
The technology of mathematically modeling the hydrodynamics of water and debris flows for alluvial fans is still in the early development stage. The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has formulated a mapping procedure for the purpose of defining the likelihood of flood hazards on inundated alluvial fan zones to be used for flood insurance purposes and general floodplain regulation, referred to as the FEMA alluvial fan methodology. 
An active alluvial fan flooding hazard is indicated by three related criteria: 
a. Flow path uncertainty below the hydrographic apex; 
b. Abrupt deposition and ensuing erosion of sediment as a stream or debris flow loses its competence to carry material eroded from a steeper, upstream source area; and 
c. An environment where the combination of sediment availability, slope, and topography creates an ultra hazardous condition for which elevation on fill will not reliably mitigate the risk. 
Inactive alluvial fan flooding is similar to traditional riverine flood hazards, but occurs only on alluvial fans. It is characterized by flow paths with a higher degree of certainty in realistic assessments of flood risk or in the reliable mitigation of the hazard. Counter to active alluvial fan flooding hazards, an inactive alluvial fan flooding hazard is characterized by relatively stable flow paths. However, areas of inactive alluvial fan flooding, as with active alluvial fan flooding, may be subject to sediment deposition and erosion, but to a degree that does not cause flow path instability and uncertainty. 
An alluvial fan may exhibit both active alluvial fan flooding and inactive alluvial fan flooding hazards. The hazards may vary spatially or vary at the same location, contingent on the level of flow discharge. Spatially, for example, upstream inactive portions of the alluvial fan may distribute flood flow to active areas at the distal part of the alluvial fan. Hazards may vary at the same location, for example, with a flow path that may be stable for lower flows, but become unstable at higher flows. 
More detailed information can be found at FEMA's website: "Guidelines for Determining Flood Hazards on Alluvial Fans" at http://www.fema.gov/fhm/ft_afgd2.shtm#1. 
Alluvial Fans and LOMR's 
The NFIP does not allow for the removal of land from the floodplain based on the placement of fill (LOMR-F) in alluvial fan flood hazard areas. The NFIP will credit a major structural flood control project, through the LOMR process, that will effectively eliminate alluvial fan flood hazards from the protected area. Details about map revisions for alluvial fan areas can be found in the Code of Federal Regulations at Title 44, Part 65.13. 
Alluvial Fan Task Force 
 As stated in AB 2141 (Longville, Chapter 878, Statutes of 2004), the State of California Department of Water Resources will convene an Alluvial Fan Task Force (AFTF). The AFTF will produce an alluvial fan model ordinance for local communities and a recommendations report to the legislature. As of March 2006, the ordinance and report are projected to be completed by 2007. 
2.0 HIGHER STANDARDS RECOMMENDED BY THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
This ordinance meets the minimum standards required to participate in the National Flood Insurance Program. Community adoption of higher standards can be applied towards credit under the Community Rating System (CRS) program and result in reduced premiums for all flood insurance policy holders within the entire community. The State of California recommends: 
A. Freeboard. 
• To elevate at least 2 feet above the minimum required base flood elevation, make the following changes: 
1. Modify Sections 5.1.C.1.a, 5.1.C.1.C, and 5.4.A.1 by replacing "elevated to or above" with "elevated 2 feet above." 
2. Modify Section 5.4.B.1 by replacing "at or above" with "at least 2 feet above." 
3. Replace Section 5.1.C.1.b with: 
In an AO zone, elevated above the highest adjacent grade to a height 2 feet above the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM, or elevated at least 4 feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified. 
B. Determining BFE's in Unnumbered A Zones. 
• Replace "may" with "shall" in the second paragraph of Section 4.2.C to read: 
"NOTE: A base flood elevation shall…" 
C. Determining Market Value of Existing Structures. 
• Replace the "Market value" definition in Section 2 with: 
"Market value" shall be determined by estimating the cost to replace the structure in new condition and adjusting that cost figure by the amount of depreciation which has accrued since the structure was constructed. 
1. The cost of replacement of the structure shall be based on a square foot cost factor determined by reference to a building cost estimating guide recognized by the building construction industry. 
2. The amount of depreciation shall be determined by taking into account the age and physical deterioration of the structure and functional obsolescence as approved by the floodplain administrator, but shall not include economic or other forms of external obsolescence. 
Use of replacement costs or accrued depreciation factors different from those contained in recognized building cost estimating guides may be considered only if such factors are included in a report prepared by an independent professional appraiser and supported by a written explanation of the differences. 
D. Increased Cost of Compliance (ICC) Coverage—Repetitive Loss Provisions. 
This provision allows communities the opportunity for flood insurance policy holders to have ICC coverage made available in repetitive loss situations. 
• Modify the definition of "Substantial damage" as follows: 
"Substantial damage" means: 
1. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred; or 
2. Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a 10-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. This is also known as "repetitive loss." 
E. Non-conversion of Enclosed Areas Below the Lowest Floor. 
• Insert/add the following section as Section 4.2.J. 
A. Non-conversion of Enclosed Areas Below the Lowest Floor. 
To ensure that the areas below the BFE shall be used solely for parking vehicles, limited storage, or access to the building and not be finished for use as human habitation without first becoming fully compliant with the floodplain management ordinance in effect at the time of conversion, the Floodplain Administrator shall: 
1. Determine which applicants for new construction and/or substantial improvements have fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are 5 feet or higher; 
2. Enter into a "NON-CONVERSION AGREEMENT FOR CONSTRUCTION WITHIN FLOOD HAZARD AREAS" or equivalent with the City of Coachella. The agreement shall be recorded with the County of Riverside County Recorder as a deed restriction. The non-conversion agreement shall be in a form acceptable to the Floodplain Administrator and County Counsel; and 
3. Have the authority to inspect any area of a structure below the base flood elevation to ensure compliance upon prior notice of at least 72 hours. 
3.0 SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS 
A. Crawlspace Construction. 
Communities with construction practices that result in crawl spaces with interior floors up to 2 feet below grade have historically been in violation of the NFIP requirements. FEMA Technical Bulletin 11-01 now provides accommodation for these practices. 
• Remove the following from "Lowest floor" definition in Section 2: 
2. For residential structures, all subgrade enclosed areas are prohibited as they are considered to be basements (see "Basement" definition). This prohibition includes below-grade garages and storage areas. 
• Add the following section into your ordinance at Section 5.1 .C: 
5.1 .C. Crawlspace Construction. 
This sub-section applies to buildings with crawl spaces up to 2 feet below grade. Below-grade crawl space construction in accordance with the requirements listed below will not be considered basements. 
a. The building must be designed and adequately anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. Crawl space construction is not allowed in areas with flood velocities greater than 5 feet per second unless the design is reviewed by a qualified design professional, such as a registered architect or professional engineer; 
b. The crawl space is an enclosed area below the BFE and, as such, must have openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. For guidance on flood openings, see FEMA Technical Bulletin 1-93; 
c. Crawl space construction is not permitted in V zones. Open pile or column foundations that withstand storm surge and wave forces are required in V zones; 
d. Portions of the building below the BFE must be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage. This includes not only the foundation walls of the crawl space used to elevate the building, but also any joists, insulation, or other materials that extend below the BFE; and 
e. Any building utility systems within the crawl space must be elevated above BFE or designed so that floodwaters cannot enter or accumulate within the system components during flood conditions. 
f. Requirements for all below-grade crawl space construction, in addition to the above requirements, to include the following: 
1. The interior grade of a crawl space below the BFE must not be more than 2 feet below the lowest adjacent exterior grade (LAG), shown as D in figure 3 of Technical Bulletin 11-01; 
2. The height of the below-grade crawl space, measured from the interior grade of the crawl space to the top of the crawl space foundation wall must not exceed 4 feet (shown as L in figure 3 of Technical Bulletin 11-01) at any point; 
3. There must be an adequate drainage system that removes floodwaters from the interior area of the crawl space within a reasonable period of time after a flood event, not to exceed 72 hours; and 
4. The velocity of floodwaters at the site should not exceed 5 feet per second for any crawl space. For velocities in excess of 5 feet per second, other foundation types should be used. 
B. Mudslide (i.e., Mudflow) Prone Areas. (Zone M) 
• Communities with mudslide prone areas shall insert the following: 
1. Definitions to Section 2: 
"Area of special mudslide (i.e., mudflow) hazard" is the area subject to severe mudslides (i.e., mudflows). The area is designated as Zone M on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). 
"Mudslide" describes a condition where there is a river, flow or inundation of liquid mud down a hillside, usually as a result of a dual condition of loss of brush cover and the subsequent accumulation of water on the ground, preceded by a period of unusually heavy or sustained rain. 
"Mudslide (i.e., mudflow) prone area" means an area with land surfaces and slopes of unconsolidated material where the history, geology, and climate indicate a potential for mudflow. 
2. Section " 5.{X} Mudslide (i.e., Mudflow) Prone Areas ": 
5.{X} Mudslide (i.e., Mudflow) Prone Areas. 
A.  The Floodplain Administrator shall review permits for proposed construction of other development to determine if it is proposed within a mudslide area. 
B.  Permits shall be reviewed to determine that the proposed site and improvement will be reasonably safe from mudslide hazards. Factors to be considered in making this determination include, but are not limited to: 
1. The type and quality of soils; 
2. Evidence of ground water or surface water problems; 
3. Depth and quality of any fill; 
4. Overall slope of the site; and 
5. Weight that any proposed development will impose on the slope. 
C.  Within areas which may have mudslide hazards, the Floodplain Administrator shall require: 
1. A site investigation and further review by persons qualified in geology and soils engineering; 
2. The proposed grading, excavation, new construction, and substantial improvement be adequately designed and protected against mudslide damages; 
3. The proposed grading, excavations, new construction, and substantial improvement not aggravate the existing hazard by creating either on-site or off-site disturbances; and 
4. Drainage, planting, watering, and maintenance not endanger slope stability. 
C. Erosion-prone areas. (Zone E) 
• Communities with erosion prone areas shall insert the following: 
1. Definitions into Section 2: 
"Area of special flood-related erosion hazard" is the land within a community which is most likely to be subject to severe flood-related erosion losses. The area may be designated as Zone E on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). 
"Flood-related erosion" means the collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical level or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusually and unforeseeable event which results in flooding. 
"Flood-related erosion area" or "Flood-related erosion prone area" means a land area adjoining the shore of a lake or other body of water, which due to the composition of the shoreline or bank and high water levels or wind-driven currents, is likely to suffer flood-related erosion damage. 
"Flood-related erosion area management" means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood-related erosion damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood-related erosion control works, and floodplain management regulations. 
2. Section " 5.{X} FLOOD-RELATED EROSION-PRONE AREA " into Section 5: 
5.{X} FLOOD-RELATED EROSION-PRONE AREA 
A.  The Floodplain Administrator shall require permits for proposed construction and other development within all flood-related erosion-prone areas known to the community. 
B.  Permit applications shall be reviewed to determine whether the proposed site alterations and improvements will be reasonably safe from flood-related erosion, and will not cause flood-related erosion hazards or otherwise aggravate the existing hazard. 
C.  If a proposed improvement is found to be in the path of flood-related erosion or would increase the erosion hazard, such improvement shall be relocated or adequate protective measures shall be taken to avoid aggravating the existing erosion hazard. 
D.  Within Zone E on the Flood Insurance Rate Map, a setback is required for all new development from the ocean, lake, bay, riverfront or other body of water to create a safety buffer consisting of a natural vegetative or contour strip. This buffer shall be designated according to the flood-related erosion hazard and erosion rate, in relation to the anticipated "useful life" of structures, and depending upon the geologic, hydrologic, topographic, and climatic characteristics of the land. The buffer may be used for suitable open space purposes, such as for agricultural, forestry, outdoor recreation and wildlife habitat areas, and for other activities using temporary and portable structures only.  
Chapter 15.60 - ENFORCEMENT 
Sections: 
 
15.60.010 - Violations. 
A.  It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to alter, construct, convert, demolish, enlarge, equip, erect, improve, maintain, move, occupy, repair, or use any building or structure in the city, or cause or permit the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any provision of any code adopted under this chapter. A person shall be guilty of a separate and distinct offense for each and every day during which any violation of any provision of any code adopted under this chapter is committed, continued, or permitted to be committed or continued. 
B.  It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to fail to comply with a notice or order to comply or repair issued under any provision of any code adopted under this chapter. A person shall be guilty of a separate and distinct offense for each and every day that he or she fails to comply with the notice or order. 
(Prior code § 7-176)  
15.60.020 - Penalties. 
Every person found guilty of a misdemeanor shall be punishable for each separate offense by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment in the county jail not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Prior code § 7-177)  
15.60.030 - Mobilehome Parks Act and Special Occupancy Parks Act—Notice of cancellation of responsibility. 
A.  Pursuant to subdivisions 18300(e) and 18865(e) of the California Health and Safety Code and Section 1006 of the California Code of Regulations, Title 25, Division 1, Chapter 2, the city of Coachella does hereby provide notification to the department of housing and community development of its intent to cancel its assumption of responsibility for enforcement of the Mobilehome Parks Act (Health and Safety Code Section 18200 et seq.) and the Special Occupancy Parks Act (Health and Safety Code Section 18860 et seq). 
B.  The mayor is authorized to sign such written notice of cancellation on behalf of the city as may be necessary to provide proper notice to the department of housing and community development. 
C.  The city clerk is authorized to transmit a certified copy of the ordinance codified in this section to the administrative office of the department of housing and community development, mobilehome parks program. 
D.  Provided the applicable provisions for cancellation of responsibility contained in the Mobilehome Parks Act and the Special Occupancy Parks Act have been met, the ordinance codified in this section shall become effective in accordance with applicable law. 
(Ord. 969 § 1, 2007)  
15.60.040 - Purpose and intent; violation of chapter. 
The city council has determined that the quality of life in Coachella is tied to the character and condition of real property within the city, and that inadequate property maintenance tends to cause a diminution in the enjoyment, use, aesthetics, and value of surrounding properties. It is the purpose of this chapter to restate, cross-reference, and amend the city's property maintenance standards, in an effort to promote public awareness of those standards, visual unity and order, as well as enhance the value of land and development within the city, and protect the appearance, integrity and character of the community. Restatements and cross-references of existing code provisions and laws are not intended to supersede or conflict with those laws. 
Inspection of property for compliance with these standards may be accomplished in any constitutionally permissible fashion including inspection from public rights-of-way, inspection with a property owner or occupier's consent, and inspection through a court-issued warrant. Violations of the property management standards of this chapter are declared a public nuisance, which may be abated by the city in accordance with Chapter 8.20 of this code. In addition to or in lieu of such administrative abatement, the city may pursue any other legal or equitable remedies available to it under this code or state law, including, but not limited to, the procedures contained in the California Health and Safety Code. 
(Ord. 988 § 6 (part), 2007)  
15.60.050 - Substandard buildings and housing. 
Buildings and structures on property shall not be left abandoned, partially destroyed, in an "unreasonable state of partial construction," or in a condition that violates an applicable provision of the California Health and Safety Code or of the California Codes previously adopted by the city, as the same currently exist or may hereafter be amended. See California Health and Safety Code Sections 17920.3, 17922.2; see also Title 15 of this code. 
For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
"Abandoned" means forsaken and devoid of any apparent owner or other person claiming title, or unoccupied and unmaintained for such an extended period of time and in such a manner as to give an outward appearance that all claims to possession or control have been relinquished. 
"Partially destroyed" means severely damaged by fire, flood, earthquake, vandalism or other forces and, as a result, substantially detracting from the appearance of the immediate neighborhood or reduces the property values in the immediate neighborhood. 
"Unreasonable state of partial construction" means a state in which building permits for construction have expired before the completion of construction and the partially constructed building or structure substantially detracts from the appearance of the immediate neighborhood, or reduces the property values in the immediate neighborhood. 
(Ord. 988 § 6 (part), 2007)  
Chapter 15.62 - SAFETY ASSESSMENT PLACARDS 
Sections: 
 
15.62.010 - Intent. 
This chapter establishes standard placards to be used to indicate the condition of a structure for continued occupancy. The chapter further authorizes the building official and his or her authorized representatives to post the appropriate placard at each entry point to a building or structure upon completion of a safety assessment. 
(Ord. 958 § 1 (part), 2006)  
15.62.020 - Application of provisions. 
The provisions of this chapter are applicable to all buildings and structures of all occupancies regulated by the city of Coachella. The council may extend the provisions as necessary. 
(Ord. 958 § 1 (part), 2006)  
15.62.030 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
"Safety assessment" means a visual, nondestructive examination of a building or structure for the purpose of determining the condition for continued occupancy. 
(Ord. 958 § 1 (part), 2006)  
15.62.040 - Placards. 
A.  The following are verbal descriptions of the official jurisdiction placards to be used to designate the condition for continued occupancy of buildings or structures. Copies of actual placards are attached. 
1.  "INSPECTED - Lawful Occupancy Permitted" is to be posted on any building or structure wherein no apparent structural hazard has been found. This placard is not intended to mean that there is no damage to the building or structure. 
2.  "RESTRICTED USE" is to be posted on each building or structure that has been damaged wherein the damage has resulted in some form of restriction to the continued occupancy. The individual who posts this placard will note in general terms the type of damage encountered and will clearly and concisely note the restrictions on continued occupancy. 
3.  "UNSAFE - Do Not Enter or Occupy" is to be posted on each building or structure that has been damaged such that continued occupancy poses a threat to life safety. Buildings or structures posted with this placard shall not be entered under any circumstance except as authorized in writing by the building official, or his or her authorized representative. Safety assessment teams shall be authorized to enter these buildings at any time. This placard is not to be used or considered as a demolition order. The individual who posts this placard will note in general terms the type of damage encountered. 
B.  The number of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the name of the jurisdiction, its address, and phone number shall be permanently affixed to each placard. 
C.  Once it has been attached to a building or structure, a placard is not to be removed, altered or covered until done so by an authorized representative of the building official. It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to alter, remove, cover or deface a placard unless authorized pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. 958 § 1 (part), 2006)  
Chapter 15.66 - SEISMIC HAZARD MITIGATION 
Sections: 
 
15.66.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to promote public safety by identifying those buildings in the city of Coachella which are most susceptible to earthquake damage and to require certain mitigation measures to protect the lives of persons working and residing in Coachella. 
(Ord. 985 § 1, 2007)  
15.66.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
"Accessory building" is a detached subordinate building, the use of which is customarily incidental to that of the principal building or to the primary uses of the land and which is located on the same lot with the principal building or use. 
"California Building Code (CBC)" is as published by the International Conference of Building Officials, Whittier, California, as adopted by the city of Coachella. 
"Civil engineer or structural engineer" means a licensed civil or structural engineer registered by the state of California pursuant to the rules and regulations set forth in Chapter 5 of Title 16 of the California Administrative Code. 
"Diaphragm" is a horizontal or nearly horizontal system acting to transmit lateral forces to the vertical resisting elements. When the term "diaphragm" is used, it includes horizontal bracing systems. 
"Essential building" is any building housing a hospital or other medical facility having surgery or emergency treatment areas; fire or police stations; municipal government disaster operation and communication centers. 
"Exterior design elements" means and includes, but are not limited to, parapets, cornices, masonry veneers, and any additional exterior nonstructural features which are likely to fall on the public right-of-way during an earthquake. 
"Load bearing walls" means masonry walls having all of the following characteristics: 
1.  Provide the vertical support for a floor or roof; 
2.  Have a total superimposed load over one hundred (100) pounds per linear foot. 
"Unreinforced masonry (URM) building" means any building containing load bearing walls and/or columns constructed wholly or partially of masonry which have an area of vertical, horizontal and combined reinforcing steel less than fifty (50) percent of that required by the 1988 Uniform Building Code, and includes, but is not limited to: 
1.  Unreinfoced brick masonry; 
2.  Hollow clay tile; 
3.  Adobe unburned clay tile; 
4.  Stone masonry. 
(Ord. 985 § 2, 2007)  
15.66.030 - Applicability. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all unreinforced masonry buildings in the city, and to buildings with exterior design elements which, in the opinion of the building official, are subject to failure in the event of an earthquake. 
(Ord. 985 § 3, 2007)  
15.66.040 - Exempted unreinforced masonry buildings. 
The following buildings are exempted from complying with this chapter: 
A.  Unoccupied accessory buildings on residential lots; 
B.  Buildings which meet the minimum hazard reduction requirements of Section 15.66.090, and are used as warehouses with not more than ten (10) percent of the gross floor area used as office space accessory to the warehouse use. Warehouses which contain pharmaceutical supplies or hazardous materials or are used for disaster relief or emergency services are not exempt from this chapter; 
C.  Buildings which have been structurally upgraded in substantial conformity to the structural standards for unreinforced masonry buildings of Appendix Chapter 1 of the Uniform Code for Building Conservation ("UCBC"), or to the force levels of the 1973 or later, edition of the UBC, or to another standard approved by the building official. 
(Ord. 985 § 4, 2007)  
15.66.050 - Notification of owners. 
Owners of buildings subject to the provisions of this chapter shall be notified within thirty (30) days of the effective date of this chapter by the building division of the city of Coachella that each such building has been included in the city's list of potentially hazardous buildings, and of all of the requirements of this chapter. Building owners shall also be notified that they are required to comply with the sign posting requirements of California Government Code Section 8875.8. 
(Ord. 985 § 5, 2007)  
15.66.060 - Removal from list of potentially hazardous buildings. 
A building may be removed from the city's list of potentially hazardous buildings by demonstrating to the satisfaction of the building official that either: 
A.  The building is exempt under the provisions of Section 15.66.040; or 
B.  All of the following conditions are met: 
1.  The minimum hazard reduction requirement of Section 15.66.090 has been satisfied, 
2.  A seismic safety report has been prepared in accordance with Section 15.66.070 herein, and 
3.  That any additional mitigation work recommended in the seismic safety report has been performed and the building has been structurally upgraded to be in substantial conformity with the structural standards for unreinforced masonry buildings of Appendix Chapter 1 of the Uniform Code for Building Conservation ("UCBC"), or to the force levels of the 1973, or later, edition of the UBC, or to another standard approved by the building official. 
(Ord. 985 § 6, 2007)  
15.66.070 - Seismic safety report. 
Owners of buildings identified as potentially hazardous shall submit a seismic safety report to the building division of the city of Coachella as follows: 
A.  Time Frame. Seismic safety reports shall be submitted within twelve (12) months of the effective date of this chapter, or such additional time as the building official deems necessary and proper; 
B.  Authorized Preparers. Seismic safety reports shall be prepared by a civil or structural engineer licensed by the state of California. Each seismic safety report shall bear the signature and professional registration number, including its expiration date, or the responsible engineer; 
C.  Purpose. The purpose of the seismic safety report shall be to evaluate the structural adequacy of the building to resist the seismic effects of earthquake, meet the standards described in subsection D hereof, and to identify any exterior design elements. The report may include a compliance plan as described in Section 15.66.080, if rehabilitation is deemed necessary. 
Building Standards. The building standards to be used in preparation of seismic safety reports shall be the minimum hazard reduction described in Section 15.66.090 the UCBC or the 1973, or later edition of the UBC, and any other standards accepted by the building official; 
D.  Format. The format for seismic safety reports shall incorporate the following data: 
1.  General Information. The building's address, age, original use, and any subsequent changes in use or occupancy, 
2.  Configuration. A description of the building's size, shape, arrangement of structural elements, and any irregularities or discontinuities. Shall also include nonstructural elements such as appendages, parapets, and veneers, 
3.  Materials. The types, ages and present conditions of all materials, 
4.  Plans of Existing Construction. A description of the seismic integrity of existing conditions with an adequate and appropriate degree of detail, 
5.  Calculations to Check Existing Construction. A description of the capacities of existing resisting elements and connections and including any testing results, 
6.  Conclusions and Recommendations. A description of the areas found to be deficient in their ability to withstand prescribed seismic forces. This section discuss in general terms the alternatives available for mitigation to the applicable standards of these inadequacies and recommendations for the most suitable solutions. 
(Ord. 985 § 7, 2007)  
15.66.080 - Compliance plan. 
If the seismic safety report for a building has identified deficiencies the owner shall submit a compliance plan for approval by the building official within ninety (90) days after submittal of the seismic safety report. The report shall describe how the building owner intends to approach hazard reductions of the building in addition to improvements required under Section 15.66.090 (Minimum hazard reduction requirement) and when the indicated improvements will be made. Options available to the building owner to achieve hazard reduction include, but are not limited to, the following: 
A.  Commence the structural rehabilitation of the building to meet or exceed the seismic provisions of the engineering standards referenced in Section 15.66.070(D) of this chapter; 
B.  Any building which qualifies as "historical property" as determined by an appropriate governmental agency under Section 37602 of the Health and Safety Code shall be retrofitted in accordance with the State Historical Building Code; 
C.  Vacate the Building. Any vacated building shall either be rehabilitated or demolished within twelve (12) months from the date of the engineer's report; 
D.  Demolish the building, or proportions thereof, to eliminate the potentially hazardous conditions. Any reconstruction shall be made in accordance with the design review provisions of the zoning code. 
(Ord. 998 § 1, 2008: Ord. 985 § 8, 2007)  
15.66.090 - Minimum hazard reduction requirement. 
Owners of buildings included in the list of potentially hazardous buildings shall be required to do the following within thirty-six (36) months of the effective date of this chapter: (1) to secure the roof and floor(s) to the building's walls if such attachment is lacking or declared inadequate in the seismic safety report to insure that bearing walls will transfer loads of at least one hundred (100) pounds per linear foot of wall, and (2) remove, upgrade or repair dangerous exterior design elements. The building official may, at his or her sole discretion, grant additional time to comply with this section. 
(Ord. 985 § 9, 2007)  
15.66.100 - City's review of seismic safety reports and compliance plan. 
The building division shall review the documents submitted for each building identified as potentially hazardous and approve the seismic safety report and compliance plan pursuant to this chapter. Copies of approved seismic safety reports submitted shall be available to the public for inspection at the building division upon request. 
(Ord. 985 § 10, 2007)  
15.66.110 - Interpretation. 
The interpretation of the building official shall prevail on matters relating to the implementation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 985 § 11, 2007)  
15.66.120 - Appeal of building official's determination. 
Any decision made by the building official pursuant to this chapter may be appealed in writing to the city manager or his or her designee who may be a licensed civil or structural engineer. The written appeal shall include all facts relevant to the decision and reasons to support any alleged abuse of discretion by the building official. The city manager may take testimony of the appellant and the building official and independent experts or may in his or her discretion determine the appeal based upon the written record. The decision of the city manager or his or her designee shall be final. 
(Ord. 985 § 12, 2007)  
15.66.130 - Fees and costs of appeal. 
The building owners shall pay an engineer's report review fee for review of the seismic safety report as established by resolution. The amount of this fee shall be deducted from the plan checking fee collected for any building permit issued for the seismic rehabilitation of the structure. The building owner is responsible for any fees and costs necessary for an appeal and shall also deposit, in advance of any appeal provided herein, an amount equal to the estimated cost of experts retained to testify or to determine the appeal. 
(Ord. 985 § 13, 2007)  
15.66.140 - Remedies. 
It is unlawful for the owner of any building subject to this chapter to violate any provision of this chapter. The remedies that are available to the city shall include, but not be limited to: 
A.  The city may seek injunctive relief to enjoin a building owner's violation of this chapter; 
B.  A building owner violating this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment in the county jail for a term not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Such building owner shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which such violation of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such building owner. 
C.  The remedies provided under this section are not exclusive. 
(Ord. 985 § 14, 2007)  
15.66.150 - Building tenant notification. 
Owners of each identified building shall provide each of their tenants with written notification that a seismic investigation of their building has taken place, and that the seismic safety report documenting the investigation is available for review at the building division. Such notification shall occur within thirty (30) days after submittal of the seismic safety report to the building division. 
(Ord. 985 § 15, 2007)  
15.66.160 - Exemption from subsequent amendments. 
Buildings on which construction has been completed in compliance with all requirements of this chapter existing at the date of completion shall not be declared a potentially hazardous building under standards adopted after the date of completion and may be allowed to post signage pursuant to California Government Code Section 8875.9. This exemption from later adopted standards shall be effective for a period of fifteen (15) years from the date of completion. This exemption shall not apply to a building which no longer meets the standards under which the seismic work was completed or buildings which undergo a change of use or occupancy. For the purposes of this section "date of completion" shall refer to the date that the building is removed from the list of potentially hazardous buildings. 
(Ord. 985 § 16, 2007)  
15.66.170 - Administrative citations. 
An owner who is subject to this section and who does not comply with the posting requirements specified in Section 15.66.050 shall be subject to an administrative citation pursuant to city of Coachella Municipal Code Chapter 3.48.090 and subject to an administrative fine of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) no sooner than fifteen (15) days after notification by the building official that the owner is subject to the administrative fine. Thereafter, if the owner does not comply with and maintain compliance with the posting requirements, within thirty (30) days of the first administrative fine, the owner shall be subject to an additional administrative citation and an additional administrative fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(Ord. 998 § 2, 2008)  
Title 16 - SUBDIVISIONS 
Chapters:  
Chapter 16.04 - INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS 
Sections: 
 
16.04.010 - Authority. 
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by Section 66411 of the Government Code of the state and in accordance with the limitations of Section II of Article XI of the Constitution of the state, the general laws of the state and Section 66410 et seq. of the Government Code known as the Subdivision Map Act. The provisions of this chapter are in addition to the regulations of the Subdivision Map Act and are supplemental thereto, consistent with, and not in conflict with the provisions of the act. 
(Prior code § 21-1)  
16.04.020 - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this chapter is to control and regulate the division or consolidation of land within the city as well as such land as may be hereafter annexed to the city and to provide for a clear and expeditious procedure for this purpose. The rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter as well as the regulations contained in this chapter shall be applicable to the resubdivision of land or the alteration of the size and shape of any existing parcel of record. It is the specific intent of the city council to establish by local ordinance requirements for the recordation of a final map or a parcel map in conformity with the authorization of the state Subdivision Map Act, with the exception of those divisions of land as set forth in this chapter. It is further the purpose of these regulations to require the subdivider to properly install improvements in accordance with the provisions of the state Subdivision Map Act and the standards and specifications adopted by the city; to require the subdivider to do the original work of placing public streets and all other improvements in a proper condition before the maintenance thereof is taken over by the city or other appropriate agency, and to relieve the taxpayers of the city to the extent of the burden that would otherwise exist; to provide for the regulation and control of the design and improvement of a subdivision with a proper consideration of its relation to adjoining areas and the effect the subdivision would have on such areas; to require the establishment of open spaces and recreational areas in accordance with rules and regulations that presently exist or may hereinafter be adopted; to provide for the designation and acquisition of sites for necessary public facilities to serve residential areas that are developed as the result of the subdivision of land; to prevent fraud and exploitation in the sale of subdivisions or parts thereof in the interests of protecting the public which has been declared to be the public policy of the state; and to preserve the health, safety, welfare and amenities of the city. 
(Prior code § 21-2)  
16.04.030 - Definitions—Generally. 
Whenever any words or phrases used in this chapter are not defined in this chapter, but are defined in the Government Code of the state, or in the zoning ordinance of the city as codified in Title 17, such definitions are incorporated in this chapter and shall apply to such words and phrases used in this chapter as though set forth in full, unless the context clearly indicates a contrary intention. 
"Alley" means a public or private right-of-way other than a street, providing only secondary access to abutting property. 
"Block" means an area of land within a subdivision, which area is entirely bounded by streets, highways, ways, except alleys, or the exterior boundary or boundaries of the subdivision. 
"City engineer" means the city engineer of the city of Coachella, or his or her duly authorized representative. 
"City manager" means the city manager of the city of Coachella, or his or her duly authorized representative. 
"Commission" means the planning commission of the city of Coachella. 
"Contiguous units" mean adjacent parcels of land, which shall be considered contiguous even if separated by roads, streets, utility easements or railroad rights-of-way. 
"Council" means the city council of the city of Coachella. 
"Cul-de-sac" means a street open at one end only, and providing at the other end special facilities for the turning around of vehicular traffic. 
"Development committee" means a body comprised of the director of planning, city engineer, fire chief, superintendent of public works, chief of police or his or her representative, and the superintendent of the Coachella sanitary district. 
"Director" means the director of planning of the city or his or her authorized representative. 
"Final subdivision map" or "final map" means a map prepared in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the Subdivision Map Act for a subdivision of land, as "subdivision" is defined in said act, which map is designed to be placed on record in the office of the Riverside County recorder. 
"Express way, arterial" and "collector" mean any vehicular route so designated on the general plan and shall be for the purpose of collecting and carrying large volumes of traffic. 
"Frontage road" means a street contiguous to a freeway, major road or arterial road, separated therefrom by a dividing strip and providing access to abutting property. 
"General plan" means the general plan of the city, adopted October 7, 1998, and any amendments thereto: 
"Grading ordinance" means Chapter 70 of the Uniform Building Code, including such amendments thereto as may be adopted by ordinance. 
"Improvement" shall be as defined in the Subdivision Map Act of the state. 
"Improvement standards" means the standards adopted by the city regulating the development of land as a subdivision. 
"Lot" means a recorded parcel or portion of land separated from other parcels or portions by description, as on a subdivision map, record of survey map, parcel map, or by metes and bounds for purpose of sale, lease or separate use as of October 7, 1953, or as subsequently created in accordance with this chapter. The term "lot" further includes any parcel which, at the time of annexation to the city, is a parcel of record. 
"Lot line adjustment" means the process for relocation of an existing lot line between two existing parcels if no additional parcels are created. 
"Major subdivision" means any real property, improved or unimproved, or portion thereof shown on the latest adopted Riverside County tax roll as a unit or as contiguous units which are divided for the purpose of sale, lease or financing, whether immediate or future, by any subdivider, into five or more parcels. Any division made solely for the purpose of street widening is not a subdivision, nor is any land given under eminent domain proceedings or threat thereof. 
"Map act" means the Subdivision Map Act of the state. 
"Minor change" means a modification of an approved tentative map that involves a change of lot lines, lot shape, lot dimensions, street alignment, width or grade, grading proposals or other elements that do not change the overall concept of the project. 
"Parcel split" means any real property, improved or unimproved, or portion thereof shown on the latest adopted Riverside County tax roll as a unit or as contiguous units which are divided, consolidated or rearranged for the purpose of sale, lease or financing, whether immediate or future, by any land division, into four or less parcels, or the division of land into any number of parcels where a parcel map is required by the map act. "Parcel split" does not include those items specifically excluded by the map act or a division of four parcels or less for construction of removable commercial buildings having a floor area of less than one hundred (100) square feet. 
"Planned unit development" means a planned residential development, commercial planned development, planned industrial/commercial development or a development lying within a hillside development overlay district or a natural factors/restricted development overlay district. 
"Standard specifications" means standard specifications and standard drawings adopted by the city. 
"Subdivider" means any individual, firm, association, syndicate, copartnership, corporation, trust or any other legal entity or assignee commencing proceedings under this chapter, to cause land to be divided into two or more parcels for himself or herself or for another and while used here in masculine gender and singular number, it is deemed to mean and include the feminine or neuter gender and plural number whenever required. 
"Subdivider's engineer" means any individual or firm retained by the subdivider and who is duly qualified to perform the necessary duties of engineering. 
"Zoning ordinance" means Title 17 of this code. 
(Ord. 892 § 21, 2003; prior code § 21-3)  
16.04.040 - Same—Street and highway details. 
"Barrier strip" means a strip of land one foot or more in width dedicated to the city for future street purposes at the end of a dead-end street or along the side of a partial-width dedicated street or other public right-of-way. 
"Bicycle way" means an area within the right-of-way of a dedicated street or easement, where bicycle travel is the designated use. 
"Median" means that portion of a divided highway separating the traveled way for traffic in opposite directions. 
"Outer separation" means the area between the traveled ways of a highway for through traffic and a frontage road or service road. 
"Parkway" means the area adjoining the outer edge of the roadbed, extending to the right-of-way line in which sidewalks, plantings, utilities, bank slopes and related facilities may be located. 
"Partial-width street" means any street the improved width of which is less than the width necessary for a normal full-width street. 
"Pedestrian way" means a right-of-way designated for use by pedestrians and not intended for use be vehicles of any kind. A pedestrian way may be located within or without a street right-of-way at grade, or grade separated from vehicular traffic. 
"Right-of-way" means the entire width of property specifically designated and recorded for the use of highways, flood and drainage works, overhead and underground utilities, or any related improvements. 
"Roadbed" means that portion of the roadway extending from curb face to curb face or to the outside line of improved shoulders. Divided highways shall be considered as having two roadbeds. 
"Roadway" means that portion of the highway including roadbed, all slopes, aide ditches, channels, waterways and all other related facilities which are located within a road right-of-way. 
"Traveled way" means that portion of the roadway designated for the movement of vehicles, exclusive of shoulder and auxiliary lanes. 
(Prior code § 21-4)  
Chapter 16.08 - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 
Sections: 
 
16.08.010 - Generally. 
The subdivider shall adhere to the criteria set out in Sections 16.08.020 through 16.08.050 in the processing of a major subdivision or a parcel split for the division of land, as more specifically defined in this chapter or other provisions of this code and the state Map Act. 
(Prior code § 21-16)  
16.08.020 - General plan and zoning. 
General plan, as presently adopted or as it may hereafter be amended, is accepted as a guide for the use of all land within the boundaries of the city and for those properties located in the unincorporated area wherein land use is defined in the general plan. All land shall be subdivided and developed in accordance with the provisions and regulations of the zoning ordinance as codified in Title 17 of this code. 
(Prior code § 21-17)  
16.08.030 - General street design. 
A.  The street system in the proposed land division shall relate, in general, to the existing streets in the area adjoining the proposed land division. 
B.  The proposed street system shall give consideration to the future land division of adjoining undivided property. 
C.  All street design shall consider access serving the existing or proposed use of abutting land. 
D.  Additional rights-of-way or easements shall be provided where necessary to accommodate roadways, slopes, drainage structures and other facilities related to land division improvements. 
E.  All streets shall be located along the boundaries of parcels and shall not divide a parcel unless approved by the city engineer. 
F.  Access to private property along freeways, expressways, arterial highways, major highways and secondary highways as designated in the general plan shall be provided by one of the following: 
1.  A frontage road or service road; 
2.  An interior street; or 
3.  Cul-de-sac street entered from a street other than a freeway, expressway, arterial, major or secondary highway. 
G.  Design of streets shall make provision for railroads, parkways, expressways, grade separations, flood control channels, prevailing geological conditions and local drainage facilities. 
H.  Dead-end streets shall be so designed that access to abutting property shall be physically possible. 
(Prior code § 21-18)  
16.08.040 - Community facilities. 
The subdivision procedures contained in this chapter and other requirements and regulations adopted by ordinance and incorporated in this code or by resolution of the council may provide necessary land and development thereof for parks, open space, playgrounds and other required public facilities serving the subdivision. This chapter establishes procedures for the referral of proposed subdivision maps to those boards, bureaus and other governmental agencies and utility companies, both public and private, so that the extension of community facilities and utilities may be accomplished in an orderly manner coincident with a division of land and in accordance with such standards as may be adopted in the general plan. In order to facilitate the acquisition of land areas required to implement this policy, the commission may recommend that land be reserved by the subdivider for a certain period of time and subject to conditions as prescribed in this title, to permit the acquisition by the appropriate public agency of the land for open space, parks, playgrounds and other public purposes. The council may, under such conditions and circumstances as provided in this chapter, require that land be dedicated or fees be levied to accomplish this purpose. 
(Prior code § 21-19)  
16.08.050 - Private streets. 
Private streets may be permitted if it is determined that there is adequate provision for their construction and continued maintenance; that the welfare of the occupants of the development will be adequately served; and that it will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare. Private streets shall be designed and constructed to the same standards and criteria as public streets. 
(Prior code § 21-20)  
16.08.060 - Subdivider's duties. 
The subdivider shall cause to be prepared maps consistent with the design standards contained in this chapter and accomplish improvements consistent with the improvement standards of the city and shall process the maps in accordance with the regulations set forth in this chapter. The subdivider shall fully cooperate in the provision and development of areas for required public facilities. 
(Prior code § 21-31)  
16.08.070 - Director of planning. 
The director shall process tentative maps and shall indicate on thee maps the date and time received and be responsible for the review, the expeditious processing and analysis of the planning aspect of tentative maps and prompt referral thereof to other governmental boards, bureaus and agencies and affected utility companies, both public and private. 
(Prior code § 21-32)  
16.08.080 - City engineer. 
The city engineer shall be responsible for acknowledging receipt of final maps and reporting to the council as to whether the proposed improvements are consistent with the regulations contained in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 21-33)  
16.08.090 - Planning commission. 
The commission shall act as the advisory agency to the council, and is charged with the duty of making investigations and reports on the design and improvement of proposed subdivisions and the conformance of such subdivisions with the general plan and this chapter. The commission shall report its actions and recommendations concerning the tentative map by resolution to the council with a copy to the subdivider. The council shall act by resolution thereon and report its action to the subdivider. For parcel splits the commission shall report directly to the subdivider. 
(Prior code § 21-34)  
16.08.100 - Filing of maps required. 
The subdivider shall file a tentative map in the case of a major subdivision or a parcel split with the planning department and, as provided in this chapter, shall procure the recordation respectively of a final subdivision map or a parcel map with the county recorder which shall, in all respects, be in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 21-35)  
16.08.110 - Filing map subsequent to division. 
Maps may be filed for noncomplying subdivisions and to revert previously divided land to acreage in the following manner: 
A.  The purchaser, or his or her successor in interest, of a lot which is the result of a division of land that is in violation of the provisions of this chapter may file a major subdivision or parcel split as required in Sections 16.08.100 and 16.08.140, which shall comply in all respects with the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Previously subdivided land may be reverted as set forth in Chapter 6, Article 1 of the Subdivision Map Act. Proceedings for reversion may be initiated by the council at the request of the land owner or by petition of all of the owners of record of the real property to be reverted to acreage. Dedications as are required for subdivisions may be required. 
(Prior code § 21-36)  
16.08.120 - Subdivisions prior to annexation. 
All divisions of land situated outside the corporate limits which require action by the commission and the director prior to annexation shall comply with the regulations of this chapter insofar as applicable, subject to the limitations of Section 66454 of the map act. 
(Prior code § 21-37)  
16.08.130 - Restraint of land division or sale in violation of chapter. 
The city or any person, firm or corporation may file a suit in the superior court of Riverside County to restrain or enjoin any attempted or proposed land division or sale in violation of this chapter pursuant to the authority of Section 66499.33 of the Government Code. 
(Ord. 892 § 22, 2003: prior code § 21-38)  
16.08.140 - Failure to comply—Illegal division of land. 
Parcels of land created contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall not constitute legal building sites and no permit shall be issued for the installation of fixtures or equipment or for the erection, construction, conversion, establishment, alteration or enlargement of any building, structure or improvement thereon unless and until a map as required by Section 16.08.100 has been filed, approved in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, and recorded, or until a certificate of compliance is obtained as set forth in Section 16.08.150. Any person who divides or causes to be divided land without complying in all respects with the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to prosecution for a misdemeanor as defined in this section. Any contract to sell, sale or deed of conveyance made contrary to the provisions of this chapter is a misdemeanor, and any person, firm or corporation, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment, or by both such fines and imprisonment. 
(Prior code § 21-39)  
16.08.150 - Certificate of compliance. 
Any person owning real property or a vendee of such person pursuant to a contract of sale of such real property may request that a determination be made as to whether such real property complies with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this chapter. Upon making such determination, the city shall cause a certificate of compliance to be filed for record with the county recorder. The certificate of compliance shall identify the real property and shall state that the division thereof complies with applicable provisions of the map act and of this chapter. The fee for this determination shall be as set forth in Chapter 16.40. 
(Prior code § 21-40)  
16.08.160 - Conditions of certification. 
If it is determined that the real property for which a certificate of compliance is requested does not comply with the provisions of the map act or of this chapter, the city may, as a condition to granting a certificate of compliance, impose such conditions as would have been applicable to the division of property at the time the applicant acquired his or her interest therein, and which had been established at such time by the map act or by this chapter. Upon making such a determination and establishing such conditions the city shall cause a conditional certificate of compliance to be filed for record with the county. Such certificate shall serve as notice to the property owner or vendee who has applied for the certificate pursuant to Section 16.08.150, a grantee of the property owner, or any subsequent transferee or assignee of the property that the fulfillment and implementation of such conditions shall be required prior to subsequent issuance of a permit or other grant of approval for development of the property. Compliance with such conditions shall not be required until such time as a permit or other grant of approval for development of such property is issued by the city. 
(Prior code § 21-41)  
16.08.170 - Effect of final or parcel map. 
A recorded final map or parcel map constitutes a certificate of compliance with respect to the parcels of real property described therein. 
(Prior code § 21-42)  
16.08.180 - Notice of violation. 
If it is found that real property has been divided in violation of the Subdivision Map Act or of this chapter, a notice of intention to record a notice of violation shall be filed for record with the county recorder by the director of planning. Such notice shall describe the real property in detail, naming the owners thereof, describing the violation, and stating that an opportunity will be given to the owner to present evidence at a time, date and place set forth therein to the planning commission why a notice of violation should not be recorded. A copy of such notice shall be sent to the owner of such real property. If, after the owner has presented evidence, it is determined that there has been no violation, the director shall have recorded with the county recorder a release of the notice of intention to record a notice of violation. If, however, after the owner has presented evidence, the commission determines that the property has in fact been illegally divided, or if within sixty (60) days of receipt of notice of intention the owner of such real property fails to inform the commission of his or her objection to recording the notice of violation, the commission of his or her objection to recording the notice of violation, the commission shall direct the director to have such notice of violation recorded in the office of the county recorder. The notice of intention to record a notice of violation and the notice of violation, when recorded, shall be deemed to be constructive notice of the violation to all successors in interest in such property. 
(Prior code § 21-43)  
16.08.190 - Limitations. 
Any action or proceeding to attack, review, set aside, void or annul the decision of the council concerning a subdivision, or any of the proceedings, acts or determinations taken, done or made prior to such decision, or determine the reasonableness, legality or validity of any condition attached thereto in a court of competent jurisdiction, shall not be maintained by any person unless such item or proceeding is commenced within ninety (90) days after the date of such decision. Thereafter, all persons are barred from any action or proceeding or any defense of invalidity or unreasonableness of such decision or of such proceedings, acts or determinations. 
(Ord. 892 § 23, 2003: prior code § 21-276)  
Chapter 16.12 - TENTATIVE MAPS 
Sections: 
 
16.12.010 - Filing. 
Each subdivider of either a major subdivision or a parcel split shall file with the planning department such number of copies of the tentative map as may be required from time to time by the city. The planning department shall make available to the subdivider or his or her representative, a copy of pertinent city regulations and such other instruction sheets providing information relative to the preparation of the tentative map. The time of filing of a tentative map shall be construed to be the time at which the map, together with the required data, is received by the director, all fees have been paid and all procedures under the city rules to implement the California Environmental Quality Act of 1970, including the preparation of a final environmental impact report if required, have been completed. The director shall indicate the date of filing upon all copies of the tentative map and accompanying data. One copy of a preliminary title report on the property to be divided shall accompany the tentative map. The tentative map shall further depict all lands in the property proposed to be divided located in the vicinity of the proposed subdivision. 
(Prior code § 21-61)  
16.12.020 - Fees. 
Fees shall be paid in accordance with Chapter 16.40. 
(Prior code § 21-62)  
16.12.030 - Preparation. 
The subdivider shall cause the tentative map of the land proposed to be divided to be prepared by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. (21-63)  
16.12.040 - Required map format and content. 
The following information shall be delineated on the tentative map, except those items determined by the city staff as not being pertinent to a particular tract: 
A.  Tract number, title of map, and section description of property; 
B.  Name and address of owner and subdivider or, if applicant is not owner, letter of authorization to act as agent; 
C.  Name and address of person preparing map; 
D.  Approximate acreage and overall dimensions; 
E.  North point, scale and date; minimum scale one hundred (100) feet to one inch; 
F.  Subdivision boundary line and vicinity map; 
G.  Names and book and page numbers of adjoining subdivisions; 
H.  Names, locations and widths of adjacent streets; 
I.  Identifying landmarks and existing structures, both above and below ground; 
J.  Names, locations and widths of proposed streets; 
K.  Approximate grades of proposed and existing streets; 
L.  Streets and rights-of-way providing legal access to the property; 
M.  Excavations within two hundred (200) feet of the subdivision; 
N.  Approximate radii of curves; 
O.  Widths of alleys and easements; 
P.  Names of utility companies and location of existing and proposed public utilities; 
Q.  Elevations of sewer at proposed main connections; 
R.  Existing culverts and drain pipes; 
S.  Watercourses and channels including existing and proposed facilities for control of stormwaters; 
T.  Land subject to overflow, inundation or flood hazard; 
U.  Railroads and other rights-of-way; 
V.  Lands and parks to be dedicated to public use; 
W.  Dimension of reservations; 
X.  Proposed lots: including lot numbers, dimensions and enclosures; 
Y.  Adjoining property and lot lines; 
Z.  Setback lines from front streets and side streets (if adjustments are requested); 
AA.  Contours, with maximum interval as follows: 
Slope (Percent) 	Interval 
(In Feet) 
0—2 	2 
3—9 	5 
10 plus 	10 
 
Copies of U.S.G.S. Maps are not acceptable; 
BB.  Existing use of property immediately surrounding tract; 
CC.  Proposed land use of all lots (single-family, multi-family, business, industrial); 
DD.  Source of water supply; 
EE.  Method of sewage disposal; 
FF.  Existing zoning and proposed zoning; 
GG.  Name of school district and boundary if within two districts; 
HH.  Names of any special districts serving the proposed subdivision and location of boundary if within area of tentative map; 
II.  If it is contemplated that the development will proceed by units, the boundaries of such units shall be shown; 
JJ.  Two cross-sections of the property at the midpoints. 
(Prior code § 21-64)  
16.12.050 - Supplemental information. 
Reports and written statements on the following matters shall accompany the tentative map unless waived in writing: 
A.  Subdivision building or development plan; 
B.  Proposed method of control of storm water, including data as to grade and dimensions; 
C.  Protective covenants proposed to be recorded; 
D.  If private streets are proposed, the method by which their maintenance will be accomplished and financed; 
E.  Proposed tree planting; 
F.  A written statement from the city health officer stating the type of sewage disposal that will be permitted. To aid in this determination, the city health officer may require soil percolation tests or other pertinent information; 
G.  Proposed perimeter landscaping, irrigation and fencing; include method proposed for financing long term maintenance of these improvements, such as a maintenance and lighting district; 
H.  Preliminary soils report and grading plan; and 
I.  A list of all owners of property lying within three hundred (300) feet of the property being divided. 
(Prior code § 21-65)  
16.12.060 - General procedures. 
The procedures outlined in Sections 16.12.070 through 16.12.100 shall be followed except as they may be mutually modified by the city and applicant. 
(Prior code § 21-66)  
16.12.070 - Copies to agencies and utilities—Recommendations. 
Within seven working days of filing of a tentative subdivision map, together with all required documents, the director shall transmit the requested number of copies of the map together with accompanying data to such public agencies and public and private utilities as may be concerned. Each of the public agencies and utilities may, within ten (10) days after the map has been received by such agency, forward to the director a written report of its findings and recommendations thereon. Within twenty-five (25) days after submission, the director will hold a conference on the tentative map with the subdivider and the development committee. 
The director shall prepare a written report of recommendations on the tentative map in relation to the requirements of this chapter and other applicable regulations of the city or public and private utilities and shall submit the same to the commission within thirty (30) days after the filing of the map and supporting documents. 
(Prior code § 21-67)  
16.12.080 - Development committee. 
The development committee shall make such recommendations to the subdivider as seem proper regarding such tentative map, and shall recommend consultations by the subdivider with such organizations, including public and private utilities as it shall designate and shall report its conclusions and findings in writing to the subdivider within seven days of the conference. This procedure is not required in the processing of a parcel split. However, consultation with the director prior to the preparation of a tentative parcel map is recommended. 
(Prior code § 21-68)  
16.12.090 - Planning commission—Resolution. 
The commission shall consider the tentative map as submitted by the subdivider together with the recommendations prepared by the director. The director may, with a minimum of three working days' notice, require that all or any part of the boundaries and/or streets of a proposed subdivision be flagged at the site to facilitate any field review of the commission. The commission shall report, by resolution, on the map of any subdivision submitted to it within fifty (50) days after the tentative map, including environmental assessment, has been filed and the resolution shall recommend approval, conditional approval or disapproval. The number, size and configuration of lots to be created and alignment and width of streets and easements shall be depicted upon the tentative map prior to approval by the commission. Conditions to make the map approvable which involve modification to lots in terms of number, size or configuration, or to streets in terms of alignment or width may be set forth by the commission for the guidance of the subdivider. However, when such conditions are substantial, the development committee may require that these changes be incorporated upon a revised tentative map and be returned to the director. The director shall have the authority to approve the resubmitted revised tentative map on behalf of the commission if the map is clearly in conformity with the conditions established by the commission. The director may, at his or her discretion, require that the revised map be submitted to the commission for approval in any instance where the map is not clearly in conformity with such conditions. Any report or recommendation on the tentative map by the staff to the commission or council, shall be in writing and a copy thereof shall be served on the subdivider at least three days prior to any hearing or action on such map by the commission or council. 
(Prior code § 21-69)  
16.12.100 - City council action. 
A.  Within ten (10) days or at its next regularly scheduled meeting after receipt of the resolution of the commission on the map, the council shall act thereon. If the council finds that the proposed map complies with the requirements of this chapter, it shall approve the map. If the council finds that the proposed map does not meet the requirements or conditions of this chapter or the map act, it shall disapprove the map. The council may waive any irregularities in the proposed map if a determination is made that such irregularity is the result of a technical or inadvertent error which does not materially affect the validity of the map. The council shall approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the tentative map by resolution within thirty (30) days after the filing of the commission's resolution. The council may extend the time within which it must act with the consent of the applicant. 
B.  No map shall be approved unless the council finds that the proposed subdivision, together with the provisions for its design and improvement, is consistent with the general plan. 
C.  The council shall deny approval of a tentative map, as required by the map act, if it makes any of the following findings: 
1.  That the proposed map is not consistent with applicable general and specific plans; 
2.  That the design or improvement of the proposed subdivision is not consistent with applicable general and specific plans; 
3.  That the site is not physically suitable for the type of development; 
4.  That the site is not physically suitable for the proposed density of development; 
5.  That the design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements are likely to cause substantial environmental damage or substantially and unavoidably injure fish or wildlife or their habitat; 
6.  That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements is likely to cause serious public health problems; and 
7.  That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will conflict with easements, acquired by the public at large, for access through or use of property within the proposed subdivision. In this connection, the governing body may approve a map if it finds that alternate easements, for access or for use, will be provided, and that these will be substantially equivalent to ones previously acquired by the public. 
This subsection shall apply only to easements of record or to easements established by judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction and no authority is granted to a legislative body to determine that the public at large has acquired easements for access through or use of property within the proposed subdivision. 
(Prior code § 21-70)  
16.12.110 - Public hearing. 
All tentative subdivision maps shall be reviewed by both the planning commission and the city council at duly noticed public hearings. Notice of public hearings shall be by both mailed notice and posting of the property. 
A.  Written notice shall be mailed to the subdivider and to the owners of all property within three hundred (300) feet of the exterior boundaries of the property involved at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing. The last known name and address of each owner as shown on the records of the county assessor may be used for the notice. 
B.  An agent of the city planner shall post notices of public hearings not less than ten (10) days before the event. At least three notices, not more than three hundred (300) feet apart, shall be posted in front of each block or part of a block effected by the public hearing. 
C.  Notification of subsequent hearings may be given at each preceding meeting, but additional written notice is not required. 
D.  Any interested person may appear at a hearing and shall be heard. 
(Prior code § 21-71)  
16.12.120 - Suspension of requirements—Variance or adjustment. 
In approving a tentative map, the commission or council may grant a suspension of any of the subdivision requirements set forth or referred to in this chapter, except underground facilities which may be waived only by the council, provided such suspensions are not inconsistent with state law. A variance from the lot area, frontage, width, depth and front yard or setback requirements of the various zones set forth in this code, may also be granted by the commission or the council. Any suspension or variance shall be based upon a sufficient showing that there are special circumstances or conditions affecting the property in question and that such suspension or variance, if granted, will not be materially detrimental to the general welfare of adjacent persons or property, and such other findings for suspension or variance as may be required in other sections of this code. If a suspension or variance is requested, a public hearing shall be conducted as provided in Title 17 of the zoning ordinance. 
The time limits established in Sections 16.12.060 through 16.12.100 may be extended by mutual consent of the subdivider and the commission or council as appropriate. 
(Prior code § 21-72)  
16.12.130 - Retention in files. 
One copy of the map and accompanying data, together with the commission's resolution, any staff reports and a record of the council's resolution with conditions of approval, if any, shall be filed with the director, and retained until recordation of the final map or maps encompassing the total area included in the tentative map. 
(Prior code § 21-73)  
16.12.140 - Extension of time. 
Upon written application of the subdivider made within twenty-four (24) months of the approval or conditional approval of the tentative map, the commission may grant by resolution, an extension of time of up to three one-year time extensions for filing of the final map. Such application shall state the reasons why an extension is needed. 
All applications shall be filed sufficiently in advance of the expiration date to permit inclusion upon commission agenda, and to permit commission action prior to such expiration date. At the time of consideration by the commission of the extension of the approved tentative map, the commission shall hear the testimony of the subdivider or any witnesses in his or her behalf and the testimony of the representatives of the development committee or any other witnesses. Upon conclusion of the hearing or the time of consideration, unless the subdivider and commission mutually agree that additional time is needed for consideration, the commission shall, within seven days, declare its findings by resolution based on the testimony and documents placed before it. The commission may approve, conditionally approve or deny the request for extension. 
The responsibility for making timely application for any extension shall remain entirely with the subdivider, and the city assumes no obligation to notify the subdivider that any tentative map or extension is about to expire. 
(Prior code § 21-74)  
16.12.150 - Revised tentative maps. 
Any revised tentative map shall comply with all the provisions of the map act and this chapter in effect at the time the revised map is approved. Proceedings on a revised tentative map shall be conducted in the same manner as for the original approval of a tentative map. The approval or conditional approval of a revised tentative map shall annul approval of the previous tentative map, but the approval thereof shall not extend the time within which the final map may be filed. 
(Prior code § 21-75)  
Chapter 16.16 - VESTING TENTATIVE MAPS 
Sections: 
 
16.16.010 - Citation and authority. 
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by Chapter 4.5 (commencing with Section 66498.1) of Division 2 of Title 7 of the Government Code of the State of California (referred to as the vesting tentative map statute), and may be cited as "the Vesting Tentative Map Ordinance." 
(Prior code § 21-77)  
16.16.020 - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to establish procedures necessary for the implementation of the vesting tentative map statute, and to supplement the provisions of the subdivision map act and the subdivision ordinance. Except as otherwise set forth in the provisions of this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall apply to this chapter. 
To accomplish this purpose, the regulations outlined in this chapter are determined to be necessary for the preservation of the public health, safety and general welfare, and for the promotion of orderly growth and development. 
(Prior code § 21-78)  
16.16.030 - Consistency. 
No land shall be subdivided and developed pursuant to a vesting tentative map for any purpose which is inconsistent with the general plan and any applicable specific plan or not permitted by the zoning ordinance or other applicable provisions of this code. 
(Prior code § 21-79)  
16.16.040 - Definitions. 
A.  A "vesting tentative map" shall mean a "tentative map" for a residential subdivision, as defined in the Coachella subdivision ordinance, Section 16.04.010 et seq., that shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words "Vesting Tentative Map" at the time it is filed in accordance with Section 16.16.060 and is thereafter processed in accordance with the provisions hereof. 
B.  All other definitions set forth in this chapter are applicable. 
(Prior code § 21-80)  
16.16.050 - Application. 
A.  This chapter shall apply only to residential developments. Whenever a provision of the subdivision map act, as implemented and supplemented by the Coachella subdivision ordinance, requires the filing of a tentative map or tentative parcel map for a residential development, a vesting tentative map may instead be filed, in accordance with the provisions hereof. 
B.  If a subdivider does not seek the rights conferred by the vesting tentative map statute, the filing of a vesting tentative map shall not be a prerequisite to any approval for any proposed subdivision, permit for construction, or work preparatory to construction. 
(Prior code § 21-81)  
16.16.060 - Filing and processing. 
A vesting tentative map shall be filed in the same form and have the same contents, accompanying data and reports and shall be processed in the same manner as set forth in the Coachella subdivision ordinance for a tentative map Chapter 16.12 except as provided in this chapter: 
A.  At the time a vesting tentative map is filed, it shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words "Vesting Tentative Map," and shall be accompanied by the following: 
1.  Height, size and location of buildings; 
2.  Information on the uses to which the buildings will be put; 
3.  Architectural plans; 
4.  Any other studies which the city defers to the time of issuance of a building permit. 
(Prior code § 21-82)  
16.16.070 - Fees. 
Upon filing a vesting tentative map, the subdivider shall pay the fees required for the filing and processing of a tentative map, per Section 16.40.010. 
(Prior code § 21-83)  
16.16.080 - Expiration. 
The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall expire at the end of the same time period, and shall be subject to the same extensions, established by this chapter for the expiration of the approval or conditional approval of a tentative map. 
(Prior code § 21-84)  
16.16.090 - Development rights vesting on approval of vesting tentative map. 
A.  The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies and standards described in Government Code, Section 66474.2. 
However, if Section 66474.2 of the Government Code is repealed, the approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies and standards in effect at the time the vesting tentative map is approved or conditionally approved. 
B.  Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, a permit approval, extension or entitlement may be made conditional or denied if any of the following are determined: 
1.  A failure to do so would place the residents of the subdivision or the immediate community, or both, in a condition dangerous to their health or safety, or both. 
2.  The condition or denial is required in order to comply with state or federal law. 
C.  The rights referred to herein shall expire if a final map is not approved prior to the expiration of the vesting tentative map as provided in Section 16.16.080. If the final map is approved, these rights shall last for the following periods of time: 
1.  An initial time period of one year. Where several final maps are recorded on various phases of a project covered by a single vesting tentative map, this initial time period shall begin for each phase when the final map for that phase is recorded. 
2.  The initial time period set forth in subsection 1 of this section shall be automatically extended by any time used for processing a complete application for a grading permit or for design or architectural review, if such processing exceeds thirty (30) days, from the date a complete application is filed. 
3.  A subdivider may apply for a one-year extension at any time before the initial time period set forth in subsection 1 of this section expires. If the extension is denied, the subdivider may appeal that denial to the city council within fifteen (15) days. 
4.  If the subdivider submits a complete application for a building permit during the periods of time specified in subsections (C)(1) through (3), the rights referred to in this chapter shall continue until the expiration of that permit, or any extension of that permit. 
(Prior code § 21-85)  
16.16.100 - Development inconsistent with zoning—Conditional approval. 
A.  Whenever a subdivider files a vesting tentative map for a subdivision whose intended development is inconsistent with the zoning ordinance in existence at that time, that inconsistency shall be noted on the map. The city may deny such a vesting tentative map or approve it conditioned on the subdivider, or his or her designee, obtaining the necessary change in the zoning ordinance to eliminate the inconsistency. If the change in the zoning ordinance is obtained, the approved or conditionally approved vesting tentative map shall, notwithstanding Section 16.16.090(A), confer the vested right to proceed with the development in substantial compliance with the change in the zoning ordinance and the map, as approved. 
B.  The rights conferred by this section shall be for the time periods set forth in Section 16.16.090(C). 
(Prior code § 21-87)  
16.16.110 - Applications inconsistent with current policies. 
Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter, a property owner or his or her designee may seek approvals or permits for development which depart from the ordinances, policies and standards described in Sections 16.16.090(A) and 16.16.100, and local agencies may grant these approvals or issue these permits to the extent that the departures are authorized under applicable law. 
(Prior code § 21-87)  
Chapter 16.20 - FINAL MAPS 
Sections: 
 
16.20.010 - Filing. 
Within twenty-four (24) months after approval of the tentative map, or any extensions of the approval, the subdivider may cause the subdivision or any unit thereof shown in the tentative map to be surveyed and a final map thereof prepared by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor, in conformation with the tentative map as approved or conditionally approved and with the requirements set forth in this chapter. Eight blue-line or black-line prints of the final map and such other copies as may be required for checking and approval shall be submitted to the city engineer, together with a checking fee as set forth in Chapter 16.40. 
(Prior code § 21-91)  
16.20.020 - Documents to be filed with map. 
At the time of submitting the final map to the city engineer the subdivider shall, submit the documents listed in this chapter. The final map shall not be considered as filed until all documents listed as follows are completed and submitted except as specifically noted: 
A.  Closures of the various lots and blocks in number and in form approved by the city engineer shall accompany a closure of the subdivision boundary; 
B.  Detailed plans, soil reports, geologic reports and other data; 
C.  Detailed plans, cross sections, profiles and specifications in the number specified by the city engineer of the improvements to be installed as required by the provisions of this chapter and by the standard specifications, and of all other improvements proposed to be installed by the subdivider in, on, over, or under any street right-of-way, easement of parcel of land dedicated by the map or previously dedicated. All such plans shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements of the city engineer and affected public utility; 
D.  Complete design data, assumptions and computations, in accordance with sound engineering practice, shall be submitted to substantiate hydraulic and structural designs; 
E.  The final map shall be accompanied by a report prepared by a duly authorized title company, naming the persons whose consent is necessary to the dedication of the streets, alleys and other public places shown on the map and certifying that, as of the date of the preparation of the report, the persons therein named are all the persons necessary to give clear title to the subdivision. 
(Prior code § 21-92)  
16.20.030 - Title sheet and final map. 
The title sheet shall be submitted no less than ten (10) days prior to council consideration of the final map. 
(Prior code § 21-93)  
16.20.040 - Agreement and security instruments. 
The subdivision improvement agreement, as set forth in Section 16.28.030 of this chapter shall be fully executed and submitted for the approval of the city attorney at least twelve (12) days prior to council consideration of the final map. The security instruments, as required in this section should be filed concurrently with the subdivision improvement agreement; provided, however, such security instruments may be filed with the city engineer not later than sixty (60) days from the date of approval and acceptance of the final map. Failure to comply with this provision will automatically void council approval of the final map and the final map must be resubmitted to the council. In no event shall the map be recorded prior to the submission of the necessary instruments. 
(Prior code § 21-94)  
16.20.050 - Deeds and easements. 
Deeds for easements for the installation of off-site public improvements or any other purpose which cannot be dedicated on the final map, shall be submitted in duplicate in fully executed form to the city attorney at least twelve (12) days prior to council consideration of the final map. All dedications and offers of dedication shall be accompanied by a certificate of title or policy of title insurance, issued by a title company authorized by the law of the state to write the same, showing the names of all persons having a record interest in the land to be dedicated or offered for dedication. Such certificate or policy shall be submitted to the city engineer at the time the final map is submitted for examination and certification. After the final map is recorded, or if dedications and offers of dedication are by separate instrument, after such instrument or instruments are recorded, a policy of title insurance shall be issued for the benefit and protection of the city. Any expense involved in complying with the provisions of this section shall be borne by the subdivider. 
(Prior code § 21-95)  
16.20.060 - Certificate regarding tax lien. 
Prior to the filing of the final map with the council, the subdivider shall file the certificates and documents set forth in Chapter 4, Article 8, of the Map Act or any amendments thereto relating to taxes and assessments. 
(Prior code § 21-96)  
16.20.070 - Engineer's estimate of improvement costs. 
The subdivider's engineer's estimate of improvement costs shall be in a form approved by the city engineer and shall include all public improvements within and immediately adjacent to the proposed subdivision and shall include all grading and slope planting costs unless such work is to be performed under separate grading permit. It shall also include any off-site improvements required as a condition of approval. 
(Prior code § 21-97)  
16.20.080 - Contents of map generally. 
The final map shall conform in size, material, scale and content with the requirements of Sections 16.20.090 through 16.20.210. 
(Prior code § 21-98)  
16.20.090 - Size, material and scale. 
The final map shall be clearly and legibly drawn in black waterproof India ink upon good tracing cloth or polyester base film, except that affidavits, certificates and acknowledgements may be legibly stamped or printed upon the map with opaque ink. Signatures shall be in opaque black ink. The dimension of each sheet of such map shall be eighteen (18) inches by twenty-six (26) inches. A margin line shall be drawn completely around each sheet, leaving an entirely blank margin of one inch. The scale of the map shall be sufficient to show all details clearly and in no case shall be less than one inch equals one hundred (100) feet, nor greater than one inch equals forty (40) feet. Enough sheets shall be used to accomplish this end. The number of each sheet and the total number of sheets comprising the map shall be stated on each of the sheets and relation of each adjoining sheet shall be clearly shown by a small key map. Each sheet of such map proper shall show the date of the survey, north point, and written and graphic scale. The map shall be so drawn and shall be in such condition when filed that good legible prints and negatives can be made therefrom. The location of the subdivision within the city shall be shown by a small scale map. 
(Prior code § 21-99)  
16.20.100 - Title. 
The title of each sheet of such final map shall consist of the approved tract number and "City of Coachella." Maps filed for the purpose of showing as acreage land previously subdivided shall be conspicuously marked with the words, "Reversion to Acreage." Immediately following the title shall be a subtitle consisting of a general description of all the property being subdivided by references to deeds, subdivisions or to sectional surveys. References to tracts and subdivisions shall be spelled out and worded identically with original records, with complete reference to proper book and page of record. 
(Prior code § 21-100)  
16.20.110 - Map notes. 
A statement labeled "Map Notes" shall be shown on one sheet of the final map. Such statement shall include the basis of bearings, what monuments were found, what monuments were found, what monuments were set, a key to symbols and abbreviations and such information deemed by the surveyor to be necessary. 
(Prior code § 21-101)  
16.20.120 - Coordinate system. 
Wherever the city engineer has established a system of coordinates, the survey shall be tied into such system. The adjoining corners of all adjoining subdivisions shall be identified by lot and other proper designation. 
(Prior code § 21-102)  
16.20.130 - Subdivision boundary. 
An accurate and complete boundary survey to second order accuracy shall be made of the land to be subdivided. A traverse of the exterior boundaries of the tract, and of each block, when computed from field measurements on the ground, shall close within a limit of one foot to ten thousand (10,000) feet of perimeter. The boundary of the subdivision shall be indicated on the final map by a distinctive symbol. Any area within such exterior boundary line which does not constitute a part of the subdivision shall be labeled "not a part of this subdivision." 
(Prior code § 21-103)  
16.20.140 - Dimensions, bearings and curve data. 
The final map shall show all survey and mathematical information and data necessary to locate all monuments and to locate and retrace all interior and exterior boundary lines appearing thereon, including bearing and distance of straight lines, and central angle, radius and arc length of curves, and such information as may be necessary to determine the location of the center of curves. 
(Prior code § 21-104)  
16.20.150 - Lots and blocks. 
All lots and blocks and all parcels offered for dedication for any purpose shall be particularly delineated and designated with all dimensions, boundaries and courses clearly shown and defined in every case. Parcels offered for dedication other than for streets or public easements shall be designated by letter. Sufficient linear, angular and curve date shall be shown to determine readily the bearing and length of the boundary lines of every block, lot and parcel which is a part thereof. Sheets shall be so arranged that no lot is split between two or more sheets, and wherever practicable, blocks in their entirety shall be shown on one sheet. Lot numbers shall begin with the numeral "1" and continue consecutively throughout the tract, with no omissions or duplications. Subsequent units of subdivision based on the same tentative map may continue the numbering sequence established in an earlier unit. 
(Prior code § 21-105)  
16.20.160 - Streets. 
The map shall show the right-of-way of each street, and the width of any portion being dedicated, and widths of any existing dedications. The widths and locations of adjacent streets and other public properties within fifty (50) feet of the subdivision shall be shown. If any street in the subdivision is a continuation or approximately a continuation of an existing street, the conformity or the amount of nonconformity of such street to such existing streets shall be accurately shown. Whenever the centerline of a street has been established or recorded, the data shall be shown on the final map. 
(Prior code § 21-106)  
16.20.170 - Easements. 
The side line of all easements shall be shown by fine dashed lines. If any easement already of record cannot be definitely located, a statement of the existence, the nature thereof, and its record reference shall appear on the title sheet. Distance and bearings on the side lines or lots which are cut by an easement shall be actual lengths on the lot lines. The widths of all easements and sufficient ties thereto to definitely locate the same with respect to the subdivision shall be shown. All easements shall be clearly labeled and identified. If an easement shown on the map is already on record, its recorded reference shall be given. If an easement is being dedicated by the map, it shall be set out in the owner's certificate of dedication. 
(Prior code § 21-107)  
16.20.180 - Monuments. 
The map shall show fully and clearly what stakes, monuments or other evidence to determine the boundaries of the subdivision were found on the ground and each adjacent corner of each adjoining subdivision or portion thereof, by lot and block number, tract name or number, and place of record, by sections, township and range, or other proper designation. Any monument or benchmark, as required by this section, that is disturbed or destroyed before acceptance of all improvements, shall be replaced by the subdivider. The following required monuments shall be shown on the final map: 
A.  The location of all monuments placed in making the survey. If any points were reset by ties, that fact shall be stated; 
B.  Concrete monuments depressed below street grade with cast-iron ring and cover of a type approved by the city engineer shall be set at intersections of street center lines and at the beginning of curve (BC) and end of curve (EC) of all center line curves, or as required by the city engineer. The exact location of all such monuments shall be shown on the final map; 
C.  All rear lot corner pipes and front lot corner pipes or off-set cross marks in the concrete surface of the public sidewalk; 
D.  Interior monuments shall be set after approval of the final map by the council, and prior to acceptance of the public improvements by the council. Exterior boundary monuments shall be monumented or referenced before recording of the final map in accordance with Section 66495 of the map act. 
(Prior code § 21-108)  
16.20.190 - Title sheet. 
The title sheet of the map, below the title, shall show the name of the civil engineer or licensed land surveyor, together with the date of the survey, the number of sheets, the number of lots and the number of acres within the subdivision. 
(Prior code § 21-109)  
16.20.200 - Certificates and acknowledgments. 
The final map shall contain those certificates and acknowledgments required by Section 66433 et seq., of the map act, together with such other affidavits, endorsements and notarial seals as may be required by law. 
(Prior code § 21-110)  
16.20.210 - Wells. 
The location of all wells, both active and abandoned, shall be shown. 
(Prior code § 21-111)  
16.20.220 - Approval by city. 
A.  Upon receipt of the final map and other data submitted therewith, the city engineer shall refer the map and data to the appropriate city departments, who shall examine them to determine the following: 
1.  That the subdivision as shown is substantially the same as it appeared on the approved tentative map, and any approved alterations thereof; 
2.  That all provisions of law and of this chapter applicable at the time of approval of the tentative map have been complied with; and 
3.  That the map is technically correct. 
B.  A report of all findings shall be given to the city engineer. If the city engineer, upon review of reports received, so determines the criteria of this section have been met, he or she shall certify thereto on the map. If the city engineer does not so determine, he or she shall advise the subdivider of the changes or additions necessary to enable him or her to make such determination, and shall afford the subdivider an opportunity to make such changes or additions. The city engineer shall submit his or her report to the council within twenty (20) days following the satisfactory submission of the final map and accompanying documents by the subdivider. The report shall be considered to be submitted when the matter has been scheduled on a council agenda by the city clerk. 
(Prior code § 21-112)  
16.20.230 - Approval by city council. 
In the event that all improvements required or conditions imposed as conditions of approval under the provisions of this chapter or by law are not completed before the filing of the final map, the council shall enter into an agreement for the installation of improvements with the subdivider. In such case, when the agreement and bonds, deposits or instruments of credit have been approved by the city attorney as to form and by the city engineer as to sufficiency, the council may consider the final map. All signatures except those of the city clerk, city engineer, clerk of the board of supervisors and the county recorder shall be affixed to the title sheet at least eight days prior to council consideration of the final map. If compliance does not occur, then the council approval shall be automatically void and a final map must be resubmitted to the council. 
The council shall approve the map if it is determined to be in conformity with the requirements of this chapter and the conditions of approval of the tentative map. If it is not in conformity, it shall be disapproved, and the council shall advise the subdivider of its disapproval and the reason or reasons therefore. The council shall take the action by resolution and as provided in this chapter within ten (10) days, or at its next meeting following the submittal of the report by the city engineer, unless the time for taking action has been extended by mutual consent of the council and the subdivider. 
(Prior code § 21-113)  
16.20.240 - Recordation. 
Upon approval of the final map by the council and satisfactory compliance by the subdivider with all other applicable requirements of this code, the city clerk shall transmit the map to the clerk of the board of supervisors for execution and ultimate transmittal to the county recorder. Upon recordation of the final map, the property owner or subdivider shall submit to the city engineer one blue-line cloth-back print of the recorded final map, one acceptable reproductible copy on linen tracing cloth or polyester base film, together with seven blue-line prints of the recorded final map and shall have submitted the reduced scale maps as required in Section 16.32.020. 
(Prior code § 21-114)  
Chapter 16.24 - PARCEL SPLITS AND LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS 
Sections: 
 
16.24.010 - General procedure. 
When an owner or subdivider desires to consolidate, to divide, and/or rearrange one or more existing lots, or parcels, into not more than four parcels, or as otherwise provided by Section 66426, and other applicable provisions of the Map Act, it shall be done in the manner set out in this chapter. This procedure may be used to revert to acreage land containing four or less contiguous parcels as authorized by Section 66499.20½ of the Map Act. 
(Prior code § 21-161)  
16.24.020 - Tentative map. 
An acceptable tentative parcel map, showing the proposed land division, shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer, or licensed land surveyor and filed with the city in the manner provided in Chapter 16.12. 
(Prior code § 21-162)  
16.24.030 - Substitute tentative map. 
Upon application to the city council, the council may direct the city engineer to prepare a substitute tentative map examining the feasibility of the parcel split. An appropriate fee shall be set to offset the cost to the city. 
(Prior code § 21-163)  
16.24.040 - Improvements and dedication. 
Except as provided in this chapter, the owner or subdivider shall offer for dedication additional streets, alleys, and public ways and easements, as are required for conformance with the general plan and city's master plans of streets and highways, water, sewer, drainage, and the existing or projected local street system. 
As a condition precedent to the approval of a parcel map, the owner or subdivider shall agree to construct improvements in or along the parcel frontage upon all existing or proposed public streets and ways as reasonably required for subdivisions. A parcel map may not be approved until the required improvements have been satisfactorily constructed or until adequate security, as approved by the city attorney and in an amount determined by the city engineer for the estimated cost of the work, has been posted with the city. 
Extraordinary conditions may make construction of certain improvements impracticable. In extreme circumstances, the city may grant conditional exception to be made only upon written statement of the owner, citing the extraordinary or extreme circumstances and shall be granted only by the council, subject to such conditions as they may impose. 
(Prior code § 21-164)  
16.24.050 - Parcel map—Size and form. 
Upon completion of requirements for the tentative mp and improvements, the owner or subdivider may proceed with the processing of a parcel map of the land division in the manner provided in Chapter 16.20 for final maps. The map shall be of a size and form prescribed by the city engineer and shall comply with the provisions of Section 66444-50 of the map act. The map shall be based upon a field survey showing monuments found and set and shall include other data as required by the city; except the record data may be used if all corners of the parcel being created are of record and if the location of one exterior boundary line can be established from an existing monumented line. 
Upon approval of the parcel map by the city, the city clerk shall transmit the map to the county recorder. The applicant shall pay the recording fee and return an acceptable reproducible, duplicate copy of the recorded map on linen tracing doth or polyester base film, one clothback print and seven blue-line prints to the city engineer for filing. 
(Prior code § 21-165)  
16.24.060 - Building permit prohibition. 
The building department shall not issue permits for the erection of any structures upon lots or parcels not complying with this title. 
(Prior code § 21-166)  
16.24.070 - Dedication of land for recreational facilities. 
The owner or subdivider shall comply with Chapter 16.36 for each new parcel created in excess of the number of original parcels. 
(Prior code § 21-167)  
16.24.080 - Lot line adjustment. 
In the event that the owners of two adjoining parcels desire to modify the location of a common boundary between the two parcels in such a manner that no additional parcels are created, the applicant shall only be required to process the final parcel map. Prior to submitting the map to the city engineer for recording, the applicant shall make application to the community development department for said lot line adjustment. The director of community development shall approve, approve with conditions or deny. The director of community development shall review applications for lot line adjustments at a time established by the department of community development. After approval by the director of community development, the lot line adjustment shall be submitted to the city engineer for recordation without further action by the planning commission or city council. The applicant shall pay established fees for processing the lot line adjustment and recording a final parcel map. 
(Prior code § 21-168)  
16.24.090 - Appeal to the city council. 
When the applicant or any interested citizen is adversely affected by or is dissatisfied with any action of the commission or city engineer with respect to the tentative map, the kind, nature, and extent of the improvements required, or a 1ot line adjustment, he or she may appeal to the council as provided in Section 66452.5 of the map act. 
(Prior code § 21-169)  
16.24.100 - Waiver of parcel map. 
The commission may waive the requirement for the recordation of a parcel map upon application of the subdivider and finding that the proposed division of land complies with such requirements as may have been established by the map act and this chapter as to area, improvement and design, floodwater drainage control, improvement of, roads, sanitary disposal facilities, water supply availability, environmental protection, and other requirements of the map act and of this chapter. In any case, where the requirement for a parcel map is waived, a tentative map is required. 
(Prior code § 21-170)  
Chapter 16.28 - IMPROVEMENTS AND GRADING 
Sections: 
 
16.28.010 - Requirements before commencing improvements. 
Prior to any construction of improvements and/or land alteration required, the subdivider shall have complied with and performed the requirements of Section 16.28.020 through 16.28.060. 
(Prior code § 21-131)  
16.28.020 - Plans and specifications. 
The subdivider shall file with the city engineer detailed plans and specifications for all improvements or land alteration together with the estimate of time reasonably necessary to complete the same. In addition, the subdivider may be required to file detailed soil reports which shall be approved by the city engineer prior to commencement of any work. 
(Prior code § 21-132)  
16.28.030 - Improvement agreement. 
The subdivider shall enter into a contract with the city to make, install and complete within the time fixed, but in no case more than two years from the date of execution of the contract, all improvement and/or land alteration in accordance with approved plans. 
(Prior code § 21-133)  
16.28.040 - Security arrangements for completion of improvements. 
The subdivider shall file surety to guarantee completion of improvements in accordance with the improvement agreement as follows: 
A.  A faithful performance surety in an amount deemed sufficient by the city engineer to cover up to one hundred (100) percent of the total cost of all required on-site and adjacent off-site improvements including grading and slope planting expenses as applicable; 
B.  A payment surety in a like amount; 
C.  A monumentation surety in an amount stipulated by the subdivider's engineer to cover the cost of placing lot corners and other related monuments. The surety shall be drawn and utilized in conformity with Article 9, Chapter 4 of the map act; and 
D.  If the required improvements are financed and installed pursuant to special assessment proceeding, upon the furnishing by the contractor of the faithful performance and payment bonds required by the special assessment act being used, the city may reduce the improvement security of the subdivider by an amount corresponding to the amount of such bonds so furnished by the contractor. 
(Prior code § 21-134)  
16.28.050 - Types of surety. 
Surety may be one of the following types subject to the approval of the council as to type and the city attorney as to form: 
A.  All bonds shall be executed by a surety company authorized to transact a surety business in California; 
B.  In lieu of the faithful performance and payment bonds, the subdivider may submit cash deposits under the conditions described in this subsection. 
Disbursements from cash deposits shall be made in accordance with separate agreement between the subdivider and the city. 
A bookkeeping fee of one percent of the total amount deposited with the city for each cash deposit bond shall be submitted with each such bond. 
Disbursements from cash deposit filed with an approved escrow agency shall be made in accordance with separate agreement between the subdivider and the city. Disbursements from a cash deposit in any instance shall not be permitted unless and until authorized in writing by both the subdivider and the city engineer. 
C.  In lieu of the faithful performance and payment bonds or cash deposits, the subdivider may submit instruments of credit under the conditions described in this subsection. Such instruments of credit shall be issued by a financial institution subject to regulation by the state or federal government in a form and content as approved by the city attorney, and shall pledge that the funds necessary to meet the performance are on deposit and guaranteed for payment and agree that the funds designated by the instrument shall become trust funds for the purposes set forth in the instrument. An instrument of credit shall be accompanied by a current statement of assets and a resolution of the board of directors of the responsible organization authorizing the issuance and the amount of the letter. An instrument of credit shall be accompanied by a statement setting forth the date upon which the responsible organization was established. 
(Prior code § 21-135)  
16.28.060 - Endorsement of certificates. 
The city clerk shall not endorse or sign certificates contained on the final map unless and until improvement security as specified in Section 16.28.050 has been posted. 
(Prior code § 21-136)  
16.28.070 - Applicability to parcel splits. 
The requirements stipulated in Sections 16.28.010 through 16.28.060 are applicable to any parcel split for which the installation of any improvements, grading or special fees are required as a condition of approval. The city council may allow the applicant to file and record a covenant, to run with the land, guaranteeing the completion of required improvements within a specified time. 
(Prior code § 21-137)  
16.28.080 - Compliance required. 
No final map shall be presented to the council for acceptance until the requirements of this chapter have been approved and until all charges established by the council and pertaining to the property being subdivided have been paid. 
(Prior code § 21-138)  
16.28.090 - Special permits issued to do work. 
Should the subdivider desire to do certain work prior to entering into an agreement with the city to install and complete all improvements and land alteration work, he or she may make an application to do so under a special permit. This application shall be accompanied by detailed plans describing the work which is proposed. The city engineer may issue a special permit to the subdivider or his contractor upon application of the subdivision applicant, providing a bond has been posted in an amount which would assure the rehabilitation of the land, including grading and planting, in the event the subdivision map is not recorded. The performance bond and contractor's qualifications shall be as provided in this title. 
When the special permit is for all work required in connection with the subdivision and the work has been completed, the agreement as designated in this section will not be required. 
(Prior code § 21-139)  
16.28.100 - Release of improvement security—Maintenance bond. 
Surety may be released in the following manner: Before surety is finally released for faithful performance, the subdivider shall post a maintenance guarantee as specified in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 21-140)  
16.28.110 - Progress payments. 
Progress payments may be made to the subdivider from any deposit money or instrument of credit which the subdivider may have made in lieu of providing a surety bond; provided, however, that no such progress payment shall be made for more than ninety (90) percent of the value of any installment of work; and, provided that the aggregate amount thus paid is not in excess of fifty (50) percent of the total amount posted as improvement security. No progress payments from cash deposits shall be made except upon joint certification by the city engineer and the subdivider that work covered thereby has been completed. 
(Prior code § 21-141)  
16.28.120 - Release of surety. 
Improvement security given for faithful performance of the agreement may be released upon recordation of the notice of completion for the work unless provision is made for partial release as work progresses under separate written agreement. The payment surety shall be retained to secure payment to the contractor, his subcontractors and to persons renting equipment or furnishing labor or material for six months after completion and acceptance of the work. Following such six-month period, this payment security may be reduced to an amount not less than the total of all claims on which an action has been filed and notice thereof given in writing to the city. 
(Prior code § 21-142)  
16.28.130 - Forfeiture of surety. 
In the event the subdivider fails to complete any or all improvement work in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the improvement agreement, the city may call on the surety for reimbursement without completing the improvements. In the event the subdivider fails to complete all improvement work in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the improvement agreement and the city shall have to, or chooses to, complete same, the city shall call on the surety for reimbursement or shall appropriate from any cash deposit funds for reimbursement. If the amount of the surety bond, cash deposit or instrument of credit exceeds all costs and expenses incurred by the city, it shall release the remainder of such bond, cash deposit or instrument of credit, and if the amount of the surety bond, cash deposit or instrument of credit shall be less than the cost and expense incurred by the city, the subdivider shall be liable to the city for such difference. 
(Prior code § 21-143) 
(Ord. No. 1009, § 1, 4-22-09)  
16.28.140 - Maintenance guarantee. 
The subdivider shall guarantee all improvements for a period of one year from the date of final acceptance and shall correct any and all defects or deficiencies arising during the period as a result of the acts or omissions of the subdivider, his or her agents or employees. The improvement guarantee shall be backed by a bond or cash deposit in the amount of ten (10) percent of the surety posted for improvements. The city shall provide written notice of the defect or deficiency. In any instance where the subdivider fails to take action within the specified time, or when immediate action is required to protect the public health, safety and/or welfare, the city may cause the work to be performed . and call on the surety for reimbursement. The maintenance bond shall be submitted prior to final acceptance of the improvements by the city. 
(Prior code § 21-144)  
16.28.150 - Minimum requirements. 
The subdivider shall improve or agree to improve all streets, thoroughfares, public ways or public or private easements within the development and adjacent thereto, as required to serve the development. No grading or improvement work shall be commenced until either an appropriate subdivision improvement agreement, land alteration permit, or street encroachment permit has been approved and any necessary bonds posted. Improvements shall be installed to line and grade and in accordance with the standard drawings and specifications of the city and/or as deter-mined by the city engineer. Street structural sections shall be designed in accordance with the "Division of Highways Stabilometer Method" or such comparable method as may be approved by the city engineer. The minimum improvements which the subdivider shall normally be required to agree to install, at his or her own cost, in the creation of a parcel or parcels shall include the following: 
A.  Grading, curbs and gutter, paving and drainage structures necessary for the proper use and drainage of the development, streets, highways and/or public safety; 
B.  Site grading and drainage, taking into consideration the drainage pattern of adjacent improved or unimproved property and making drainage provisions adequate for total ultimate development of the natural tributary area. Runoff quantities to be anticipated shall be derived from the drainage study as defined in this chapter, or by such other method as may be approved by the city engineer. Alternate methods shall be fully substantiated by the subdivider's engineer. Grading shall be in full conformity with the provisions of the appropriate ordinances of the city. Drainage facilities and concepts shall conform to the requirements of the city engineer; 
C.  Street name and traffic control signs; 
D.  Sidewalks and bicycle paths; 
E.  Fire hydrants and a water system with mains of sufficient size and capacity to provide future extensions to adjacent property and having a sufficient number of services to furnish an adequate water supply for each 1t or parcel in the subdivision and to provide adequate fire protection. Water system mains shall extend to the boundaries of the parcel map and subdivision. All domestic water shall be taken from the city system; 
F.  Sanitary sewer facilities and connections for each lot. Sewer mains, whose size and depth shall be adequate to serve adjacent and upstream properties, shall extend to the boundaries of the parcel split or subdivision; 
G.  Street trees as required by the director; 
H.  Underground utilities; 
I.  Provision shall be made for any and all railroad crossings necessary to provide access to or circulation within the proposed subdivision, including the preparation of all documents necessary for application to the state public utilities commission for the establishment and improvement of such crossings; 
J.  Midblock pedestrian ways, where required; 
K.  Improvements on private access easements shall be required as determined by the city engineer; 
L.  Street lighting facilities shall be provided in accordance with the council's policy for the area of the city where the subdivision is located. Lighting shall be adequate to permit proper policing of the subdivision and shall be so screened or otherwise designed as not to interfere with views from the hillsides of the city; 
M.  All utility distribution lines including, but not limited to electric, communication, natural gas, and cable television lines installed in and for the purpose of supplying service to any subdivision shall be placed underground. Undergrounding shall include existing aboveground facilities located within the subdivision and extending to the first existing pole outside the subdivision; 
Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface-mounted transformers, street light poles, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets and concealed ducts may be installed above the surface of the ground subject to the approval of the city engineer; 
The subdivider is responsible for complying with the requirements of this section, and shall make the necessary arrangements with the utilities involved for the installation of the facilities; and 
N.  Traffic signals in an amount proportionate to the benefits received according to rules and regulations as may be adopted from time to time by the council. 
(Prior code § 21-241)  
16.28.160 - Underground utilities. 
All underground utilities, including, but not limited to, sanitary sewers, storm drains and natural gas distribution facilities installed in streets or alleys shall be constructed prior to the surfacing of such streets or alleys. Connections for all underground utilities and sanitary sewers shall be laid to such length as will obviate the necessity for disturbing the street or alley improvements when the service connections thereto are made. 
(Prior code § 21-242)  
16.28.170 - Wells. 
All wells shall be abandoned by sealing in a manner satisfactory to the city engineer or shall be transferred to the ownership of the city unless specific approval to retain the well for private use is granted by the city at the time of approval of the tentative map. The locations of such wells shall be shown on the final map and well logs, if available, shall be submitted to the city. 
(Prior code § 21-243)  
16.28.180 - Completion. 
A complete improvement plan, "as-built," shall be filed with the city engineer upon completion of these improvements; the "as-built" plans to be drawn on copies of the original tracings and certified as to accuracy and completeness by the subdivider's registered civil engineer. Upon receipt and acceptance of the "as-built" plans, the city engineer may accept the public improvements. 
(Prior code § 21-244)  
16.28.190 - As-built certification. 
The subdivider's engineer shall file or have filed with the city a certificate of grading signed by a registered civil engineer and an as-built sewer plan, also signed by a registered civil engineer. The sewer plan shall show the location and grades of all sewer lines and laterals installed. Both the certificate and as-built plan shall be submitted prior to issuance of building permits. 
(Prior code § 21-245)  
16.28.200 - Acceptance of improvements. 
The city engineer shall have the authority and responsibility to accept public improvements and approve site grading relative to subdivision of land whether through the major subdivision process or the parcel split process. Completion of all improvements and/or grading as contemplated by the subdivision improvement agreement, the land alteration permit or the street encroachment permit is a condition of approval and acceptance. 
(Prior code § 21-246)  
Chapter 16.32 - DESIGN STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS 
Sections: 
 
16.32.010 - Design standards generally. 
Except where modified by the council upon recommendation of the commission, each subdivision and map thereof shall be in conformity with the standards set forth or referred to in this chapter. 
All design shall be in accordance with generally accepted engineering principles and the appropriate city standard drawings and any supplemental design criteria which may be adopted by the city from time to time. Specific details of design shall be subject to the approval of the city engineer, who shall have the authority to approve minor deviations from the minimum standards listed here. 
All subdivisions should result in the creation of lots which are developable and capable of being built upon. No subdivision should create lots which are impractical to improve due to steepness of terrain, location of watercourses, problems of sewerage or driveway grades, or natural physical conditions. 
(Prior code § 21-211)  
16.32.020 - Access to public streets. 
All lots or parcels created by the subdivision of land shall have access to a public street improved to standards hereinafter required. Private streets, common driveways or access easements shall not normally be permitted. However, if the commission determines that the most logical development of the land requires that lots be created which cannot easily be served by a public street, a private access may be approved. The subdivider shall submit a development plan showing the alignment, width, grade and material specifications of any proposed private improvements, the topography and means of access to each lot, drainage and sewerage of the lots served by such private improvements and a plan satisfactory to the city for ownership and maintenance of said access and the liability for taxes thereon. Construction of these improvements as approved by the city shall be completed prior to occupancy of any buildings on lots served by a private access. 
(Prior code § 21-212)  
16.32.030 - Street standards. 
Streets shall conform to the following minimum conditions as set out in this section and Sections 16.32.040 through 16.32.100. 
Subdivision design shall conform to the concept of major streets designated in the general plan, and to any future street rights-of-way designated by the commission and approved by the council. Whenever a subdivision embraces any major street, it shall be included in the tract and shall be platted by the subdivider in the location generally indicated. If a specific location has been designated by the commission and approved by the council, that location shall be used. 
(Prior code § 21-213)  
16.32.040 - Minimum standards. 
Typical sections of various classes of streets shall be in accord with the applicable city standard drawings, and in accord with the following table: 
Classification 	Minimum R/W Width (in feet) 	Minimum T/W Width (in feet) 
State highway 	See Caltrans 	See Caltrans 
Express way 	120 	78 (22' median) 
Major arterial 	110 	64 (22' median) 
Minor arterial 	100 	64 (12' median) 
Major collector 	88 	64 
Minor collector 	60 	40 
Cul-de-sac 	50 	36 
 
The basis for requirements for streets and roadway widths and design shall be the topography of the land and density of development in terms of the proposed number of dwellings to be served by such street or roadway on an ultimate basis. Reduced right-of-way width shall, in all cases, be sufficient to accommodate utility facilities within the right-of-way. 
Improvements as set forth in Chapter 16.28 shall be installed within the half of an existing or proposed street adjacent to the subdivision boundary. Substandard existing improvements shall be removed and replaced as directed by the city engineer. Where an existing street has not previously been paved, paving having a minimum width from face of curb to edge of pavement of twenty-eight (28) shall be installed. 
The subdivider shall dedicate all rights-of-way for streets or portions of streets as necessary within the subdivision boundary. Full width dedications within the subdivision shall have complete improvements installed, except that upon secondary, major and arterial roads, paving upon each half may be a minimum of twenty-four (24) feet in width from the face of curb to edge of pavement, subject to prior approval of the city. 
The standards set forth in this chapter are minimum, and additional on-site and/or off-site public improvements and dedications may be required. 
(Prior code § 21.214)  
16.32.050 - Street pattern. 
The street pattern in the subdivision shall provide for the most advantageous development of the site and adjoining areas and the entire neighborhood or district. 
Where appropriate to the design and terrain, proposed streets shall be continuous and in alignment with existing, planned or platted streets with which they are to connect. The center lines of streets, if not in alignment, shall be offset at least two hundred (200) feet unless otherwise approved by the city engineer for reasons of severe topography, one-way streets, or other unusual circumstances. 
Proposed streets shall be extended to the boundary lines of the land to be subdivided, unless prevented by topography or other physical conditions, or unless, in the opinion of the commission upon recommendation of the city engineer, such extension is not necessary for the coordination of the subdivision with the existing layout or the most advantageous future development of adjacent tracts. Where reservation for future street is made, slope rights along the sides and end of the reserved area shall be preserved in the name of the city. 
In the case of stub-end streets extending to the boundary of the property, a one-foot strip at the end of the stub-end street the width of the street right-of-way shall be deeded to the city pending the extension of the street into adjacent property. Where required, a temporary turnaround or a temporary connection to another street shall be provided by the subdivider. 
Proposed streets shall intersect one another as nearly at right angles as topography and other limiting factors on good design permit. Streets shall be designed in a manner which will discourage the use of local streets for through traffic. Four-way intersections involving local streets shall be avoided whenever possible. 
(Prior code § 21-215)  
16.32.060 - Design adjacent to arterial, major and secondary roads. 
Subdivision design shall be in general accord with the concepts of the general plan, and as determined by the commission. 
Street design should have the purpose of making adjacent lots, if for residential use, desirable for such use by cushioning the effect of heavy traffic and of minimizing the interference with traffic on such streets. 
The number of intersecting streets along arterial, major and secondary streets should be held to a minimum. Wherever practicable, such intersections should be spaced not less than one thousand (1,000) feet on center. 
Residential lots adjacent to these roads normally will be required to be served by a residential street paralleling the road or by a series of cul-de-sac or loop streets extending from a parallel street. Where such double frontage lots are created, improvements on such lots shall be oriented to and front upon the local street. A decorative wall of concrete block or of a comparable material approved by the planning commission, with a minimum height of six feet, shall be required at the property line or top of slope adjacent to the arterial, major or secondary road. Landscaping and permanent irrigation may be required. 
When the rear of any lot borders any arterial or major road, the subdivider shall be required to execute a certificate on the title sheet, deemed sufficient by the city attorney, prohibiting the right of ingress and egress from the major or arterial road to the lot. The council may require similar dedication in other instances where deemed necessary for health, safety and welfare. 
(Prior code § 21-216)  
16.32.070 - Grade, curves and sight distances. 
Grades, curves and sight distances shall be subject to approval by the city engineer, to insure proper drainage and/or safety for vehicles and pedestrians. 
Grades of streets shall be not less than two-tenths percent, except, on local streets a minimum grade of fifteen-hundredths percent may be used if approved by the city engineer, nor more than seven percent on arterial or major roads, ten (10) percent on secondary roads, twelve (12) percent on residential collector streets, fifteen (15) percent on residential streets. Maximum grade for hillside local streets shall not exceed twenty (20) percent. Any grade segment in excess of twelve (12) percent may not exceed three hundred (300) feet in length. For all grades of twelve (12) percent or more, the installation of a Portland cement concrete road surface is required. 
At street intersections, property lines at each block shall be rounded by an arc, the radius of which shall not be less than ten (10) feet and which shall be concentric with the curb return wherever possible. 
The radii of curvature shall not be less than that specified in the following table. Determination of which topography classification to be used shall be subject to approval by the city engineer. 
Street Classification 	Minimum Radius Moderate Topography (In Feet) 	Minimum Radius Rough Topography (In Feet) 
Arterial 	1,200 	
Major 	1,000 	750 
Secondary 	600 	300 
Residential 	230 	100 
 
(Prior code § 21-217)  
16.32.080 - Curbs, sidewalks, and pedestrian ways. 
Vertical concrete curbs and gutters and sidewalks shall be required in all subdivisions except as noted. 
A.  The requirements for sidewalks may be omitted in whole or in part by the commission on all streets less than secondary highways; provided, that the findings are made that such sidewalks are not necessary because of either of the following: 
1.  The traffic count on a particular street is significantly reduced from the established standard for local streets as determined by the city engineer; 
2.  The design or the topography of the subdivision and its relationship to adjoining properties and uses does not warrant the standard sidewalk requirements, based on recommendation of the city engineer; 
3.  When required for access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation facilities, other community facilities, or for unusually long blocks, the commission may require pedestrian ways not . less than twenty (20) feet in right-of-way and paved with concrete a minimum of ten (10) feet in width. Such pedestrian ways may be bordered on each side with sprinklered landscaping and a minimum six-foot-high chain link fence. In lieu of the chain link fence, the commission may require the subdivider to use a masonry wall as specified in this chapter, a minimum of six feet high, where they deem it necessary for any one of the following reasons: 
a.  Separation of land use; 
b.  Acoustical buffer; 
c.  Promotion of an architectural theme or compatibility of the area; or 
d.  Where alternate pedestrian facilities are provided. 
4.  Where sidewalks are not required, concrete driveway aprons shall extend to the property line. 
B.  The requirement for curb and gutter may be omitted in whole or in part by the commission on all residential streets less than secondary highways; provided, that the findings are made that such curbs and gutters are not necessary because of the following: 
1.  Topography and geology of the property is such that run-off from the roadways will not endanger public health, safety and/or welfare; and 
2.  Curb and gutter is not required as part of an area storm drainage system. 
Where curb and gutter is not required, driveway aprons may be constructed of asphalt concrete. 
(Prior code § 21-218)  
16.32.090 - Street names and numbers. 
Street names and numbers shall be assigned by the director. 
(Prior code § 21-219)  
16.32.100 - Culs-de-sac. 
Culs-de-sac shall be limited to a maximum length of six hundred (600) feet and shall be provided with a turnaround having a minimum curbline radius of forty (40) feet. 
(Prior code § 21-220)  
16.32.110 - Hillside subdivisions and planned unit developments. 
In either a planned unit development or a hillside subdivision or portions thereof which have an average slope in excess of ten (10) percent prior to grading, the commission, in the exercise of its discretion, may modify the requirements of this chapter in a manner that will result in the best possible utilization of the land to be subdivided, giving consideration to the topography and natural cover of the land, the general character of the proposed subdivision, the proposed zoning and the desirability of minimizing grading upon the site. 
(Prior code § 21-221)  
16.32.120 - Atlas maps. 
The subdivider shall provide the city with accurate maps of the subdivision at scales of one inch equals two hundred (200) feet and one inch equals four hundred (400) feet for use by the city in updating its atlas maps. The maps may be dual purpose, e.g., vicinity map, grading plan, tract map, etc., and shall contain the following minimum information: 
200' scale 	Streets, name and width 
	Lots, number and dimensions 
	Easements, type and dimension 
400' scale 	Outline of streets and lots, no dimensions 
 
(Prior code § 21-222)  
16.32.130 - Utility easements. 
Easements for water, drainage or sewer purposes shall be provided as necessary, with a minimum width of ten (10) feet. Easements for large structures or unusually deep structures shall be of such greater width as may be specified by the city engineer. Any reduction in width shall require approval of both the city engineer and the utility involved. 
(Prior code § 21-223)  
16.32.140 - Lot standards. 
The size, shape and orientation of lots, each of which shall contain a practical building site, shall be appropriate to the location of the proposed subdivision and to the type of development contemplated. The following principles and standards shall be observed: 
A.  The side lines of all lots, so far as possible, should be at approximately right angles to the street on which the lot faces, or approximately radial to the center of curvature of a cul-de-sac on which the lot faces. 
B.  No lot shall be divided by a city or special district boundary line. 
C.  No remnants of property, with the exception of one-foot control lots, shall be created which do not conform to lot requirements, or are not required for a private or public utility purpose. 
D.  The division of a lot or parcel by a tax code boundary shall not be permitted. 
E.  Lot lines between adjacent lots within a subdivision should be located at the top of any grading slope which may be proposed at such location. 
F.  Unless otherwise altered by the provisions of a planned unit development, the minimum lot depth for a residential development shall be not less than ninety (90) feet with the following exception: Lots adjacent to freeways, major streets or collector roads shall utilize a minimum lot depth of one hundred (100) feet to provide sufficient separation from the road noise and to facilitate the usable lot area. 
G.  In determining the permissible lot size, all public utility transmission line easements shall be excluded. 
H.  The depth of the lot shall not exceed three times the width. 
(Prior code § 21-224)  
16.32.150 - Block design. 
Blocks shall normally have sufficient width for an ultimate layout of two tiers of lots of the size required by the provisions of the zoning ordinance. 
Blocks shall not normally exceed one thousand (1,000) feet in length between street lines, except in hillside development or where subdivisions containing parcels of one-half acre or larger justify or require a variation from this requirement. In any block over nine hundred (900) feet in length a crosswalk or pedestrian way may be required in accordance with Section 16.32.080. 
(Prior code § 21-225)  
16.32.160 - Nonresidential subdivisions. 
The street and lot layout of a nonresidential subdivision shall be appropriate to the land use for which the subdivision is proposed, and shall conform to the proposed land use standards established in the general plan and zoning ordinance. 
In addition to the principles and standards in this chapter which are appropriate to the planning of all subdivisions, the subdivider shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the commission that the street, parcel and block pattern proposed is specifically adapted to the uses anticipated and takes into account other uses in the vicinity. The following principles and standards shall be observed: 
A.  Proposed industrial parcels shall be suitable in area and dimensions to the types of industrial development anticipated. 
B.  Street rights-of-way and pavement shall be adequate to accommodate the type and volume of traffic anticipated to be generated thereon. 
C.  Special requirements may be imposed by the city with respect to street, curb, gutter and sidewalk design and construction. 
D.  Special requirements may be imposed by the city with respect to the installation of public utilities, including water, sewer and storm drainage. 
E.  Nonresidential subdivisions shall be designed to protect adjacent areas from potential nuisance from the proposed nonresidential subdivisions, including the provisions of extra depth and setback in parcels backing on existing or potential residential development and provisions for a permanently landscaped buffer strip when determined necessary by the commission. 
F.  Streets carrying nonresidential traffic, especially truck traffic, shall not normally be extended to the boundaries of adjacent existing or potential residential areas, or connected to streets intended for predominantly residential traffic. 
G.  Nonresidential subdivisions shall take into account and specifically designate all private areas proposed for vehicular circulation and parking, for pedestrian circulation, and for buffer strips and other landscape. 
H.  Buffer strips shall consist of landscaped areas which are designed to shield and otherwise soften the effect of the nonresidential subdivision on nearby residential areas. Such buffer strips shall be improved to standards as specified in the zoning ordinance. 
(Prior code § 21-226)  
16.32.170 - New development and redevelopment. 
The following specific procedures and standards shall be applied to proposed changes in product sizes within single-family residential tracts in which a previously approved product was constructed. If a residential product was approved and not built, this section of the code shall not apply. Evaluation of the proposed changes shall be by director's review based upon the standards, criteria and findings for reviewing development plans in accordance with the site plan review process, except in the event that changes in product size of twenty-five (25) percent or greater increase or decrease, based on a weighted average, are proposed. If the change is twenty-five (25) percent or greater, evaluation shall be by the planning commission based upon the standards, criteria and findings for reviewing development plans in accordance with the architectural review process. 
A.  Compatibility. Proposed product changes shall incorporate the following criteria to provide continuity and integrity within the neighborhood: 
1.  All proposed homes shall have compatible architecture, materials, colors, roof lines and frontage widths with built homes in the tract; and 
2.  All proposed walls and fencing shall be compatible with existing fencing. 
B.  Transition Area. If a transition area is required, it shall consist of three to five homes and shall be established side to side and across the street from any built homes. This transition area may be adjusted to meet any immediate physical barrier such as a street, flood control channel, or open space area and shall address the following: 
1.  Proposed homes closest in design and size to the built homes shall be placed in the transition area; 
2.  Two-story homes shall be located side to side or across the street from existing two-story homes; and 
3.  One-story homes shall be located side to side or across the street from existing one-story homes. 
C.  Degree of Change of Product Size. The degree of change shall be determined from the percent difference between the weighted average square footage of the units built (total square footage of all built units divided by the number of units) and the weighted average square footage of the proposed units (total square footage of all proposed units divided by the number of units). 
1.  Product Change of Fifteen (15) Percent or Less. 
a.  Must provide compatibility per subsection (A) of this section; 
b.  Requires no notice to adjacent property owners. 
2.  Product Change is more than Fifteen (15) Percent, but less than Twenty-Five (25) Percent. 
a.  Must provide compatibility per subsection (A) of this section; 
b.  Must provide a transition area per subsection (B) of this section; 
c.  Notice of the proposed change and a ten-day comment period from the date of mailing of the notices shall be sent to the property owners within the subject tract (or sub-tract, if applicable) and to any other property owners within three hundred (300) feet of any of the proposed homes. 
3.  Product Change is Twenty-Five (25) Percent or Greater. 
a.  Must provide compatibility per subsection (A) of this section; 
b.  Must provide a transition area per subsection (B) of this section; 
c.  The proposal shall be subject to approval of an architectural review modification pursuant to Section 17.72 by the planning commission after a duly noticed public hearing; 
d.  Notice of public hearing to review the proposed change shall be mailed to the property owners within the subject tract (or sub-tract, if applicable) and to any other property Owners within three hundred (300) feet of any of the proposed homes. 
(Ord. No. 1021, § 1, 7-28-10)  
Chapter 16.36 - RESERVATIONS AND DEDICATIONS FOR PUBLIC FACILITIES 
Sections: 
 
16.36.010 - Purpose. 
It is the purpose and intent of the provisions of this chapter to require the reservation or dedication of land directly benefiting the regulated subdivision in order to provide for necessary public facilities including, but not limited to, sites for parks and recreational areas, open space, or other public facilities as deemed necessary. In addition to requirements for reservation and dedication of lands, provision is made in this, chapter for the payment of fees in lieu thereof for the acquisition of lands outside of the regulated subdivision, which lands will provide equivalent sites for the purposes set forth in this chapter to benefit the regulated subdivision. In each case it is the intent that the regulated subdivision will receive the direct benefit upon which the exaction was postulated. 
(Prior code § 21-261)  
16.36.020 - Neighborhood facilities. 
The subdivider may be required to reserve sites, appropriate in area and location, for necessary and desirable neighborhood facilities, such as parks and playgrounds. Such sites shall be located in accordance with the principles and standards contained in this chapter or expressed in the general plan. School sites may be dedicated in accordance with the provisions of Section 66478 of the map act. Recreation sites shall be dedicated in accordance with the provisions of Section 64477 of the map act and the provisions of this code, or, in the alternative, a fee shall be paid as required in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 21-262)  
16.36.030 - Determination of need. 
The neighborhood facilities needed shall be determined on the basis of the estimated number of families in the area to be served by the facilities. 
(Prior code § 21-263)  
16.36.040 - Service area. 
The definition of service areas determining the need for neighborhood facilities at the district or community level shall be based on the general plan. The planning neighborhood will normally provide the basis for estimating the number of families to be served by facilities at the local level. A planning neighborhood shall, insofar as possible, exhibit the following characteristics: 
A.  It is bounded, rather than bisected, by major thoroughfares or other substantial land use or natural barriers to pedestrian traffic. 
B.  It is usually not over a mile in extent in any direction. 
C.  It contains a minimum of five hundred (500) families. 
(Prior code § 21-264)  
16.36.050 - Principles and standards. 
The following principles and standards are intended to serve as a general guide in determining the neighborhood facilities for which sites normally will be required: 
A.  Wherever possible, playground and neighborhood recreation areas shall be developed in conjunction with elementary school sites. 
B.  Where ravines, including natural waterways, are included within the boundaries of a subdivision, such ravines may, at the discretion of the city, be reserved for public use, including recreation and the disposal of storm waters. These purposes may be accomplished through dedication and/or storm drainage and scenic easements. 
(Prior code § 21-265)  
16.36.060 - Dedication of land and/or payment of fees for park and recreation purposes pursuant to the Quimby Act. 
A.  This section is adopted pursuant to Section 66477 of the Government Code which provides for the dedication of land or the payment of fees in lieu thereof for park and recreational facilities as a condition of approval of a tentative map or parcel map. 
B.  Whenever land that is proposed to be divided for residential use lies within the boundaries of the city, a fee and/or the dedication of land shall be required as a condition of approval of the division of land. 
C.  It is found and determined by the city council that the public interest, convenience, health, welfare and safety requires that three acres of land for each one thousand (1,000) persons residing within a subdivision shall be devoted to neighborhood and community park and recreational facilities. However, if the amount of actual acreage of neighborhood and community park area existing within the city, as shown on the city's records, plans, recreational element, maps, or reports as of the date of the most recent available federal census, per one thousand (1,000) members of the total population of the city, as shown in the most recent available federal census, exceeds that limit, then the city council determines that the public interest, convenience, health, welfare and safety requires that a higher standard, not to exceed five acres of land per one thousand (1,000) persons residing within the city, shall be devoted to neighborhood and community park purposes. 
D.  Definitions. 
"Dwelling unit" means a building or mobilehome designed for residential occupancy. For the purposes of this section, the number of dwelling units created by a land division shall be as follows: One dwelling unit per lot created in a single-family residential zone, one dwelling per unit approved in a multifamily residential zone; and where the number of units to be built in a multifamily residential zone is unknown, the maximum number of dwelling units allowed under that zone. For a condominium project, the number of dwelling units created shall be the number of condominium units approved. 
"Park" means a parcel or parcels of land, exclusive of natural open space, which is open and available for use by the general public and which serves the recreational needs of the public. 
"Parks and recreation plan" means a general plan and/or other plan for park and recreational facilities adopted by the city which describes current and planned facilities and services. 
E.  Exemptions. This section shall not apply to the following land divisions: 
1.  Commercial or industrial; 
2.  Condominium projects or stock cooperatives which consist of the subdivision of airspace in an existing apartment building which is more than five years old and no new dwelling units area added; and 
3.  Subdivisions containing less than five parcels and not used for residential purposes; provided, however, that a condition of approval shall be placed on those maps that if a building permit is requested for the construction of a residential structure or structures on one or more of the parcels within four years, the fee may be required to be paid by the owner of each parcel as a condition to issuance of such permit. F. Adoption and Amendment of a Parks and Recreation Plan. 
1.  Prior to requiring a subdivider to dedicate land or pay a fee, or a combination of both, the city must adopt a parks and recreation plan which shall be used to plan and direct park and recreation services within the city. 
2.  The city may amend an approved parks and recreation plan at any time to reflect the needs of the city or when there are pertinent changes in the city's boundaries. 
3.  A parks and recreation plan shall contain a statement of goals, policies, programs, standards and proposed location and development or rehabilitation of recreation facilities and services such as natural reservations, parks, parkways, playgrounds, recreational community gardens, and other recreational areas. 
G.  Land Dedication and Fee Requirements. 
1.  Whenever a tentative map or a parcel map which is subject to the provisions of this section is submitted to the community development department of the city, the city director of community development shall determine whether the city will require the dedication of land or payment of fees in lieu thereof for park and recreational purposes. If dedication of land is required, the city director of community development also shall determine its location, after consultation with the subdivider. Thereafter, such location shall be shown on the tentative map or parcel map as submitted. The subdivider shall have the right to appeal any such determination to the planning commission and thereafter to the city council, upon filing a written appeal with the city director of community development within fifteen (15) days after written notice of such determination is received by the subdivider. 
2.  The conditions of approval of a tentative map or a parcel map subject to the provisions of this section shall require the dedication of land, the payment of fees in lieu thereof, or a combination of both for park and recreational purposes to serve the future inhabitants of the subdivision. If the land is to be dedicated, the proposed dedication shall be shown on the approved tentative map or parcel map. If fees are to be paid, the condition of approval shall require that the fees be paid to the city. 
3.  The amount and location of land to be dedicated and/or the fees to be paid shall bear a reasonable relationship to the use of the park and recreational facilities by the future inhabitants of the subdivision. 
4.  All land dedicated, fees paid, or a combination of both, must be used only for the purpose of developing new or rehabilitating existing neighborhood or community park and recreational facilities to serve the subdivision. 
5.  The amount and location of property to be dedicated and the amount of any fees to be paid shall be as approved by the city in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
6.  Whenever subsequent development occurs on property for which fees have been paid or land dedicated, no additional fees or dedications shall be required except as to any additional lots or dwelling units which were not subject to a prior fee or dedication requirement. 
7.  All dedications of land shall be in accordance with the Subdivision Map Act. Land shall be conveyed in fee simple to the city free and clear of all encumbrances except those which will not interfere with the use of the property for its intended purposes and which the city agrees to accept. All deeds shall be delivered to the city before the approval of the final map or parcel map. If the final map or parcel map is disapproved, or if it is withdrawn by the subdivider, the deeds shall be returned to the subdivider. If the final map or parcel map is approved, the deeds shall be recorded by the city at the time the final map or parcel map is recorded. No deed for dedication of land shall be accepted unless it is accompanied by a policy of title insurance, secured by the subdivider, in an amount equal to the value of the land dedicated. 
8.  Whenever land has been conveyed or fees paid to the city and a final map is never recorded or, if recorded, is reverted to acreage, the city shall, at its option, either reconvey all land dedicated to it, repay all fees paid without interest, allow the developer a credit for any land dedicated or fees paid to be applied only to a new subdivision on the same property, or make other arrangements with the subdivider. 
9.  Land which has been dedicated and accepted may be sold by the city if the subdivider has not begun substantial construction on the subdivision and the city council determines that another site would be more suitable for local park or recreational facilities. The proceeds from the sale of the land must be used for the purchase of the more suitable site. 
10.  Where a proposed subdivision lies within an area not then within the city's element of the general plan but intended to be annexed into the city by the developer, the developer shall dedicate land, pay a fee in lieu thereof, or both, in accordance with the provisions of this section and the general plan shall be amended after the approval of the tentative map or parcel map to include said development and any previously unincluded park for which development there was a dedication of land and/or a payment of fees. 
11.  Whenever fees are to be paid, the fees shall be paid at such time as is agreed upon by the subdivider and the city through the conditions of approval. Payment may be required prior to recordation of the final map or parcel map if the fees are to reimburse the city for expenditures previously made, or if the city determines that the fees will be collected for park and recreation facilities for which an account has been established and funds appropriated and for which the city has adopted a proposed construction schedule or plan. Payment may be deferred to the date of the issuance of building permits, or the date of final inspection or the date the certificate of occupancy is issued, whichever occurs last. If the payment of fees is deferred, the city may determine whether the fees shall be paid on a pro rata basis for each dwelling unit when it received its final inspection or certificate of occupancy, on a pro rata basis when certain percentages of the dwelling units have received their final inspections or certificates of occupancy, or on a lump-sum basis when the last dwelling in the development receives its final inspection or certificate of occupancy. 
12.  Whenever fees are paid pursuant to this section, the city shall deposit them into a separate subdivision park trust fund. 
13.  All fees paid must be used only for the purpose of developing new or rehabilitating existing neighborhood or community park and recreational facilities to serve the subdivision. The development of new park and recreational facilities includes, but is not limited to, the acquisition of land for neighborhood or community parks for recreational purposes. 
14.  Fees paid pursuant to this section shall be expended for use only within the boundaries of the city and as specified in this chapter and the city shall maintain appropriate records to reflect such expenditures. 
15.  All fees collected pursuant to this section shall be committed by the city for a specific project to serve residents of the subdivision in a budgetary year either within five years of receipt of the fees or five years after the issuance of building permits on one-half of the lots created by the subdivision whichever occurs later. If the fees are not so committed, the fees received shall be distributed to the then record owners of the subdivision in the same proportion that the size of their lot bears to the total area of all lots in the subdivision. 
16.  A subdivider of any tentative map or parcel map which was approved prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter may apply to be reassessed pursuant to the provisions of this section, provided the fees have not yet been paid and, in such event, all other provisions of this section shall apply. Upon such application, the community development department shall determine the amount of fees required, and the matter need not be set for hearing before the city council or the planning commission unless a dedication of land or a credit as provided in subsection (H)(6) of this section is requested by the subdivider or recommended by the community development department. 
H.  Land Dedication and Fee Determinations. 
1.  Whether the conditions of approval for a land division shall require the dedication of land, the payment of fees, or both, shall be based on the following: 
a.  The natural features of the area; topography; geology; available access; the location; size and shape of the subdivision; the land available for dedication; the feasibility of dedication; the location of existing and proposed park sites and trailways; suitability for patrol, supervision and maintenance; and the compatibility of dedication with the city's general plan and other plans pertaining to parks and recreation adopted by the city. 
b.  For subdivisions containing fifty (50) parcels or less, only the payment of fees may be required, provided, however, that when a condominium project, stock cooperative or community apartment project, as those terms are defined in Section 1351 of the Civil Code, exceeds fifty (50) dwelling units, the dedication of land may be required even though the number of parcels may be less than fifty (50). Nothing in this section shall prevent the city from accepting the voluntary dedication of land by a subdivider for a subdivision containing less than fifty (50) parcels if the dedication meets the other requirements of this section. 
c.  Whenever the actual amount of land to be dedicated is less than the amount of land required to be dedicated, the subdivider shall pay fees for the value of any additional land that otherwise would have been required to be dedicated. 
2.  Unless a different number is set forth in the parks and recreation plan, the average number of persons per unit (density) for calculating the amount of land to be dedicated or the amount of fee to be paid, or a combination of both, shall be 4.72 according to the U. S. Census Bureau, Census 2000. 
3.  The amount of land to be dedicated or fees paid shall be based on the residential density of the subdivision and shall be determined by multiplying the number of dwelling units of the subdivision by the average number of persons per unit (as determined pursuant to subsection (H)(2) of this section) by a coefficient equaling the number of acres of park land required per person (ranging from .003 to .005). 
4.  Whenever land will be dedicated, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  Whenever land is dedicated, the subdivider shall, without credit, provide the following for the benefit of the land dedicated: 
i.  Full street improvements and utility connections including, but not limited to, curbs, gutters, relocation of existing public utility facilities, street paving, traffic control devices, street trees, and sidewalks to the dedicated land; 
ii.  Fencing along the property lines of the subdivision which are contiguous to the park; 
iii.  Improve the drainage through the park site; 
iv.  Provide minimal physical improvements, not including recreational facilities, building, or equipment, which the city determines are necessary for acceptance of the land for park and recreational purposes; 
v.  Provide access from the park and recreational facilities to an existing or proposed public street, unless the city determines that such access is unnecessary for maintenance of the park area or use of the park by the residents of the area; 
vi.  Water, sewer, grading and drainage improvements in addition to those grading, drainage, irrigation and planting improvements required under other city ordinances. All land to be dedicated and improvements to be made should be approved by the city prior to the approval or disapproval of a subdivision; 
vii.  All grading plans for land to be dedicated shall be reviewed and approved by the city for conformance with the city's general plan and any other parks and recreation plans and the needs of the city; and 
viii.  No grading, drainage, irrigation, planting, street or utility improvements required under this section shall be eligible for a credit against the land to be dedicated or fees paid under the provisions of this section. 
5.  Whenever a fee is to be paid in lieu of the dedication of land, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  The amount of the fee shall be determined by multiplying the number of acres of land required to be dedicated pursuant to subsection (H)(3) of this section by the per acre fair market value of the land within the subdivision which would otherwise be dedicated. 
b.  The per acre fair market value of the land within the subdivision which would otherwise be required to be dedicated shall be based on the zoning of the property contemplated under the development approval and on the value of the land within the subdivision as if it were improved only with those improvements specified in subsection (H)(4)(a) of this section. The value of any structures other than those improvements specified in subsection (H)(4)(a) of this section shall not be considered when determining fair market value. The fair market value shall be determined by the city council based on annual appraisals of the average values of property within the city zoned for single-family and multiple-family residential uses, with an approved subdivision or parcel map and improved with those improvements described in subsection (H)(4)(a) of this section. 
6.  The subdivider may receive a credit against the payment of fees or the dedication of land as follows: 
a.  Common interest developments, as defined in Section 1351 of the Civil Code, shall be eligible to receive a credit, as determined by the city council, against the amount of land required to be dedicated or the amount of the fee imposed pursuant to this section, for the value of private open space within the development which is usable for active recreational uses. 
b.  A credit may be given against the requirement for the payment of fees or the dedication of land required by this section for the reasonable value of park and recreation improvements, including any equipment, provided by the subdivider to the dedicated land. The amount of the credit shall be determined prior to the approval or conditional approval of the tentative map or parcel map. The granting of a credit shall be made by the city council and shall be based on an approved set of improvement plans. However, the city reserves the right to require in-lieu fees if it finds the improvements unacceptable. 
c.  A credit may be given where private areas for park and recreational purposes are provided in a subdivision and such areas are for active recreational uses, to be privately owned and maintained in common by the future owner(s) of the development. Such areas may be credited against up to fifty (50) percent of the requirement of land dedication or fees at the discretion of the city council; provided, that the city council determines that it is in the public interest to grant such credits and that all of the following standards either have been or will be met prior to approval of the final map or development permit: 
1.  That yards, court areas, setbacks, and other open space areas, as may be required to be maintained by this code, the building code and other regulations, shall not be included in the computation of such private areas; 
2.  Evidence is provided that the private ownership and maintenance of the area will be adequately provided for by recorded written agreement, covenants or restrictions; 
3.  That the use of the private area is restricted for park and recreational purposes by an open space easement or other instrument; 
4.  That the proposed private area is reasonably adaptable for use of park or recreational purposes, taking into consideration such factors as size, shape, topography, geology, access and location; 
5.  "Active recreational uses" mean, for the purposes of this section, recreation facilities occurring on usable level land (five percent maximum slope) in a planned development which are designed to provide individual or group activities of an active nature including, but not limited to, open lawn, sports fields, court games, swimming pools, children's play areas, picnic areas, golf courses, and recreational community gardening. Active recreational uses do not include natural open space, nature study areas, open space for buffer areas, steep slopes, or scenic overlooks. Credits for areas within watercourses, drainage areas, or water bodies may be granted only if: 
a.  Such areas are suitable for active recreational use, 
b.  Such areas will actually be used for active recreation, and 
c.  The proposed type of active recreational use to be located within such areas is allowed or otherwise permitted by the city's general plan or other plan adopted by the city for parks and recreational facilities; 
6.  Notwithstanding the fifty (50) percent limitation as set forth above, a private open space credit in excess of fifty (50) percent of the requirement of land dedication or fees payment may be granted by the city council provided that the proposed recreational use is cited in the city's general plan or other plan adopted by the city for parks and recreational facilities. 
I.  Annual Reports. 
1.  The city shall maintain a separate account for all land dedications and fee payments received pursuant to this section and shall prepare an annual report for each account. The annual reports shall be prepared no later than ninety (90) days after the fiscal year of the city ends. The reports shall include each of the following: 
a.  The land dedications and fee payments received, the balance of the account, and the facilities purchased, leased or constructed during the fiscal year; 
b.  Documentation in support of and justification for the land dedications, fee payments, fee expenditures and any change in the fee account balance; 
c.  Information describing any changes in boundaries, service area, plan goals, policies, standards, as well as, any changes in park and recreation facility inventory; and 
d.  A schedule of how, when and where the city intends to use the land dedicated or fees paid, or both, to develop park or recreational facilities to serve the residents of the subdivisions and the anticipated starting dates for the development of the park and recreation facilities. The starting dates shall be reasonable with respect to the need for such parks and facilities, weather constraints, the need to minimize the disruption of the neighborhood, the amount of land and fees received, and the anticipated availability of funds for the operation and maintenance of the parks and facilities which are constructed. 
(Ord. 927 § 1, 2005; Ord. 924 § 1, 2005; Ord. 868 § 4, 2002)  
Chapter 16.40 - DEPOSITS AND FEES 
Sections: 
 
16.40.010 - Fees generally. 
Fees shall be required as specified in this chapter. 
The fees are intended to cover expense to the city involved in processing a subdivision from checking the tentative map through acceptance of the public improvements, including inspection services. Soils and materials testing are specifically excluded from services encompassed within the subdivision fee schedule. 
On-site improvements within the public rights-of-way, as well as off-site improvements within the public rights-of-way immediately adjacent to the subdivision boundary, shall be considered as included within the fee schedule. However, review of plans and inspections required of extensive off-site improvements shall be paid as a separate and additional fee. Such fee shall be in accordance with the schedule set forth in the appropriate council resolution. 
(Prior code § 21-186)  
16.40.020 - Maps and plans. 
Prior to the submission of a tentative map, final map, parcel map or improvement plans to the city for processing, the property owner or subdivider shall pay to the city filing fees in an amount as may be established from time to time by the council by resolution. 
(Prior code § 21-187)  
16.40.030 - Public works inspection. 
Following council approval of the final map, but prior to the recordation of the map, the property owner or subdivider shall pay to the city an inspection fee in the amount established from time to time by the council by resolution. 
(Prior code § 21-188)  
16.40.040 - Grading. 
Where grading is to be accomplished under the subdivision agreement, a separate and additional fee for such items only shall be collected in accordance with the applicable city regulations governing land alteration permits. 
(Prior code § 21-189)  
16.40.050 - Termination of work. 
In the event that work on a subdivision should terminate during any one of the three phases enumerated in Sections 16.40.020 through 16.40.040, the city engineer shall have the authority to establish the percentage of work actually performed to date within the pertinent phase and the amount of refund, if any, to be made. 
(Prior code § 21-190)  
16.40.060 - Recording. 
The property owner or subdivider shall pay for the recording of the map. 
(Prior code § 21-191)  
16.40.070 - Certificate of compliance. 
As part of an application for a certificate of compliance, the applicant shall pay to the city filing fees in an amount as may be established from time to time by the council by resolution. 
(Prior code § 21-192)  
16.40.080 - Special fees. 
Fees for purposes of defraying the estimated or actual costs of constructing planned drainage facilities for the removal of surface and stormwaters from local or neighborhood drainage areas, planned sanitary sewer facilities for local sanitary sewer areas, bridges or major thoroughfares may be required. The amount of any such special fees shall be established by supplemental ordinance and shall conform to the pertinent requirements of Chapter 4, Article 5 of the map act. The council may at its discretion, accept considerations in lieu of the payment of fees for drainage facilities. These may include but are not limited to the dedication of rights-of-way, the construction of other public improvements and the granting of fee title to real property. 
(Prior code § 21-193)  
Title 17 - ZONING  
Chapter 17.02 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
17.02.010 - Comprehensive zoning chapter. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter and its accompanying map shall be known as "The Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance of the City of Coachella." It is adopted as a means for implementing the general plan, under the provisions of the Government Code of the State of California, Title 7, Planning. 
(Prior code § 010.01)  
17.02.020 - Intent and purpose. 
A.  To promote and protect the public health, safety, welfare and general prosperity of the city. 
B.  To implement the general plan. 
C.  To encourage the most desirable and appropriate use of land for open spare, agricultural, residential, commercial, industrial and other purposes, and the most desirable density of population throughout the city. 
D.  To ensure the orderly and adequate provision of community utilities and facilities such as transportation, water, sewerage, schools, and other public requirements. 
E.  To encourage the most appropriate use and occupancy of buildings. 
F.  To promote good civic design and arrangements. 
G.  To provide reasonable standards with respect to, but not limited to the following: 
1.  The use and intensity of use of structures and land for residential, commercial, industrial or other purposes; population density; the location, height, bulk and size of buildings and other structures; 
2.  Yards, courts, and other private and public open spaces; parking and loading; signs; private streets; planned street lines; building lines; grading of land. 
All in accordance with the general plan. 
(Prior code § 010.02)  
17.02.030 - Finding of fact. 
A.  The city council declares that due and careful consideration has been given to the suitability of each and every zone for the regulations applicable to it, and that these regulations are found to best serve the above purposes. The city council further finds that these regulations are in the public interest, and that due and careful consideration has been given to the relationship between these regulations and the general plan of the city, and the established plans in the unincorporated area of the county of Riverside. 
B.  The city council further finds that the property development standards included in this chapter are necessary to preserve the community health, safety and general welfare; to assure adequate levels of light, air and density of development; to maintain and enhance the locally recognized value of community appearance; to promote the safe and efficient circulation of pedestrian and vehicular traffic; and to encourage the development of property in such a manner as not to adversely affect the use and enjoyment of adjoining lands. 
(Prior code § 010.03)  
17.02.040 - Interpretation. 
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for promoting the public health, safety, convenience, comfort, and general welfare of the community. When the requirements of this chapter impose higher requirements than are imposed or required by existing provisions of law or ordinance, the provisions of this chapter shall govern. When, however, the provisions of other laws or ordinances impose greater restrictions than required by this chapter, the provisions of the other laws or ordinances shall govern. It is not the intent of this chapter to interfere with, or nullify any easements, covenants, or agreements which are not in conflict with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 011.01)  
17.02.050 - Applicability. 
The provisions of this chapter are applicable not only to private persons, agencies and organizations, but also to all public agencies and organizations to the full extent that they may be enforceable in connection with the activities of any such public agencies or organizations. 
(Prior code § 011.02)  
17.02.060 - Enforcement. 
The zoning administrator or such other city official as may be designated by the city manager, under the general supervision of the city manager, shall enforce the provisions of this chapter, and shall have the authority to issue citations for violations of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 011.03)  
17.02.070 - Permits not to be issued. 
No building permit, business license, or other similar permit, shall be issued for the erection or use of any building or structure or part thereof, or for the use of any land which is not in accordance with all the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 011.04)  
17.02.080 - Building permit. 
All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by a site plan as defined in Section 070.08, drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the location, height and area of the building to be erected, and such other information as may be necessary for the enforcement of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 011.05)  
17.02.090 - Permits for new use of land. 
No land heretofore vacant shall hereafter be used or an existing use of land be hereafter changed to a use of a different class or type unless a permit is first obtained from the building director for the new or different use. 
(Prior code § 011.06)  
17.02.100 - Commencement of operation under permits and licenses. 
No permits or licenses issued by city officials shall be deemed effective until all applicable provisions of this chapter and such special conditions as may have been imposed under provisions of this chapter by the planning commission and/or city council shall have been met and complied with. 
(Prior code § 011.07)  
17.02.110 - Continuation of previously granted variances. 
All variances heretofore granted pursuant to the provisions of Ordinance No. 284 as amended, shall be deemed to exist hereafter as variances pursuant to Chapters 17.70 through 17.82, and shall be subject to all conditions and provisions governing such variances upon the effective date of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 011.08)  
17.02.120 - Continuation of previously granted permits. 
All permitted uses heretofore lawfully existing under Ordinance No. 284 of the city, as amended, shall continue in effect until revoked or terminated and shall be continued under this chapter and shall be subject to all conditions governing such permit. 
(Prior code § 011.09)  
17.02.130 - License approval continued. 
The rights given by any permit, license or other approval under any ordinance repealed by this chapter shall not be affected by such repeal, but such rights shall hereafter be exercised in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 011.10)  
17.02.140 - Violations of previous ordinances. 
Any use or structure previously unlawful shall not be deemed to have acquired the status of a nonconformity by reason of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. To the extent that said use or structure was previously in violation of Ordinance No. 284, as amended, or any other ordinance, statute or law, or is in violation of this chapter, it shall be deemed a continuing violation. 
(Prior code § 011.11)  
17.02.150 - Legal procedure. 
Any building or structure erected or maintained and/or any use of property contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be and the same is declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance and the city attorney shall, upon order of the city council, immediately commence action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for the abatement, removal and enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law and shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such building, structure or use and restrain and enjoin any person from setting up, erecting or maintaining such building or structure, or using any property contrary to the provisions of this chapter. It shall be the right and duty of every citizen to participate and assist the city officials in the enforcement of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 011.12)  
17.02.160 - Responsibility for violations. 
It shall be the duty of all architects, contractors, subcontractors, builders and other persons having to do with the establishment of any use of land or the erection, altering, changing or remodeling any building or structure to see that a proper permit has been granted before such work is begun. Any such architect, builder, contractor or other person doing or performing any such work without a permit having been issued, is in conflict with the requirements of this chapter and shall be deemed guilty of violation of this chapter in the same manner and to the same extent as the owner of the premises or the persons for whom the use is established, or for whom such buildings are erected, or altered, and shall be subject to the penalties prescribed in this chapter for violation. 
(Prior code § 011.13)  
17.02.170 - Remedies. 
All remedies provided for in this chapter shall be cumulative and not exclusive. 
(Prior code § 011.14)  
17.02.180 - Penalties. 
Any violation of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor. Each day that a violation of this chapter is continued or permitted to exist without compliance shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Prior code § 011.15) 
(Ord. No. 1098, § 38, 12-14-16)  
17.02.190 - Intent and purpose. 
This chapter is intended to set forth those provisions of a general nature which apply to uses in all zone classifications. It shall also be the purpose of this part to set forth standards and conditions which shall apply to various uses and terms wherever found in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 070.01)  
17.02.200 - Use. 
A.  Conflicting Regulations. Wherever any provisions of this chapter impose more stringent requirements, regulations, restrictions, or limitations than are imposed or required by the provisions of any other law, ordinance, restriction or covenant, then the provisions of this chapter shall govern. 
B.  Scope. No building, or part thereof, shall hereafter be erected, altered, or used, and no parcel of land shall be used, except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
C.  Enumeration and Authorization of Use. The express enumeration and authorization in this chapter of a particular class of building, structure, or use in a designated zone shall be deemed a prohibition of such building, structure, or use in all other zones, except as otherwise specified. 
D.  Additional Permitted Uses. 
1.  Uses other than those specifically mentioned in this chapter as uses permitted in each of the zones may be permitted therein, provided such uses are similar to those mentioned and are, in the opinion of the city planning commission, as evidenced by resolution of record, not more obnoxious or detrimental to the welfare of the community than the permitted uses specifically mentioned in any zone. 
2.  The planning director shall maintain a permanent list of additional permitted uses, together with the date of determination and the resolution number. 
3.  The planning commission shall not, under the provisions of this subsection, include uses in a zone which are specifically listed as permitted uses in another zone. 
E.  Location of Dwellings and Street Access. Except where otherwise provided for in this chapter, every dwelling shall face or front upon a dedicated public street or permanent means of access to a dedicated public street, and in no event shall the access to any dwelling be only from an alley. 
F.  Dwelling and Other Occupancies. Where a dwelling is located, placed, or erected above another type of use, in nonresidential zones, no yard shall be required for the dwelling. 
G.  Lots Recorded. Any lot shown upon an official subdivision map or record of survey map duly approved and recorded, or any lot for which a bona fide deed has been duly recorded prior to the effective date of Ordinance 71 (October 7, 1953), may be used as a building site. 
(Prior code § 070.02)  
Chapter 17.04 - RULES OF CONSTRUCTION 
 
17.04.010 - Applicants. 
Those persons or agencies initiating action for changes or amendments, paying fees where required and complying with the procedural requirements stated in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 012.01)  
17.04.020 - Appellants. 
Those persons or agencies filing appeals, paying fees where required and complying with procedural requirements stated in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 012.02)  
17.04.030 - City. 
The city of Coachella. 
(Prior code § 012.03)  
17.04.040 - City engineer. 
The city engineer of the city of Coachella or his or her duly authorized representative. 
(Prior code § 012.04)  
17.04.050 - Commission. 
The Coachella city planning commission. 
(Prior code § 012.05)  
17.04.060 - Council. 
The city council of the city of Coachella. 
(Prior code § 012.06)  
17.04.070 - County. 
The county of Riverside. 
(Prior code § 012.07)  
17.04.080 - Department. 
The planning department of the city of Coachella. 
(Prior code § 012.08)  
17.04.090 - Developer. 
Person or agency proposing to initiate and carry out a project. 
(Prior code § 012.09)  
17.04.100 - Director or planning director. 
The director of planning for the city of Coachella, or his or her duly authorized representative. 
(Prior code § 012.10)  
17.04.110 - Engineer. 
The registered civil engineer employed by the owner or by a subdivider to prepare required subdivision maps and improvement plans. Compare city engineer. 
(Prior code § 012.11)  
17.04.120 - Gender. 
Any gender includes the other gender. 
(Prior code § 012.12)  
17.04.130 - Health department or department of health. 
The Riverside County health department. 
(Prior code § 012.13)  
17.04.140 - Health officer or health authority or board of health commissioners. 
The county health officer of the county of Riverside, or his or her duly authorized representative. 
(Prior code § 012.14)  
17.04.150 - Including. 
Including but not limited to. 
(Prior code § 012.15)  
17.04.160 - May. 
Permissive. 
(Prior code § 012.16)  
17.04.170 - Municipal code. 
The entire municipal code of the city of Coachella. 
(Prior code § 012.17)  
17.04.180 - Oath. 
Includes affirmation. 
(Prior code § 012.18)  
17.04.190 - Ordinance. 
An ordinance of the city of Coachella. 
(Prior code § 012.19)  
17.04.200 - Owner. 
The holder of the fee title to property in a district, whether a person, partnership, corporation or other entity recognized by law, and his or her or its lessees, permittees, assignees or successors in interest. 
(Prior code § 012.20)  
17.04.210 - Person. 
Any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, club, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, organization, district, political subdivision, foreign country, or the managers, lessees, agents, servants, officers, or employees of any of them or any other group or combination acting as a unit. 
(Prior code § 012.21)  
17.04.220 - Project. 
An action undertaken to change the use or character of use of land or structure, said action requiring a permit or other action on the part of the city. Project includes, but is not limited to subdivision, lot split, building construction, planned unit development, rezoning of land, variance from this ordinance, request for conditional use, and change of land use requiring a permit. 
(Prior code § 012.22)  
17.04.230 - Resident. 
Present or future user of land or structure which is the subject of, or the final product of a project. Considered to be the ultimate user of a project. 
(Prior code § 012.23)  
17.04.240 - Shall. 
Mandatory. 
(Prior code § 012.24)  
17.04.250 - Singular and plural. 
The singular includes the plural and the plural, the singular. 
(Prior code § 012.25)  
17.04.260 - State. 
State of California. 
(Prior code § 012.26)  
17.04.270 - Tenses. 
Words used in the present tense include the past and future tenses and vice versa. 
(Prior code § 012.27)  
17.04.280 - Use of words and phrases. 
Words and phrases used in this chapter and not specifically defined shall be construed according to the context and approved usage of the language. 
(Prior code § 012.28)  
17.04.290 - Written. 
Includes printed, typewritten, mimeographed or multigraphed. 
(Prior code § 012.29)  
17.04.300 - Zoning administrator. 
The building director of the city. 
(Prior code § 012.30)  
Chapter 17.06 - DEFINITIONS 
 
17.06.010 - List of definitions. 
Abandoned automobile—Reference 
Abut or abutting—Reference 
Access 
Accessory—Reference 
Accessory building—Reference 
Accessory structure 
Accessory use 
Accessory vehicle—Reference 
Acre—Reference 
Acre, net 
Addition 
Adjacent 
Adjoining 
Adult education classes 
Advertising—Reference 
Agricultural or agriculture 
Airport or aircraft landing field 
Alley 
Alteration 
Amplitude—Performance standards 
Animals and fowls 
Animal, domestic 
Animal, wild 
Apartment—Reference 
Apartment, bachelor 
Apartment hotel 
Apartment house 
Arcade 
Architectural projection—Reference 
Area—Reference 
Area, net 
Assembly, places of 
Attic 
Automobile—Reference 
Automobile, abandoned 
Automobile and trailer sales area 
Automobile dismantling or wrecking yard 
Automobile fueling station—Performance standards 
Automobile impounding yard 
Automobile laundry or car wash 
Automobile, minor emergency repairs 
Automobile parking—Reference 
Automobile repair business 
Automobile service station 
Awning 
Bachelor apartment—Reference 
Balcony 
Basement 
Billboard or outdoor advertising structure—Reference 
Block 
Boats and boat trailers—Reference 
Boarding or rooming house 
Building 
Building, accessory—Reference 
Building, addition to—Reference 
Building, residential—Reference 
Building coverage—Reference 
Building height—Reference 
Building line 
Building site—Reference 
Bulk 
Bulk distributing stations—Hazardous materials 
Camp, tourist—Reference 
Camp, youth—Reference 
Camper—Reference 
Canopy 
Car—Reference 
Car wash—Reference 
Carport 
Cellar 
Cemetery 
Certificate of occupancy 
Child day care center or child care nursery 
Children's home 
Clinic 
Club, country 
Club, private 
Colleges and universities—Reference 
Commercial district 
Communication equipment building 
Compressed gas—Performance standards 
Conditional use 
Contiguous—Reference 
Convalescent home—Reference 
Convenience establishments 
Corner lots—Reference 
Corrosive material—Performance standards 
Court 
Coverage—Reference 
Curb level 
Dairy 
Day care center or day nursery—Reference 
Day care home—Reference 
Decibel—Performance standards 
Density 
Dental clinic—Reference 
Depth of lot—Reference 
Design 
Detached living quarters—Reference 
Developer 
Discrete impulses—Performance standards 
Dormitory 
Drive-in restaurants or drive-in eating and drinking establishments 
Duplex—Reference 
Dust, fugitive sources—Performance standards 
Dust, windborne—Performance standards 
Dwelling 
Dwelling, accessory—Reference 
Dwelling, group 
Dwelling, living quarters—Reference 
Dwelling, servants quarters—Reference 
Dwelling, single-family detached 
Dwelling, two-family 
Dwelling, multiple-family detached 
Dwelling, townhouse 
Dwelling unit, efficiency—Reference 
Earthborne vibration—Reference 
Easement, private road—Reference 
Educational institution 
Efficiency dwelling unit—Reference 
Family 
Family day care home 
Family foster care home 
Fence 
Filling station—Reference 
Final map 
Fire protection—Performance standards 
First story—Reference 
Flood hazard 
Floor area 
Floor area ratio 
Fraternity or sorority house 
Freeway—Reference 
Frequency—Performance standards 
Front yard—Reference 
Frontage 
Frontage road—Reference 
Future street or alley—Reference 
Garage, private—Reference 
Garage, public—Reference 
Garage, repair 
Garage, storage 
Gas—Reference 
General plan 
Geological exploratory core hole, temporary 
Grade 
Guest house 
Guest room 
Habitable room—Reference 
Health facility, long-term 
Height, building or structure 
Heliport 
Helistop 
Highway—Reference 
Highway 
Home for aged—Reference 
Home, childcare—Reference 
Home, children's—Reference 
Home, convalescent—Reference 
Home, day care—Reference 
Home, family day care—Reference 
Home, foster care—Reference 
Home, long-term convalescent—Reference 
Home, mobile—Reference 

Home, model—Reference 
Home, motorized—Reference 
Home, nursing—Reference 
Home, rest—Reference 
Home occupation 
Hospital 
Hospital, long-term convalescent or nursing and convalescent—Reference 
Hospital, psychiatric—Reference 
Hospital, special 
Hotel 
Hotel, apartment—Reference 
House, apartment—Reference 
House, boarding or rooming—Reference 
House, guest—Reference 
House, rooming—Reference 
House trailer—Reference 
Household pet—Reference 
Housing for the elderly or senior citizen housing 
Impact—Performance standards 
Impact noise—Performance standards 
Impact noise analyzer—Performance standards 
Improvement 
Impulses, discrete—Reference 
Industrial district 
Industrial park 
Inner court—Reference 
Institution, educational—Reference 
Institution, health—Reference 
Institution, philanthropic—Reference 
Inundation 
Junk or salvage yard 
Kennel 
Kitchen 
Land reclamation project 
Landscaping 
Light housekeeping room—Reference 
Liquid—Reference 
Living quarters—Reference 
Living unit—Reference 
Loading berth 
Loading facility 
Long-term convalescent home or health facility—Reference 
Lot 
Lot of record 
Lot area 
Lot coverage 
Lot depth 
Lot frontage—Reference 
Lot line, front 
Lot line, rear 
Lot line, side 
Lot width 
Lot, corner 
Lot, reversed corner 
Lot flag 
Lot, interior 
Lot, key 
Lot, through 
Lot, transitional 
Major highway—Reference 
Maps—Reference 
Marquee 
Medical clinic—Reference 
Mental care—Reference 
Microwave station 
Mineral production 
Minor emergency repairs—Reference 
Mobilehome 
Mobilehome park 
Mobilehome site 
Model home 
Motel 
Motor vehicle 
Multi-tenant retail 
Net acre—Reference 
Net area—Reference 
Noise—Performance 
Nonconforming uses, lots, structures and characteristics of use 
Nursery, day—Reference 
Nursery school—Reference 
Nursing home—Reference 
Octave band analyzer—Performance standards 
Odor threshold concentration—Performance standards 
Odor threshold limit value—Performance standards 
Odorous matter—Performance standards 
Office 
Open space, major 
Open space, minor 
Open space, common 
Open space maintenance district 
Open space, useable roof area 
Orphanage—Reference 
Outdoor advertising structure—Reference 
Outdoor court—Reference 
Outdoor storage 
Oxidizing material—Performance standards 
Parcel 
Parcel map 
Parking building 
Parking facility 
Parking facility, accessory 
Parking garage, accessory 
Parking garage, private 
Parking garage, public 
Parking lot 
Parking stall 
Parkway—Reference 
Particulate matter—Performance standards 
Particulate velocity—Performance standards 
Pedestrian way 
Pedestrian ways, plan of 
Performance standards—Reference 
Pet shop 
Philanthropic institution 
Plan—Reference 
Planned unit development 
Planned street line—Reference 
Pool 
Portable container—Performance standards 
Pre-application review—Reference 
Preferred center frequency—Performance standards 
Private club—Reference 
Private road easement—Reference 
Project 
Projection, architectural 
Property line 
Public utility—Reference 
Public way 
Quarry 
Real estate tract sales office 
Rear lot line—Reference 
Rear yard—Reference 
Recreation room 
Recreational vehicle 
Repair garage—Reference 
Resident 
Residential building 
Residential district 
Rest home—Reference 
Retail sales, retail store 
Right-of-way—Reference 
Roadway—Reference 
Room, guest—Reference 
Room, habitable 
Room, light housekeeping 
Rooming house—Reference 
Sanitarium—Reference 
School, elementary and high 
Screening 
Secondary highway—Reference 
Seismograph—Performance standards 
Senior citizen housing—Reference 
Servants quarters 
Setback 
Shopping center 
Side yard—Reference 
Sidewalk 
Signs 
 Sign, advertising decoration 
 Sign, advertising statuary 
 Sign, area 
 Sign, directional 
 Sign, ground 
 Sign, identification 
 Sign, nameplate 
 Sign, off-site 
 Sign, on-site 
 Sign, post 
 Sign, poster panel 
 Sign, project directory 
 Sign, projecting 
 Sign, project title 
 Sign, real estate 
 Sign, roof 
 Sign, wall 
Site, building—Reference 
Solid fill 
Solid fill project 
Sound—Performance standards 
Sound level meter—Performance standards 
Specific plan 
Stable, private 
Stable, public 
Stall—Reference 
Standard conditions or standard cubic feet—Performance standards 
Steady state—Reference 
Storage—Reference 
Storage garage—Reference 
Story 
Story, first 
Streets and highways 
 Freeway 
 Arterial, major 
 Arterial, minor 
 Street or public street 
 Parkway 
 Right-of-way 
 Roadway 
 Service road 
 Street, collector 
 Street, local 
 Street, private 
 Street, private road easement 
 Street or alley, future 
 Street line, planned 
Structural alteration 
Structure 
Structure, accessory—Reference 
Subdivider 
Subdivision Map Act 
Suite 
Surveyor 
Swap meet, indoor 
Swap meet, outdoor 
Telephone repeater station 
Temporary use—Reference 
Tentative map 
Tentative map, revised 
Tourist camp 
Townhouse—Reference 
Toxic matter—Performance standards 
Trailer—Reference 
Trailer, full tent—Reference 
Trailer park—Reference 
Trailer site—Reference 
Transient 
Transitional—Reference 
Travel trailer—Reference 
Under floor space 
Use 
Use, accessory—Reference 
Use, conditional—Reference 
Use, principal 
Use, temporary 
Utilities, public utility service center 
Utilities, public utility service yard 
Variance—Reference 
Vehicle—Reference 
Vehicle, accessory 
Vehicle, commercial 
Vehicle, recreational—Reference 
Vehicular access rights 
Vibration, earthborne—Performance standards 
Vibration, steady state—Performance standards 
Walk—Reference 
Washroom 
Water supply 
Way—Reference 
Wholesale store, sales 
Windborne dust—Reference 
X—Reserved 
Yard 
Yard, front 
Yard, rear 
Yard, side 
Yard, special 
Youth camp 
Zoning map 
 
(Ord. 1004-(2) § 1, 2008; prior code § 013.01)  
17.06.020 - Definitions beginning with "A". 
"Abandoned automobile." See "Automobile, abandoned." 
"Abut" or "abutting" means the same as "Adjoining." 
"Access" means the place or way by which pedestrians and vehicles shall have safe, adequate and suitable ingress and egress to a property or use as required by this chapter. 
"Accessory" means the same as "Accessory use or accessory structure." 
"Accessory building" means the same as "Accessory structure." 
"Accessory structure" means a detached subordinate structure or building, the use of which is customarily incidental to that of the main structure or building, or to the main, use of the land, and which is located in the same or less restrictive zone and on the same lot with the main structure, building or use. See "dwellings, living quarters," "dwellings, servants quarters," "guest house." 
"Accessory use." An accessory use is a use conducted on the same lot as the principal use or structure to which it is related, except that where specifically provided in the parking and loading regulations, accessory off-street parking or loading need not be located on the same lot; and 
Is a use which is clearly incidental to and customarily found in connection with such principal use; and is either in the same ownership as such principal use or is maintained and operated on the same lot substantially for the benefit or convenience of the owners, occupants, employees, customers, or visitors of the principal use. 
An accessory use includes: living or sleeping accommodations for servants; living or sleeping accommodations for caretakers in connection with specified uses and district regulation; living or sleeping accommodations for employees in connection with commercial or manufacturing uses; keeping of domestic animals, but not for sale or hire; (commercial stable or kennel is not an accessory use); swimming pools not located within a building; home occupations; a newsstand primarily for the convenience of the occupants of a structure and which is located wholly within such structure and has no exterior signs or displays; accessory off-street parking stalls open or enclosed; accessory off-street loading berths; accessory signs; accessory radio or television towers; adult education classes. 
"Accessory vehicle." See "vehicle, accessory." 
"Acre" means the same as "acre, net" unless otherwise specified. 
"Acre, net" means forty-three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet of area, net. See "area, net." 
"Addition" means the result of any work that increases the volume of an existing structure or replaces a demolished portion. Compare "alteration" and "structural alteration." 
"Adjacent" means two or more lots or parcels of land separated only by an alley, or two or more objects that lie near or close to each other. Compare "adjoining." 
"Adjoining" means two or more lots or parcels of land sharing a common boundary line, or two or more objects in contact with each other. Synonyms are "contiguous" or "abutting." 
"Adult education classes" means accessory use in residential district, provided classes meet only one day per week for not more than three hours and class size does not exceed thirty (30) persons. 
"Advertising." See "signs." 
"Agricultural" or "agriculture" means the use of land for agricultural purposes including fanning, dairying, pasturage, apiculture, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture and animal and poultry husbandry, and the necessary accessory uses for handling, treating or storing the produces; provided however that the operation of any such accessory use shall be secondary to that of the normal agricultural activity. 
"Airport" or "aircraft landing field" means any area of land or water which is used or intended to be used either publicly or privately for the arrival or departure of one or more aircraft, and any appurtenant areas used or intended to be used for airport buildings or other airport facilities or right-of-way, together with all airport buildings and facilities located thereon. Airport includes "heliport" and "helistop." 
"Alley" means a public or private right-of-way other than a street or highway which affords the means of vehicular access to the side or rear of properties abutting a street or highway. See also "streets" and "highways." 
"Alteration" means any work on a structure that does not result in any addition to the structure. Compare "addition" and "structural alteration." 
"Amplitude" means the maximum displacement of the earth from the normal rest position. Amplitude is usually reported as inches or mills. 
"Animals and fowls" means any animal, poultry, bird, reptile, fish or any other dumb creature. 
"Animal, domestic" means any domesticated animal or household pet commonly maintained in residence with man. 
"Animal, wild." The following are wild animals for the purpose of this chapter: alligator, badgers, bear, bobcats, buffalo, civet, cougar, coyote, crocodile, eagle, eland, elephant, elk, foxes, giraffe, gnu, gorilla, hyena, hippopotamus, jaguar, leopard, lion, lynx, moose, orangutan, poisonous reptile, possums, puma, raccoons, rhinoceros, sea lion, skunks, tiger, vulture, walrus, wart hog, weasel, wolf or yak. 
"Apartment" means the same as "dwelling unit." 
"Apartment, bachelor" means a dwelling that combines kitchen, living and sleeping rooms into one room, located within an apartment house or apartment hotel and subject to minimum floor area and occupancy requirements. 
"Apartment hotel" means a residential building designed or used for both two or more dwelling units and six or more guest rooms or suites of rooms. 
"Apartment house" means a residential building designed or used for two or more dwelling units, or combination of two or more dwelling units and not more than five guest rooms or suites of rooms. 
"Arcade" means a contiguous area with access to a street or other public way which: Is open and unobstructed to a height of not less than twelve (12) feet; and, is accessible to the public at all times; and, has an area of not less than five hundred (500) square feet including portions occupied by building columns; and has a minimum dimension of ten (10) feet; and, is not more than three feet above the level of the street which it adjoins. 
"Architectural projection." See "projection, architectural." 
"Area" means the same as "area, net" unless otherwise specified. 
"Area, net" means that area of a lot or parcel of land exclusive of: public alleys, highways or streets; or proposed public facilities such as alleys, highways, streets or other necessary public sites when included within a proposed development project; or, other public or private easements where the owner of the tenement does not have the right to use the entire surface of the land. 
"Assembly, places of" means any structure or premise, or portion thereof (except a theater, motion picture theater, little theater, school or special school) having an assemblage capacity of fifty (50) or more persons, designed or used for entertainment, amusement, instruction, worship, deliberation, display, meeting, awaiting transportation, or the consumption of food or drink. 
"Attic" means space between a roof and the ceiling beneath, and not appropriated to any occupancy. 
"Automobile." See "motor vehicle," "vehicle," "recreation vehicles" as well as automobile-related terms. 
"Automobile, abandoned" means any motor vehicle, which is required to be registered by the California Vehicle Code when operated upon a highway and whose registration has been expired for a period of six months or more. However, a motor vehicle stored within a permitted building or structure shall not be considered to be an abandoned automobile. 
"Automobile and trailer sales area" means an open area other than a street used for the display, sale or rental of new or used automobiles or trailers and where no repair work is done except minor incidental repairs of automobiles or trailers to be displayed, sold or rented on the premises. 
"Automobile dismantling or wrecking yard" means any premises used for the dismantling or wrecking of vehicles required to be registered under the California Vehicle Code, including the buying, selling or dealing of such vehicles or the integral parts or component materials thereof or the storage, sale or dumping of dismantled, partly dismantled or wrecked inoperative vehicles. Automobile dismantling shall not include the incidental storage of inoperative or disabled vehicles in connection with a legal operation of an automobile repair garage, automobile body and fender repair shop or automobile impound yard. 
"Automobile fueling station" means any lot or parcel of land or portion thereof used partly or entirely for storing or dispensing flammable liquids, combustible liquids, liquefied flammable gas or flammable gas into the fuel tanks of motor vehicles. Compare "automobile service station." 
"Automobile impounding yard" means facilities designated or maintained by a governmental agency for the temporary storage of vehicles legally removed or impounded by a peace officer from public or private property as prescribed by law. 
"Automobile laundry" or "car wash" means a building or portion thereof containing facilities for washing more than two automobiles using production line methods with chain conveyors, blowers, steam cleaning device or other mechanical means. 
"Automobile, minor emergency repairs" means those repairs to a currently state-licensed motor vehicle owned by the occupants of the property, which do not require the complete immobilization of the vehicle in excess of twenty-four hours duration or do not require the removal of the engine, transmission, rear end or more than one wheel. "Minor emergency repairs" does not include body and fender work. 
"Automobile parking." See "parking lot" and parking-related definitions. 
"Automobile repair business" means the activity of doing repair work on motor vehicles, or the replacing of, or the adding of parts thereto for compensation. Tire changing, brake adjustments, tire repairing, lamp globe changing, fan belt changing, the changing or charging of batteries, changing or installing of ornamental accessories and lubricating motor vehicles and such activity is incident to the business of selling motor fuel or ornamental accessories shall not be deemed to be engaging in the automobile repair business. 
"Automobile service station" means structures or premises where gasoline, oil, grease, batteries, tires and automobile accessories may be supplied and dispensed at retail, and where in addition, the following services may be rendered and sales made, and no other: 
1.  Sale and servicing of spark plugs, batteries, and distributors and distributor parts; 
2.  Tire servicing and repair, but not recapping or regrooving; 
3.  Replacement or adjustment of automobile accessories; 
4.  Radiator cleaning and flushing, provision of water, antifreeze and other additives; 
5.  Washing and polishing, and sale of automobile washing and polishing materials; 
6.  Greasing and lubrication; 
7.  Providing and repairing fuel pumps; exterior oil pumps and lines; 
8.  Servicing and repair of carburetors; 
9.  Adjusting and repairing brakes; 
10.  Emergency wiring repairs; 
11.  Motor adjustments not involving removal of the head or crankcase; 
12.  Provision of cold drinks, packaged foods, tobacco, and similar convenience goods for gasoline supply station customers, but only as accessory and incidental to the principal operation; 
13.  Provision of road maps and other information material to customers; 
14.  Provision of restroom facilities; 
15.  Parking lot as an accessory use only. 
Uses permissible at a service station do not include body work, straightening of frames or body parts, steam cleaning, painting, nor welding. 
"Awning" means a temporary shelter supported by an exterior wall of a building and of a type which can be retracted, folded or collapsed against the face of the supporting building. Compare "canopy," "marquee." 
(Prior code § 013.02)  
17.06.030 - Definitions beginning with "B". 
"Bachelor apartment." See "apartment, bachelor." 
"Balcony" means an unroofed platform enclosed by a railing or parapet projecting from the wall of a building for the private use of tenants or for exterior access to the above-grade living units. When a balcony is roofed and enclosed with operating windows, it is considered part of the room it serves. 
"Basement." That portion of a building between floor and ceiling which is partly below and partly above grade, but so located that the vertical distance from grade to the floor below is less than the vertical distance from grade to ceiling. See also "cellar." 
"Billboard" or "outdoor advertising structure." See "signs." 
"Block" means the land adjoining one side of a street between two consecutive junctions of such street with streets, railways, right-of-way, or waterways crossing or meeting such side of such street. 
"Boarding or rooming house" means a residential building containing a single dwelling unit and not more than five guest rooms or suites of rooms where lodging is provided with or without meals, for compensation. 
"Boats and boat trailers." See "recreational vehicles." 
"Buildable area" means the same as "area, net." 
"Building" means any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls, for the housing, shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or property of any kind. See also "structure." 
"Building, accessory." See "accessory Structure." 
"Building, addition to." See "addition." 
"Building, residential." See "residential building." 
"Building coverage." See "lot coverage." 
"Building height." See "height, building or structure." 
"Building line" means a line established by law or agreement usually parallel to the property line beyond which a structure may not extend. See also "street line, planned." 
"Building site" means the same as "lot." 
"Bulk" means the size of buildings or other structures and their relationships to each other and to open areas and lot lines. Regulations controlling bulk include: maximum height; maximum lot coverage; maximum floor area ratio; minimum size of yards and setbacks. 
The shape of buildings or other structures and the area of the lot upon which a residential building is located and the number of dwelling units or rooms within such building in relation to the area of the lot. 
"Bulk distributing stations" means hazardous materials" means any distributing station for hazardous materials where there is located a loading rack and which is not an integral part of a refinery, natural gasoline plant or crude petroleum producing or pipeline operation. 
(Prior code § 013.03)  
17.06.040 - Definitions beginning with "C". 
"Camp, tourist." See "tourist camp." 
"Camp, youth." See "youth camp." 
"Camper." See "recreational vehicles." Compare "mobilehome." 
"Canopy" means a fixed shelter without enclosing walls used only as a roof and attached to the exterior wall or walls of a building and used only for purposes accessory to the building to which it is attached. A canopy may have column support in addition to the support provided by the building to which it is attached. Compare "awning" and "marquee." 
"Car." See automobile-related definitions, "motor vehicle" and "vehicles." 
"Car wash." See "automobile laundry" or "car wash." 
"Carport" means an accessory structure or portion of a principal structure, consisting of a roof and supporting members such as columns or beams, unenclosed from the ground to the roof on at least two sides, and designed or used for the parking or temporary storage of motor vehicles of owners or occupants of the structure to which it is accessory. 
"Cellar" means the portion of a building between floor and ceiling which is wholly or partly below grade and so located that the vertical distance from grade to the floor below is equal to or greater than the vertical distance from grade to ceiling. See also "basement." 
"Cemetery" means land used or intended to be used for the burial or interment of the dead and dedicated for such purposes, including columbariums, crematories, mausoleums and mortuaries when operated in conjunction with and within the boundary of such cemetery. 
"Certificate of occupancy" means a required document issued by the building department prior to the occupation or use of vacant land, except for agricultural uses, or prior to occupation or use of buildings erected or structurally altered. 
"Child day care center" or "child care nursery" means any building or other premises or portion thereof appropriated to the day care, apart from their parents or guardian, of more than six ambulatory children between the ages of two and five years inclusive and between the hours of six a.m. and seven p.m. The establishment shall be licensed by the state and conducted in accordance with state requirements. Similar terms are day nursery, nursery school and child day care nursery. Rooms accessory to a church and used for religious education on not more than two days a week are not considered child day care centers. Compare "family day care home," "family foster care home," and "children's home," "philanthropic institution." 
"Children's home" means one or more buildings used for the semi-permanent, twenty-four hour care of orphans or other children deprived of parental care, operated by a public agency or a philanthropic or charitable organization, but shall not include commercial enterprises operated by such organization or a correctional institution. 
"Clinic" means any facility used for the care, diagnosis and treatment of sick, active, infirm or injured persons and those who are in need of medical, dental or surgical attention, but who are not provided with board or room or kept overnight on the premises. "Clinic" includes dental clinic, health clinic, medical clinic and doctors' offices and may include laboratory facilities in conjunction with normal clinic services. 
"Club, country" means a private club organized and operated for social purposes and possessing outdoor recreational facilities, such as golf courses, tennis courts or polo grounds. 
"Club, private" means any building or premises used by an association of persons whether incorporated or unincorporated, organized for some common purpose, but not including a group organized solely or primarily to render a service customarily carried on as a commercial enterprise. 
"Colleges" and "universities." See "educational institutions." 
"Commercial psychic activities" means any activity which for a fee, donation, gratuity, reward, compensation or consideration of any kind purports to predict or foretell the future or fate of any individual, group, business or nation or attempts or promises to influence the future or performance of any person, group, business or nation by analysis of parts, products, or personal characteristics of a person, including, but not limited to palm reading, crystal ball, celestial body, tea leaves, playing of cards or through the exercise of any purported psychic, mediumistic, prophetic, occult, clairvoyant or supernatural power. 
"Commercial district" means a zoning district whose designation begins with the letter "C". 
"Communication equipment building" means a building housing operating mechanical or electronic switching equipment of a telephone or similar communication system and personnel necessary for operation of such equipment. See also "utilities." 
"Compressed gas" means any gas which is compressed to a pressure in excess of fifteen (15) pounds per square inch, gage (psig) at ambient temperature. 
"Conditional use" means a use which requires a special degree of control because of characteristics peculiar to it, or because of size, technological processes or type of equipment, or because of the exact location with reference to surroundings, streets and existing improvements or demands upon public facilities. 
Such control is to ensure that the particular use at the particular site on which such use is proposed to be located, is compatible with other existing or permitted uses surrounding the site. 
"Contiguous" means the same as "adjoining." 
"Convalescent home" means the same as "health facility, long-term." 
"Convenience establishments" means small establishments designed and intended to serve the daily or frequent trade or service needs of surrounding population. Such establishments include grocery stores, variety stores, drugstores, coin-operated laundry and dry cleaning establishments, beauty shops, barbershops and medical and dental offices. Specifically excluded are automobile service stations and repair garages and drive-in eating and drinking establishments. 
"Corner lot." See "lot, corner." 
"Corrosive material" means any acid, alkaline, caustic or other liquid or solid material which when in contact with living tissue will cause damage to such tissue by a chemical action, or which may cause fire when in contact with other materials. 
"Court" means an open unoccupied space, bounded on three sides by the walls of a building. An inner court is a court entirely enclosed within the exterior walls of a building. All other courts are outer courts. 
"Coverage." See "lot coverage." 
"Curb level" means the level of the established curb in front of the building measured at the center of such front. Where no curb level has been established, the city engineer shall establish such curb level or its equivalent. 
(Prior code § 013.04)  
17.06.050 - Definitions beginning with "D". 
"Dairy" means any premises where three or more cows or goats or any combination thereof equaling three or more animals are kept or maintained for the purpose of producing milk or milk products. 
"Day care center" or "day nursery" means the same as "child day care center." 
"Day care home" means the same as "family day care home." 
"Decibel" means a unit which describes the sound pressure level or intensity of sound. The sound pressure level in decibels is twenty (20) times the logarithm to the base ten (10), of the ratio of the pressure of the sound to a reference pressure of 0.0002 microbar. 
"Density" means the number of dwelling units that may be constructed per acre or per square foot of lot area. 
"Dental clinic." The same as "clinic." 
"Depth of lot." See "lot, depth." 
"Design" means street alignment, grades and width, alignment and width of easements and rights-of-way for drainage and sanitary sewers and minimum lot area depth and width. 
Design shall also include the alignment, grade and width of easements and rights-of-way for utilities as well as grading and general layout of the lots and streets within the area. 
"Detached living quarters" means the same as "guest house." 
"Developer" means a person or agency proposing to initiate and carry out a project. 
"Development" means the activity of preparing land and constructing buildings, facilities, or other improvements in order to establish a land use. Development also means a lot or parcel together with the buildings, facilities, or other improvements located thereon. 
"Discrete impulses" means a ground-transmitted vibration stemming from a source where specific pulses do not exceed sixty (60) per minute or one per second. 
"Dormitory" means a guest room designed, intended or occupied as sleeping quarters for more than two persons. Every hundred (100) square feet of superficial floor area in a dormitory shall be considered as a separate guest room. 
"Drive-in restaurants" or "drive-in eating and drinking establishments" means any commercial establishment serving food or drinks, making provisions encouraging consumption of food or beverages in automobiles, whether such consumption in automobiles is on the premises or at the curb adjacent to the premises. 
"Duplex" means the same as "dwelling, two-family." 
"Dust, fugitive sources" means sources of dust other than from a stack, chimney or vent such as from open piles, conveyors, loading, etc. 
"Dust, windborne" means particulate matter which is solid at standard conditions and released into the atmosphere by the action of wind. 
"Dwelling" means a building or portion thereof designed or used exclusively for residential purposes or occupancy. For the purposes of this title, dwellings do not include apartment houses, hotels, apartment hotels, mobilehomes, motels, rooming houses, nursing homes, housing for the elderly, rest homes, university owned or leased housing or institutions. See also "residential building." 
"Dwelling, accessory." See "servants quarters" and "guest house." 
"Dwelling living quarters" means the same as "guest house." 
"Dwelling, servants quarters." See "servants quarters." 
"Dwelling, single-family detached," means a detached building designed or used exclusively for occupancy by one family and containing one dwelling unit. 
"Dwelling, two-family" means a building designed or used exclusively for occupancy by two families and containing two dwelling units. 
"Dwelling, multi-family" means the same as "Apartment house." 
"Dwelling, townhouse" means a residential building designed for or containing one or two dwelling units and structurally separated in accordance with the provisions of this title, and which may be sold jointly with a lot upon which the dwelling unit is situated. 
"Dwelling, group" means two or more one-family or multiple-family dwellings, apartment houses or boarding or rooming houses located on the same lot. 
"Dwelling unit" means a group of two or more one-family or multiple-family dwellings, apartment houses or boarding or rooming houses located on the same lot. 
"Dwelling unit" means a group of two or more rooms, one of which is a kitchen, designed for occupancy by one family for living and sleeping purposes. 
"Dwelling unit efficiency" means the same as "apartment, bachelor." 
(Prior code § 013.05)  
17.06.060 - Definitions beginning with "E". 
"Earthborne vibration." See "vibration, earth borne." 
"Easement, private road." See "streets and highways," "private road easement." 
"Educational institutions" means colleges or universities supported wholly or in part by public funds, and other colleges or universities giving general academic instruction as prescribed by the state board of education. 
"Efficiency dwelling unit" means the same as "apartment, bachelor." 
(Prior code § 013.06)  
17.06.070 - Definitions beginning with "F". 
"Family" means a person or persons living together as a single housekeeping unit in a residential building. 
"Family day care home" means a single family home that provides non-medical care to children under eighteen (18) years of age in need of personal services, supervision, or assistance essential for sustaining the activities of daily living or for the protection of the individual on less than a twenty-four-hour basis, for up to fourteen (14) children, including children under the age of ten (10) years who reside at the home. 
"Family foster care home" means a dwelling unit, where full-time foster care is provided for unrelated children as part of the family, where the total number of children, sixteen (16) years or under, does not exceed six, the total number of people (excluding servants) does not exceed eight, and the dwelling unit is licensed by the state as a full-time foster home. 
"Fence" means a free-standing structure of metal, masonry, composition or wood or any combination thereof resting on or partially buried in the ground and rising above ground level, and used for confinement, privacy, protection, screening or partition purposes. See also "landscaping," "screening." 
"Filling station." See "automobile service station." 
"Final map" means a map prepared in accordance with the subdivision ordinance and with any applicable provisions of the Subdivision Map Act, designed to be recorded with the county recorder. 
"Fire protection" means such fire hydrants and other protective devices as required by the chief of the Coachella fire protection district. 
"First story." See "story, first." 
"Flood hazard" means a hazard to land or improvements due to overflow water having sufficient velocity to transport or deposit debris, scour the surface soil, dislodge or damage buildings, or erode the banks of water courses. 
"Floor area" means the sum of the gross areas of the several floors of a building or buildings, measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls or from the center lines of walls separating two buildings. In particular, floor area includes: 
1.  Basement space, except as specifically excluded in his or her definition. 
2.  Elevator shafts or stairwells at each floor. 
3.  Floor space in penthouses. 
4.  Attic space (whether or not a floor has been laid) providing structural headroom of eight feet or more. 
5.  Floor space in interior balconies or mezzanines. 
6.  Floor space in open or roofed terraces, exterior balconies, breezeways or porches, if more than fifty (50) percent of the perimeter of such terrace, balcony, breezeway or porch is enclosed, and provided that a parapet not higher than three feet, eight inches, or a railing not less than fifty (50) percent open and not higher than four feet, six inches, shall not constitute an enclosure. 
7.  Any other floor space used for dwelling purposes, no matter where located within a building, when not specifically excluded. 
8.  Floor space in accessory buildings, except for floor space used for accessory off-street parking. 
9.  Floor space used for permitted or required accessory off-street parking spaces located more than twenty-three (23) feet above curb level. 
10.  Floor space used for accessory off-street loading berths in excess of two hundred (200) percent of the amount required by the applicable district regulations. 
11.  Any other floor space not specifically excluded. 
12.  However, the floor area of a building shall not include: 
a.  Cellar space, except that cellar space used for retailing shall be included for the purpose of calculating requirements for accessory off-street parking spaces and accessory off-street loading berths. 
b.  Elevator or stair bulkheads, accessory water tanks, or cooling towers. 
c.  Uncovered steps. 
d.  Attic space, whether or not a floor actually has been laid, providing structural headroom of less than eight feet. 
e.  Floor space in open or roofed terraces, exterior balconies, breezeways, or porches, provided that not more than fifty (50) percent of the perimeter of such terrace, balcony, breezeway or porch is enclosed, and provided that a parapet not higher than three feet, eight inches, or a railing not less than fifty (50) percent open and not higher than four feet, six inches, shall not constitute an enclosure. 
f.  Floor space used for permitted or required accessory off-street parking spaces located not more than twenty-three (23) feet above curb level. 
g.  Floor space used for accessory off-street loading berths, up to two hundred (200) percent of the amount required by the applicable district regulation. 
h.  Floor space used for mechanical equipment. 
"Floor area ratio" means the total floor area on a lot divided by the lot area. For example: a building containing twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of floor area on a zoning lot of ten thousand (10,000) square feet has a floor area ratio of two. 
"Freeway." See "streets and highways." 
"Frequency" means the number of times that a displacement completely repeats itself in one second of time. Frequency may be designated in cycles per second or hertz (Hz). 
"Front yard." See "yard, front." 
"Frontage" means all property fronting on one side of a street between intersecting or intercepting streets, or between a street and right-of-way, waterway, end of dead-end street, or city boundary measured along the street line. An intercepting street shall determine only the boundary of the frontage on the side of the street which it intercepts. 
"Frontage road." See "streets and highways, service road." 
"Future street or alley." See "streets and highways, future street." 
(Prior code § 013.07) 
(Ord. No. 1075, § 1, 6-10-15)  
17.06.080 - Definitions beginning with "G". 
"Garage, private." See "parking garage, accessory." 
"Garage, repair" means a structure or portion thereof, other than a storage or parking garage, designed or used for repairing, equipping or servicing of motor vehicles. Such garages may also be used for housing, storage or sale of motor vehicles. 
"Garage, storage" means a structure or portion thereof designed and used exclusively for the storage of motor vehicles, and within which temporary parking may also be permitted. 
"Gas." See "flammable gas." 
"General plan" means a comprehensive declaration of purposes, policies and programs for the development of the city and including, where applicable, diagrams, maps and text setting forth objectives, principles, standards, and other features, and which has been adopted by the city council. Compare "specific plan." 
"Geological exploratory core hole, temporary" means a seismic test hole or exploratory core hole used or intended to be used exclusively for geophysical or geological exploratory work preliminary to possible exploration for oil, natural gas or other hydrocarbons, to be drilled and abandoned within ninety (90) days from the time of commencement of actual drilling operations. 
"Grade" means the lowest point of elevation of the finished surface of the ground between the exterior wall of a building and a point five feet distant from said wall, or the lowest point of elevation of the finished surface of the ground between the exterior wall of the building and the property line if it is less than five feet distant from said wall. In ease walls are parallel to and within five feet of a public sidewalk, alley or other public way, the grade shall be the elevation of the sidewalk, alley or public way. 
"Guest house" means an accessory structure used solely as a temporary dwelling of guests of the occupants of the premises and containing not more than five guest rooms or suites of rooms, but with no kitchen facilities and not rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling unit. See also "accessory structure" and "servants quarters." 
"Guest room" means any habitable room which does not contain cooking facilities and is designed or used for occupancy by one or more persons and is not in a dwelling unit. See also "room, light housekeeping," "suite." 
(Prior code § 013.08)  
17.06.090 - Definitions beginning with "H". 
"Habitable room." See "room, habitable." 
"Health facility, long-term" means an institution or premises licensed by the state and used for the housing and care of the ambulatory, aged, or infirm and offering or providing lodging, meals, nursing, dietary or other personal services, but not including the care and treatment of persons with contagious or communicable disease or persons insane or addicted to narcotics or alcohol. There shall be no surgery, physical therapy or other similar activities such as is customarily provided in hospitals. Also called rest homes, convalescent homes, homes for the aged, veteran's homes, institutions for the feebleminded, cerebral palsied and the like, plus other similar names, signifying long-term care, which is personal and at most, nursing help, rather than medical or surgical care. See also "hospital." 
(Note: A senior citizens project or housing for the elderly project is to be distinguished from a long-term health facility in that the senior citizens project or housing is primarily of a residential character with only incidental nursing facilities while a nursing home is primarily designed and used for the care of convalescent or ill persons.) 
"Height, building or structure" means the vertical distance from the grade to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof, or to the deck line of a mansard roof or to the average height of the highest gable of a pitch or hip roof. 
"Heliport" means an area of land or water or a structural surface which is used or intended for use for the landing and take-off of helicopters, and any appurtenant areas which are used or intended for use for heliport buildings and other heliport facilities. 
"Helistop" means the same as a heliport except that no refueling, maintenance, repairs or storage of helicopters is permitted. 
"Highways." See "streets and highways." 
"Home for aged" means the same as "health facility, long-term." 
"Home, child care" means the same as "family day care home." 
"Home, children's." See "children's home." 
"Home convalescent" means the same as "health facility, long-term." 
"Home, daily care" means the same as "family day care home." 
"Home, family daily care." See "family day care home." 
"Home foster care." See "family foster care home." 
"Home, long-term convalescent." Same as "health facility, long-term." 
"Home, mobile." See "mobilehome." 
"Home, model." See "model home." 
"Home, motorized." See "recreational vehicles." 
"Home, nursing" means the same as "health facility, long-term." 
"Home, rest." The same as "health facility, long-term." 
"Home occupation" means an accessory use which: 
1.  Is clearly incidental to or secondary to the residential use of a dwelling unit; 
2.  Is not the principal office; 
3.  Is carried on within a dwelling unit or accessory structure by one or more occupants of such dwelling unit, except that in connection with the practice of a profession, one person not residing in such dwelling unit may be employed; and 
4.  Occupies not more than twenty-five (25) percent of the total floor area of such dwelling unit and in no event more than five hundred (500) square feet of floor area. 
A.  In connection with the operation of a home occupation, it shall not be permitted: 
1.  To sell articles produced elsewhere than on the premises; 
2.  To have exterior displays or a display of goods visible from the outside; 
3.  To store materials or products outside of a principal or accessory structure; 
4.  To display in an R-1 District a nameplate or other sign, except as permitted in connection with the practice of a profession; 
5.  To make external structural alterations which are not customary in residential buildings; 
6.  To produce offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust or other particulate matter, odorous matter, heat, humidity, glare or other objectionable effects. 
B.  Home occupations include, but are not limited to: 
1.  Fine arts studios; 
2.  Professional offices, including offices of physician, dentist or other person licensed by law to practice medicine or healing, and ministers of religion; 
3.  Teaching of not more than four pupils simultaneously or in the case of musical instruction of not more than a single pupil at a time; 
C.  However, home occupation shall not include uses such as: 
1.  Advertising or public relations agencies; 
2.  Barbershops; 
3.  Beauty parlors; 
4.  Commercial stables or kennels; 
5.  Depilatory electrolysis or similar offices; 
6.  Interior decorator's offices, or workshops; 
7.  Ophthalmic dispensing; 
8.  Pharmacy; 
9.  Real estate or insurance offices; 
10.  Stockbroker offices; 
11.  Veterinary medicine. 
"Hospital" means an establishment which provides accommodations, facilities and services over a continuous period of twenty-four (24) hours or more, for observation, diagnosis and care, of two or more individuals, not related by blood or marriage to the operator, who are suffering from illness, injury, deformity or abnormality, or from any condition requiring obstetrical, medical or surgical services. The term "hospital" includes "hospital, special" services unless otherwise specified. 
"Hospital, long-term convalescent" or "nursing and convalescent" means the same as "health facilities, long-term." 
"Hospital, psychiatric" means the same as "hospital, special." 
"Hospital, special" means a hospital which treats primarily people with communicable disease, insane or feebleminded patients, epileptics, drug addicts or alcoholic patients. 
"Hotel" means a residential building designed or used for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging, or sleeping purposes or containing six or more guest rooms or suites of rooms, which may also contain not more than one dwelling unit, but not including any institution in which human beings are housed or detained under legal restraint. 
"Hotel, apartment." See "apartment hotel." 
"House, apartment." See "apartment house." 
"House, boarding or rooming." See "boarding or rooming house." 
"House, guest." See "guest house." 
"House, rooming." See "boarding or rooming house." 
"House trailer." See "mobilehome." 
"Household pet." The same as "animal, domestic." 
"Housing for the elderly" or "senior citizen housing" means a project specially designed for elderly persons and providing living unit accommodations and spaces for common use by the occupants in social and recreational activities and, when needed, incidental facilities and space for the project residents. 
(Prior code § 013.09)  
17.06.100 - Definitions beginning with "I". 
"Impact" means an earthborne impact vibration generally produced by two or more objects striking each other so as to cause separate and distinct pulses. 
"Impact noise" means relatively short duration noise, generally produced by the striking of two or more objects so as to be heard as separate distinct noises. See also "noise" and "sound." 
"Impact noise analyzer" means an instrument which measures the peak sound pressure of an impact noise and meets the standards of the American National Standards Institute (or the International Electrotechnical Commission). 
"Improvement" means such street work and utilities to be installed, or agreed to be installed by the developer on the land to be used for public or private streets, highways, alleys, pedestrian-ways, ways and easements, a are necessary for the general use of the residents in the project and local neighborhood traffic and drainage needs and required as a condition precedent to the approval and acceptance of the project. Such street work and utilities include necessary monuments, street name signs, guardrails, barricades, safety devices, fire hydrants, grading, retaining walls, storm drains and flood control channels and facilities, erosion control structures, sanitary sewers, street lights, street trees, traffic warning devices (other than traffic signals and relocation of existing traffic signal systems directly affected by other subdivision improvements) and other facilities as are required in conformance with other applicable provisions of this chapter, or as are determined necessary by the planning director for the necessary and proper development of the project. 
"Impulses, discrete." See "discrete impulses." 
"Industrial district" means any zoning district whose designation begins with the letter "M". 
"Industrial park" means a special or exclusive type of industrial area designed or equipped to accommodate a community of industries, or approved under the procedure for planned developments. 
"Inner court." See "court." 
"Institution, educational." See "educational institution." 
"Institution, health." See "clinics," "health facilities, long-term" and "hospitals." 
"Institution, philanthropic." See "philanthropic institution." 
"Inundation" means ponded water or water in motion of sufficient depth to damage property due to the presence of the water or to deposits of silt. 
(Prior code § 013.10)  
17.06.110 - Definitions beginning with "J". 
"Junk or salvage yard" means any premises used for the keeping or storage of junk, including but not limited to, iron and scrap metals, paper, rags, glass, wood and similar materials and shall include the dismantling of machinery or the storage or keeping for sale of parts and equipment resulting from dismantling or wrecking operations on said property or elsewhere. Junk and salvage yards shall also include the baling of cardboard, cardboard boxes, paper and paper cartons. Compare "automobile dismantling and wrecking yard." 
(Prior code § 013.11)  
17.06.120 - Definitions beginning with "K". 
"Kennel" means any lot or structure whereon or wherein four or more dogs are kept or maintained for any purposes. 
"Kitchen" means any room or any portion of a dwelling unit, whether an enclosing subdivision thereof or otherwise, used or intended or designed to be used for cooking and preparing food, except a light housekeeping room or that portion of a recreation room in a multiple residential use, or in an accessory building appurtenant thereto, containing facilities for the cooking and preparation of food. 
(Prior code § 013.12)  
17.06.130 - Definitions beginning with "L". 
"Land reclamation project" means a project established to restore otherwise unsuitable land to useful purposes such as recreational areas through the use of fill materials such as rubbish, waste, soil and other unwanted materials. "Land reclamation project" shall include a "dump" or "waste disposal facility." 
"Landscaping" means the planting and maintenance of some combination of trees, ground cover, shrubs, vines, flowers or lawns. In addition, the combination or design may include natural features such as rock and stone and structural features including, but not limited to fountains, reflecting pools, art work, screens, walls, fences and benches. See also "fence" and "screening." 
"Light housekeeping room." See "room, light housekeeping." 
"Liquid." See "combustible liquid" and "flammable liquid." 
"Liquor, off-sale establishment" means any retail establishment which requires a Type 20, Type 21 or similar retail license from the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control (ABC) to sell liquor to customers for their consumption off the establishment's premises. 
"Liquor, on-sale establishment" means any retail establishment which requires a Type 41 (restaurant), Type 42 (bar/tavern), Type 47 (restaurant), type 48 (bar/nightclub), or similar retail license from the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control (ABC) to sell liquor to customers for their consumption on the establishment's premises. 
"Living quarters" means the same as "dwelling unit." 
"Loading berth" means a space within a loading facility, exclusive of driveways, aisles, maneuvering areas, ramps, columns, landscaped areas, office and work areas for the temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading or unloading goods or materials, and which abuts upon a street, alley, or other appropriate means of access. 
"Loading facility" means an area, either open or enclosed, or partially enclosed within a structure or portion thereof, designed or used for the temporary parking of commercial vehicles while loading or unloading goods or materials. 
"Long-term convalescent home" or "health facility." See "health facility, long-term." 
"Lot" means a piece or parcel of land of at least sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for use, coverage and area, and to provide such yards and other open spaces as are required by this chapter. Such lot shall have frontage on an improved public street, or on an approved private street, and may consist of: 
1.  A single lot of record; 
2.  A portion of a lot of record; 
3.  A combination of complete lots of record, of complete lots of record and portions of lots of record, or of portions of lots of record; 
4.  A parcel of land described by metes and bounds; 
Provided that no case of division or combination shall any residual lot or parcel be created which does not meet the requirements of this chapter. The word lot includes the words "plot" or "parcel." 
"Lot of record" means a lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the office of the county recorder, or a lot or parcel described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded. 
"Lot area" means the total area measured in a horizontal plane, included within the lot lines of a lot or parcel of land. 
"Lot coverage" means that percentage of a lot which, when viewed directly from above would be covered by a structure or structures, or any part thereof, excluding projecting roof eaves. 
"Lot depth" means the distance between the midpoint of the front lot line and the midpoint of the rear lot line. 
"Lot frontage." See "frontage." 
"Lot line, front" means a line separating an interior lot from a street or highway, or a line separating the narrower street frontage of a corner lot from the street or highway, unless otherwise specified by deed restrictions. 
"Lot line, rear" means a lot line which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line and, in the case of an irregular, triangular, or gore-shaped lot, a line ten (10) feet in length within the lot, parallel to and at the maximum distance from the front lot line. 
"Lot line, side" means any lot boundary line, not a front lot line or a rear lot line. On a corner lot, the street right-of-way line with the greatest amount of street frontage shall be the side lot line. 
"Lot width" means the horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at right angles to the lot depth at a point midway between the front and rear lot line. 
"Lot, corner" means a lot situated at the intersection of two or more streets having an angle of intersection of not more than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. 
"Lot, reversed corner" means a corner lot, the side street of which is substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the first lot to its rear. 
"Lot, flag" means a lot so shaped and designed that the main building site area is set back from the street on which it fronts and includes an access strip not less than twenty (20) feet in width at any point connecting the main building site area to the frontage street. 
"Lot, interior" means a lot bounded by a street on one side only, or a lot other than a corner lot. 
"Lot, key" means the first interior lot to the rear of a reversed corner lot and not separated therefrom by an alley. 
"Lot, through" means an interior lot having a frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel streets. 
"Lot, transitional" means generally, the first one hundred (100) feet of a lot in an R district having a side line adjoining or separated only by an alley from a lot in a C or M zone. 
(Prior code § 013.13) 
(Ord. No. 1088, § 6, 12-14-16)  
17.06.140 - Definitions beginning with "M". 
"Major highway." See "streets and highways." 
"Map." See "final map," "parcel map," "tentative map," "tentative map revised," and "zoning map." 
"Final map" means a map prepared in accordance with the subdivision ordinance and with any applicable provisions of the Subdivision Map Act, designed to be recorded with the county recorder. 
"Parcel map" means a map showing the division of land as described in the State Subdivision Map Act, (Section 11535, subdivisions (b) and (c)), and prepared in accordance with the provisions of the subdivision ordinance of the city, and the Subdivision Map Act. 
"Tentative map" means a map made for the purpose of showing the design of a proposed subdivision and the existing conditions in and around it and need not be based upon an accurate or detailed final survey of the property. 
"Tentative map revised," means a map involving a revised arrangement of the streets, alleys, easements or lots within property for which a tentative map has been previously approved, or a modification of the boundary of the property. 
"Zoning map" means designated official map or maps which show the location and boundaries of the districts established by this chapter and are referred to as the "zoning map" and incorporated as a part of this chapter. The "zoning map" together with everything shown thereon and all amendments thereto, are as much a part of this chapter as if fully set forth and described in context. 
"Marquee" means a fixed shelter used only as a roof and extended over a building line, and which is entirely supported by the building to which it is attached. Compare "awning," "canopy." 
"Medical clinic" means the same as "clinic." 
"Mental care." See "hospital, special" and "health facility, light mental care." 
"Microwave station" means a structure housing equipment necessary for the receiving, amplifying or transmitting of microwave signals, including necessary antenna systems along a communications route which employs microwave frequencies assigned by the Federal Communications Commission. 
"Mineral production" means the mining, quarrying, excavating, processing and stockpiling of rock and gravel within a district, but not including the removal of such materials from an area in order to prepare it for building or street construction. 
"Minor emergency repairs." See "automobile, minor emergency repairs." 
"Mobilehome" means a structure or vehicle, without its own motive power, used or designed for living or sleeping purposes. It is equipped with wheels for the purpose of transporting such from place to place, but is generally located on a fixed or semipermanent base. A mobilehome or house trailer is not a dwelling unit. In addition, a travel trailer is not to be considered as a mobilehome. Compare "recreational vehicles." 
"Mobilehome park" means any lot or parcel of land where trailer or mobilehome sites are rented or leased or offered for rent or lease for one or more house trailers or mobilehomes. Compare "tourist camp." 
"Mobilehome site" means that portion of a mobilehome park set aside and designated for the occupancy of a mobilehome and including the area set aside or used for parking or building structures which are accessory to the mobilehome. 
"Model home" means a dwelling or residential building having all of the following characteristics: 
1.  Such dwelling is constructed upon a proposed lot previously designated as a model home site by the planning commission in a subdivision for which the planning commission has approved or conditionally approved a tentative map, but for which a final map has not yet been recorded. The proposed lot upon which the model home is constructed is recognized as a legal building site for the duration of the model home permit. 
2.  No certificate of occupancy for such dwelling has been issued by the building department. 
3.  Where applicable, temporary access thereto is permitted over future streets previously restricted to public, access. 
4.  Such dwelling is intended to be temporarily utilized as an example of the dwellings which have been built or which are proposed to be built in the same subdivision. 
"Motel" means a group of attached or detached buildings containing individual sleeping or living units designed or used temporarily by tourists or transients traveling by automobile, with the garage attached or parking space conveniently located to each unit, commonly referred to as auto courts, motels, motor lodges, tourist courts and similar designation. Otherwise, the same as "hotel." 
"Motor vehicle" means a self-propelled device used or intended to be used for the transportation of freight or passengers upon a street or highway, excepting a device moved by human power or a device used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. See also "recreational vehicle" and automobile-related definitions plus "vehicle, accessory" and "vehicle, commercial." 
"Multi-tenant retail" means collective sales or exchange of merchandise by individual vendors occupying separate sales spaces that are not divided by permanent walls. This classification includes both indoor and outdoor swap meets, conducted on either a permanent or recurring basis. 
(Prior code § 013.14)  
17.06.150 - Definitions beginning with "N". 
"Net acre." See "acre, net." 
"Net area." See "area, net." 
"Noise" means a subjective description of an undesirable or unwanted sound. See also "sound" and "impact noise." 
"Nonconforming uses, lots, structures and characteristics of use" means Section 070.05. 
"Nursery, day." The same as "child day care center." 
"Nursery school" means the same as "child day care center." 
"Nursing home" means the same as "health facility, long-term." 
(Prior code § 013.15)  
17.06.160 - Definitions beginning with "O". 
"Octave band analyzer" means an instrument to measure the octave band composition of a sound, by means of band-pass filters. It shall meet the specifications of the American National Standards Institute and should be calibrated in the preferred frequencies. (ANSI S1.4-1961, ANSI S1.6-1967, ANSI S1.111966). See also "preferred center frequency." 
"Odor threshold concentration" means the lowest concentration of odorous matter that produces an olfactory response in normal human beings. Odor thresholds shall be determined in accordance with the American Society for Testing and Materials Test Method D1391-57 (reconfirmed to 1967) or in an equivalent manner acceptable to the zoning administrator. 
"Odor threshold limit value" means the maximum allowable concentration of odorous matter to which an industrial worker may be exposed for eight hours per day, five days a week as adopted by the American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists. 
"Odorous matter" means material suspended in the atmosphere that produces an olfactory response in normal human beings. 
"Office" means the following types of uses are typical office functions: 
1.  Agricultural, business, and personal credit services; 
2.  Security and commodity brokers, dealers, exchanges, and services; 
3.  Employment services; 
4.  Insurance carriers, agents, brokers, and services; 
5.  Real estate and related services; 
6.  Holding and investment companies; 
7.  Advertising services; 
8.  Consumer and mercantile credit reporting services; 
9.  Adjustment and collection services; 
10.  Direct mail advertising services; 
11.  Stenographic services and other duplicating and mailing services; 
12.  News syndicate services; 
13.  Business and management consulting services; 
14.  Detective and protective services; 
15.  Motion picture distribution and services; 
16.  Physician services; 
17.  Dental services; 
18.  Legal services; 
19.  Engineering and architectural services; and 
20.  Office activities only of business organizations involved in manufacturing, wholesale and retail trade, transportation, communication and utilities, public and semipublic. 
"Oil well" means any shaft or hole already drilled, being drilled or to be drilled into the surface of the earth which is used or intended to be used in connection with coring, or the drilling for, prospecting for, or the production of petroleum, natural gas, or other hydrocarbon substances; or is used or intended to be used for the subsurface injection into the earth of oil field waste, gases, water or liquid substances; including any such existing hole, shaft or casing which has not been abandoned. 
"Open space, major" means any space or area characterized by great natural scenic beauty or whose existing open space, natural condition, or present state of use, if retained, would enhance the present or potential value of abutting or surrounding urban development, or would maintain or enhance the conservation of natural or scenic resources. 
"Open space, minor" means that portion of a lot including courts or yards, which: 
1.  Is open and unobstructed from the ground upward, except for permitted projections into yards; and 
2.  Is accessible to and usable by all residents of the lot or premises; 
3.  Has no dimension less than twenty (20) feet; and 
4.  Is not used for private streets, driveways, parking or loading. 
"Open space" shall include such terms as "usable open space," "recreational space" and "public open space." 
"Open space, common" means open space substantially free of structures, but possibly containing improvements which are part of a general development plan and are appropriate for the recreation of residents of a planned residential development. Percentages of required common open space and proportion of level open space may be set by the district regulations or by the authorized agency. The common open space shall be land within the total development site used for recreational or environmental purposes by occupants of the development, or dedicated to the city for public park or inclusion within a park maintenance district. 
"Common open space" shall not include private streets, driveways, private yards or patios, parking or loading spaces or utility easements where the ground surface cannot be used appropriately for active or passive recreation, nor other areas primarily designed for other operational functions. 
"Open space, usable roof area" means that part of a roof which: 
1.  Is usable by all residents of the building and is accessible to all residents by a passageway from the buildings; 
2.  Is enclosed by a parapet or ground rails adequate for the safety of the occupants; 
3.  Has no dimension less than twenty (20) feet; and 
4.  Is developed for active or passive recreational use. 
"Orphanage." See also "philanthropic institution." The same as "children's home." 
"Outdoor advertising structure." See "signs." 
"Outdoor court." See "court." 
"Outdoor storage" means storage of goods and materials outside of any building or structure, but not including storage of a temporary or emergency nature. 
"Oxidizing material" means any chemical element or compound which may yield oxygen or violently react when involved in a fire or when in contact with water or which may increase the intensity of a fire even though it may be relatively noncombustible. 
(Prior code § 013.16)  
17.06.170 - Definitions beginning with "P". 
"Parcel" means a contiguous quantity of land in the possession of or owned by or recorded as the property of, the same claimant or person. See also "lot." 
"Parcel map" means a map showing the division of land as described in the State Subdivision Map Act, (Section 11535, subdivisions (b) and (c)), and prepared in accordance with the provisions of the Subdivision ordinance of the city, and the Subdivision Map Act. 
"Park maintenance district" means a district established pursuant to the provisions of the Park and Playground Act of 1909, as set forth in West's Annotated Government Code 38000. 
"Parking building" means the same as "parking garage, public." 
"Parking facility" means an area either open or enclosed within a structure or portion thereof, designed or used for the parking of motor vehicles. 
"Parking facility, accessory" means a parking facility which is accessory to a structure or use on the same or other lot, and may include both required or permitted parking stalls. 
"Parking garage, accessory" means the same as "parking garage, private." 
"Parking garage, private" means an accessory structure or portion of a principal structure designed or used for the parking or temporary storage of motor vehicles of patrons, occupants, or employees of the structure or use served. 
"Parking garage, public" means a structure or portion thereof designed or used for the parking of motor vehicles and some or all of whose parking stalls are nonaccessory. Commercial or public parking garages may include accessory off-street parking stalls limited to such stalls which are accessory to other structures or uses on the same lot. 
"Parking lot, public" means an open parking facility which is not accessory to a structure or use on the same or another lot. 
"Parking stall" means space within a parking facility exclusive of driveways, aisles, maneuvering or landscaped areas, ramps, columns, office and work areas, for the parking of one motor vehicle. 
"Parkway." See "streets and highways." 
"Particulate matter" means airborne material except water which exists in a finely divided form as a liquid or solid at standard conditions. 
"Particulate velocity" means a characteristic of vibration that depends on both displacement and frequency. If not directly measured it can be computed by multiplying the frequency by the amplitude times the factor 6.28. The particulate velocity would be in inches per second, when the frequency is expressed in cycles per second and the amplitude in inches. 
"Pedestrian way" means a right-of-way for pedestrians, free from vehicular traffic, and including access ramps, stairs, and mechanical lifts and routes through buildings which are available for public use. 
"Pedestrian ways, plan of" means a plan of pedestrian ways which has been adopted by the city council. 
"Performance standards." See specific definitions dispersed throughout this chapter. 
"Pet shop" means any store or department of any store or any place of business where dogs, cats, monkeys, birds, reptiles, or any other animals are kept for sale, for hire, or sold. 
"Philanthropic institution" means a nonprofit, charitable institution devoted to the housing, training or care of children, or of aged, indigent, handicapped or underprivileged persons, but not including the following: 
1.  Office buildings, except as an accessory to and located on the same lot with an institutional activity, as listed above; 
2.  Hospitals, clinics or sanitariums, correctional institutions; 
3.  Institutions or homes for the insane or those of unsound mind; 
4.  Lodging houses or dormitories providing temporary quarters for transient unemployed persons; 
5.  Organizations devoted to collecting and salvaging new or used materials; or 
6.  Organizations devoted principally to distributing food, clothing or supplies on a charitable basis. 
"Plan." See "general plan," "specific plan," "pedestrian ways, plan of." 
"Planned unit development" means the planning, construction or implementation and operation of any use or structure, or a combination of uses and structures, on a single parcel of land based on a comprehensive and complete design or plan treating the entire complex of land, structures and uses as a single project. See also specific sections dealing with planned unit developments. 
"Planned street line." See "street line, planned." 
"Pool" means any structure used for swimming, bathing or wading or as a fish pond or similar use. 
"Portable container" means a container for flammable or combustible liquids capable of being easily and readily borne or carried, not stationary or fixed and having a maximum capacity of five gallons. 
"Pre-application review." See Chapter 17.77. 
"Preferred center frequency" means the octave band designated by a single number which corresponds to the geometric center frequency. Nine octave bands cover the entire range of frequencies of interest in industrial noise and are described in the American National Standards Institute Standard No. S1.6-1967. 
"Private club." See "club, private." 
"Private road easement." See "streets and highways." 
"Project" means an action undertaken to change the use or character of use of land or structures, said action requiring a permit or other action on the part of the city. Project includes, but is not limited to subdivision, lot split, building construction, planned unit development, rezoning of land, variance from this chapter, request for conditional use, and change of land use requiring a permit. 
"Projection, architectural" means anything attached to and extended outside the outer face of the exterior wall of a structure and not intended for shelter or occupancy. 
"Property line" means a line separating parcels of real property having separate legal descriptions, but not including a building line. 
"Public utility." See "utilities." 
"Public way" means any street, alley, pedestrian way, channel, viaduct, subway, tunnel, bridge, easement, right-of-way or other way of which a public agency has a right of use. See also "streets and highways." 
(Ord. 1004-(2), § 2, 2008; prior code § 013.17)  
17.06.180 - Definitions beginning with "Q". 
"Quarry" means any place on a lot or parcel of land where dirt, soil, sand, gravel, rock, clay, decomposed granite, or other similar material is removed by excavation or otherwise. Quarry shall include mining operations for the removal of ores, precious stones, or other solid minerals, but shall not include: 
1.  Excavation and removal of materials from a lot or parcel of land preparatory to construction of a building for which a building permit has been issued and remains in full force and effect, provided that such excavation is confined to that necessary for such building construction, but in no event shall more than five thousand (5,000) cubic yards of soil or other excavated materials be removed from the premises; or 
2.  Excavation, on a lot, parcel of land or subdivision, necessary to grading, building construction or operation on the premises, where a building permit is not in full force and effect, provided that such grading is necessary to prepare a site for a lawful use permitted thereon, but in no event shall more than five hundred (500) cubic yards of soil or other excavated materials be removed from such premises. 
(Prior code § 013.18)  
17.06.190 - Definitions beginning with "R". 
"Real estate tract sales office" means a sales office established and maintained in one model home as approved by the planning director, or in a single-family dwelling on a recorded lot previously designated as a model home site by the planning director and serving temporarily as an example of houses in the same subdivision, and subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
"Rear lot line." See "lot line, rear." 
"Rear yard." See "yard, rear." 
"Recreational room" means a room, contained in either a main building or an accessory building, designed to be utilized primarily for games, the pursuit of hobbies, social gatherings and such activities. Such a room may contain such plumbing fixtures as are utilized in a bar or hobby activities. Such a room in a single-family or two-family dwelling or in an accessory building appurtenant to a single-family or two-family dwelling, may not include facilities for the cooking and preparation of food. However, in a multiple residential use or in an accessory building appurtenant thereto, a recreation room which is for the common use of all the dwelling units therein, may contain facilities for the cooking and preparation of food. 
"Recreational vehicles" include the following: 
1.  "Travel trailer" means a vehicular portable structure built on a chassis designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and vacation uses permanently identified as a travel trailer by the manufacturer; 
2.  "Camper" means a structure designed primarily to be mounted upon a motor vehicle and with sufficient facilities to render as suitable for use as a temporary dwelling for camping, travel, recreational and vacation purposes; 
3.  "Motorized home" means a portable dwelling designed and constructed as an integral part of a self-propelled vehicle; 
4.  "Full tent trailer" means a canvas folding structure mounted on wheels and designed for travel and vacation use; 
5.  "Boats" and "boat trailers" includes boats, floats, and rafts plus the normal equipment to transport the same on a highway. See also "motor vehicles," "mobilehome." 
"Repair garage." See "garage, repair." 
"Resident" means the present or future user of and which are the subject of the final product of a considered to be the ultimate user of a project. 
"Residential building" means a building or portion thereof designed or used for human habitation and including the following types with respect to permitted numbers of dwelling units and guest rooms: 
Type 	Dwelling Unit 	Guest Room 
Dwelling, single-family 	1 	0 
Dwelling, two-family or duplex 	2 	0 
Dwelling, multiple-family or apartment house 	2 or more 	5 or less 
Boarding or rooming house 	1 	1 to 5 
Dormitories, fraternity or sorority houses 	1 	6 or more 
Hotel or motel 	0 or 1 	6 or more 
Apartment hotel 	2 or more 	6 or more 
 
See specific definitions for any additional requirements. See also "dwelling, townhouse." 
"Residential district" means any zoning district whose designation begins with the letter "R". 
"Rest home" means the same as "health facility, long-term." 
"Retail sales, retail store" means the sale of goods, merchandise or commodities for consumption or use by the purchaser. 
"Right-of-way." See "streets and highways." 
"Roadway." See "streets and highways." 
"Room, guest." See "guest room." 
"Room, habitable" means an enclosing subdivision in a residential building commonly used for living purposes, but not including any lobby, hall, closet, storage space, water closet, bath, toilet, slop sink, general utility room, or service porches. 
For the purposes of applying the automobile parking stall requirements of this chapter, any kitchen shall be considered a habitable room and if it is a part of a room designed for other than food preparation or eating purposes, such remaining portion shall also be considered a separate habitable room. 
For the purposes of applying the lot area requirements of this chapter, a kitchen less than one hundred (100) feet in area shall not be considered a habitable room. 
For the purpose of computing the minimum allowable floor area of the room, the minimum width of every habitable room except the kitchen shall be not less than seven feet at any point within that portion of the room included in any computation of minimum allowable floor area of the room. 
"Room, light housekeeping" means Any guest room which is designed and used both as a bedroom and for the cooking and preparing of food. 
For the purposes of applying the lot area and automobile parking space requirements of the various zones, each light housekeeping room shall be considered as a separate guest room. See also "guest room." 
"Rooming house." See "boarding or rooming house." 
(Prior code § 013.19)  
17.06.200 - Definitions beginning with "S". 
"Sanitarium" or "sanatorium" means the same as "hospital." 
"School, elementary and high" means institutions of learning which offer instruction in the several branches of learning and study required to be taught in the public schools by the Education Code of the State of California. High schools include junior and senior. 
"Screening" means solid walls, solid fences or dense living hedges, together with a wire fence, for the purpose of concealing from view the area behind such structure or hedges. Such screening shall be maintained in an attractive manner at all times. See also "fence" and "landscaping." 
"Secondary highway." See "street and highways." 
"Secondary housing unit" means a separate dwelling unit incidental to a single family home that provides a sleeping quarters or a separate residence for a family. It may include permanent improvements for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation on the same site as the primary unit is situated. 
"Seismograph" means an instrument which measures vibration characteristics simultaneously in three mutually perpendicular planes. The seismograph may measure amplitude and frequency, particulate velocity or acceleration. 
"Senior citizen housing" means the same as "housing for the elderly." 
"Servants quarters" means an accessory structure located on the same premises with the main building used solely as a dwelling of persons employed on the premises; such quarters having no kitchen facilities and not rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling unit. 
"Setback" means a minimum horizontal distance between the planned street line, or the lot line if there is no planned street line, and the building line, or a line parallel to the lot line if there is no building line. See also "yard" and "building line." 
"Shopping center" means a group of commercial establishments planned and developed, owned or managed as a unit, with off-street parking and loading provided on the property, and related in its location, size and type of shops, to the trade area which the unit serves. 
"Side yard." See "yard, side." 
"Sidewalk" means that portion of a thoroughfare other than a roadway set apart by curbs, barriers, markings or other delineations for pedestrian travel. 
"Sign" means any printed or written text (including letter work or numeral), pictorial representation (including illustration, decoration or figure), emblem (including device, symbol or trademark), commercial flag (including advertising banner or pennant), or any other object which: 
1.  Is a structure or any part thereof; or is attached to, painted on, or in any other manner represented on a building, fence, wall, post or any other structure or surface; and 
2.  Is used to identify, instruct, attract, guide or advertise. 
"Sign, advertising decoration" means various sign materials used for temporary display and decoration including streamers, banner, pennant, pinwheels, commercial flags, bunting and the like. 
"Sign, advertising statuary" means an imitation, representation or similitude of a person or thing which is sculptured, molded, modeled or cast in any solid or plastic substance, material or fabric which for advertising or identifying purposes is erected or attached to the surface of the ground. 
"Sign, area" means the total surface area of the sign face including any decorative borders. 
"Sign, area of cutout letters and displays" means the area measured within the periphery of the cutout letters of displays. 
"Sign, directional" means a sign containing words or symbols indicating an entrance to, exit from, location of or distance to structures or sites. 
"Sign, ground" means a sign, the lower part of the base of which is resting entirely or in part on the ground. 
"Sign, identification." An on-site sign which carries only the name or address of the firm, the major enterprise or the principal product offered on the premises. 
"Sign, nameplate" means a small on-site sign located at an entrance to a building and indicating the name and/or address of an occupant. 
"Sign, off-site" means a sign delivering a message or advertisement other than the name, occupation or nature of the activities conducted on such premises or the products sold or manufactured thereon. 
"Sign, on-site" means a sign indicating the name, occupation or nature of the activities conducted, services offered or the products sold or manufactured on a property. 
"Sign, post" means a sign whose face is above ground level and affixed to poles or posts. 
"Sign, poster panel" means an off-site sign comprising a series of small connected panels arranged in the form of a pylon or similar structure, and designed primarily for the application of advertising post displays for pedestrian viewing. 
"Sign, project directory" means an on-site sign containing the names and locations, in list or map form, of the individual components making up a planned unit development, shopping center or similar project. 
"Sign, project title" means an on-site sign which carries the overall name of a residential subdivision, shopping center, industrial park, medical complex, planned unit development, mobilehome park and similar projects. 
"Sign, projecting" means an on-site sign other than a wall sign suspended from or supported by a building or structure and projecting out at any angle to the plane of the wall. 
"Sign, real estate" means an on-site sign displayed for the purpose of offering real property for sale, lease or rent. 
"Sign, roof" means an on-site sign erected upon or above roof or parapet of a building or structure. 
"Sign, wall" means an on-site sign attached to, erected against, or painted onto a wall of a building with the exposed face of the sign in a plane parallel to said wall. 
"Site, building" means the same as "lot." 
"Solid fill" means any noncombustible material insoluble in water, such as soil, rock, sand, or gravel that can be used for grading land or filling depressions. 
"Solid fill project" means any operation on a parcel of land where more than one thousand (1,000) cubic yards of solid fill materials are deposited for any purpose, including the grading or reclaiming of land. 
"Sound" means rapid fluctuations of atmospheric pressure which are audible to persons. See also "noise," "impact noise." 
"Sound level meter" means an instrument to measure the overall sound pressure level. It shall comply with the applicable specifications of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI S1.4-1961). 
"Specific plan" means a definite statement adopted by ordinance of policies, standards and regulations, together with a map or description defining the location where such policies, standards, and regulations are applicable. 
"Stable, private" means a detached accessory building for the keeping of horses owned by the occupants of the premises but not kept for remuneration, hire or sale. See also "accessory structure." 
"Stable, public" means a stable other than a private stable. 
"Stall." See "parking stall." 
"Standard condition" or "standard cubic feet" means a volume of gas expressed at a temperature of seventy (70) degrees Fahrenheit and a pressure of fourteen and seven-tenths (14.7) pounds per square inch absolute. 
"Steady state." See "vibration, steady state." 
"Storage." See "outdoor storage." 
"Storage, garage." See "garage, storage." 
"Story" means that portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the topmost story shall be that portion of a building included between the upper surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above. If the finished floor level directly above a basement, cellar or unused underfloor space is more than six feet above grade as defined herein for more than fifty (50) percent of the total perimeter, or is more than twelve (12) feet above grade as defined herein at any point, such basement, cellar, or unused underfloor space shall be considered as a story. Compare "basement" and "cellar." 
"Story, first" means the lower-most story which is primarily above exterior grade on one or more sides, containing at least fifty (50) percent living accommodations or related nonresidential uses and from which there is direct egress to the exterior. Stories below grade used for storage, parking, mechanical equipment or other services are not considered basement stories. Related nonresidential uses include laundry space, recreation, or hobby room, commercial use and related corridor space. 
"Street" and "highways." See also "alley," "public way." 
1.  "Freeway" means a divided highway or through traffic with full control of access and with grade separations at intersections, and declared to be such in compliance with the State Streets and Highways Code. 
2.  "Arterial, major" means any street, existing or proposed, designated as a major arterial on the "circulation element" of the general plan. 
3.  "Arterial, minor" means any street, existing or proposed, designated as a minor arterial on the "circulation element" of the general plan. 
4.  "Street" or "public street" means any public thoroughfare, other than an alley or walk. Where a subdivision has been recorded containing lots which abut only on an alley or walk, said alley or walk may be considered to be a street. 
5.  "Parkway" means that portion of street or highway other than a roadway or sidewalk. 
6.  "Right-of-way" means area of land reserved for public or private easements. 
7.  "Roadway" means that portion of a right-of-way for a street, arterial or alley designed or used for accommodating the movement of vehicles. 
8.  "Service road" or "frontage road" means a street lying adjacent and approximately parallel to and separated from a freeway or arterial and which affords access to abutting property. 
9.  "Street, collector" means a street (including the principal access streets of a subdivision) which carries traffic from local streets either directly, or via other existing or proposed collector streets, to a major or minor arterial. 
10.  "Street, local" means any street other than a collector street, major or minor arterial or freeway, providing access to abutting property and serving local as distinguished from through traffic. 
11.  "Street, private" means a private road easement that the planning official determines to be adequate for access and which conforms to such dimensional and improvement standards adopted by the city council. 
12.  "Private road easement" means a parcel of land not dedicated as a public street, or other private street, and for which: 
a.  A private easement for road purposes has been proposed or granted to the owners of property contiguous or adjacent thereto; and 
b.  An instrument creating the easement has been duly recorded and filed with the county recorder. 
13.  "Street or alley, future" means any real property which the owner thereof has offered for dedication to the city for street or alley purposes, but which has been rejected by the city council, subject to the right of the council to rescind its action and accept by resolution at any later date and without further action by the owner, all or part of said property as public street or alley. 
14.  "Street line, planned" means the proposed boundary of a street or highway as shown on the "planned street line map" or as otherwise designated in the ordinance. 
"Structural alteration" means any change other than incidental repairs which would prolong the life of the supporting members of a structure or building such as bearing walls or bearing partitions, columns, beams or girders. Compare "alteration." 
"Structure" means anything constructed or erected which is supported directly or indirectly on the earth, but not including any vehicle which conforms to the California Vehicle Code. Structure includes any building or accessory building which can be used for the housing, shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind, plus fences, wall, billboards, platforms, towers, poster panels and signs. 
"Structure, accessory." See "accessory structure." 
"Subdivider" means any person, firm, corporation, partnership or association who causes land to be divided into a subdivision for himself, herself or others. 
"Subdivision Map Act" means the Subdivision Map Act of the state of California, Chapter 2, Part 2, of Division 4 of the Business and Professions Code, commencing with Section 11500 thereof. 
"Suite" means a group of habitable rooms designed as a unit, and occupied by only one family; but not including a kitchen or other facilities for the preparation of food, with entrances and exits which are common to all rooms comprising the suite. Compare "guest room" and "room, light housekeeping." 
"Surveyor" means a licensed land surveyor authorized to practice in California. 
"Swap meet, indoor" means collective sales or exchange of merchandise by individual vendors occupying separate sales spaces that are not divided by permanent walls. This classification includes both indoor and outdoor swap meets, conducted on either a permanent or recurring basis. 
"Swap meet, outdoor" means collective sales or exchange of merchandise by individual vendors occupying separate sales spaces that are not divided by permanent walls. This classification includes both indoor and outdoor swap meets, conducted on either a permanent or recurring basis. 
(Prior code § 013.20) 
(Ord. No. 1075, § 2, 6-10-15)  
17.06.210 - Definitions beginning with "T". 
"Telephone repeater station" means a building used for housing amplifying equipment along aerial or underground telephone cable routes. See also "utilities." 
"Temporary use." See "use, temporary" 
"Tentative map" means a map made for the purpose of showing the design of a proposed subdivision and the existing conditions in and around it and need not be based upon an accurate or detailed final survey of the property. 
"Tentative map, revised" means a map involving a revised arrangement of the streets, alleys, easements or lots within property for which a tentative map has been previously approved, or a modification of the boundary of the property. 
"Tourist camp" means any place, area or tract of land upon which are located two or more campers, trailer coaches, trailers, automobiles used for sleeping purposes or other camping outfits commonly referred to as tourist camp, trailer camp, and similar designations. Compare "mobilehome park." 
"Townhouse." See "dwelling, townhouse." 
"Toxic matter" means material which is capable of causing injury to living organisms by chemical means when present in relatively small amounts. 
"Trailer." See "mobilehome and recreational vehicles." 
"Trailer, full tent." See "recreational vehicles." 
"Trailer park." See "mobilehome park." 
"Trailer site." See "mobilehome site." 
"Transient" means any person who exercised occupancy for a reason of concession, permit, right of access, license, or other agreement for a period of thirty (30) consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. See "hotel." 
"Transitional." See "lot, transitional." 
"Travel trailer." See "recreational vehicles." 
(Prior code § 013.21)  
17.06.220 - Definitions beginning with "U". 
"Under floor space" means a space between the ground and the floor directly above. 
"Use" means the purpose for which land or structures are arranged, designed or intended, or for which either land or structures are, or may be, occupied or maintained. Use includes construction, establishment, maintenance, alteration, moving onto, enlargement, operation or occupancy. 
"Use, accessory." See "accessory use." 
"Use, conditional." See "conditional use." 
"Use, principal" means the main or primary purpose for which a structure or lot is designed, arranged or intended, or for which either may be used, occupied or maintained under this chapter. 
"Use, temporary" means a use of land or structures not intended to be of permanent duration. 
"Utilities, public utility service center" means any buildings or premises used for the administration of public utility repair, maintenance and installation crews including parking for vehicles, not to exceed one and one-half tons rated capacity, but not including warehouses or storage yards. 
"Utilities, public utility service yard" means any buildings or premises used for the office, warehouse, storage yard, or maintenance garage or a public utility including microwave repeater stations when incorporated as a part of the service yard use. See also "communication equipment building" and "telephone repeater station." 
(Prior code § 013.22)  
17.06.230 - Definitions beginning with "V". 
"Variance." See Section 17.76.010. 
"Vehicle." See also "motor vehicle," "mobilehome," "recreational vehicles" and automobile-related definitions. 
"Vehicle, accessory" means any motor vehicle used in connection with the operation of any structure or use. 
"Vehicle, commercial" means a vehicle, which when operated upon a highway is required to be registered as a commercial vehicle by the California Vehicle Code, and which is used or maintained for the transportation of persons for hire, compensation, or profit or designed, used or maintained primarily for the transportation of property. 
"Vehicle, recreational." See "recreational vehicle." 
"Vehicular access right" means the right of easement for access of owners or occupants of abutting lands to a public way other than as pedestrians. 
"Vibration, earthborne" means a reciprocating movement transmitted through the earth, both in horizontal and vertical planes. 
"Vibration, steady state." Vibration which is continuous as from a fan, compressor or motor. 
(Prior code § 013.23)  
17.06.240 - Definitions beginning with "W". 
"Walk" means any right-of-way for pedestrians, including sidewalks and inner-block walks. 
"Washroom" means a room or place where clothes, etc. are laundered. 
"Water supply" means such water system supply and distribution facilities as are necessary to provide a reliable and adequate water supply for private use and public fire protection services. 
"Way." See "alley," "pedestrian way," "public way" or "streets and highways." 
"Wholesale store, sales" means a business establishment engaged in selling to retailers or jobbers, rather than consumers. 
"Windborne dust." See "dust, windborne." 
(Prior code § 013.24)  
17.06.250 - Definitions beginning with "X". 
Reserved.  
17.06.260 - Definitions beginning with "Y". 
"Yard" means an open space other than a court, on a lot or parcel of land, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
"Yard, front" means a yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line and a line parallel thereto on the lot. Where there is a building line farther back from the yard line, the building line, not the front lot line, shall be controlling. In addition, if there is a planned street line beyond the lot line, the planned street line shall be the point of measurement rather than the lot line. 
"Yard, rear" means a yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and a line parallel thereto on the lot. 
"Yard, side" means a yard more than six inches in width between a main building and the side lot line, extending from the front yard or front lot line where no front yard is required, to the rear yard. The width of the required side yard shall be measured horizontally from the nearest point of the side lot line toward the nearest part of the main building. 
"Yard, special" means a special yard is any yard other than a yard adjacent to a public street, required to perform the same function as side or rear yards, but adjacent to a lot line so placed or oriented that neither the term side yard nor the term rear yard clearly applies. 
"Youth camp" means any place with programs established for the primary purpose of providing an outdoor group living experience with social, spiritual, educational or recreational objectives for persons under twenty-one (21) years of age. 
(Prior code § 013.26)  
17.06.270 - Definitions beginning with "Z". 
"Zoning map" means the designated official map or maps which show the location and boundaries of the districts established by this chapter and are referred to as the "zoning map" and incorporated as a part of this chapter. The said "zoning map" together with everything shown thereon and all amendments thereto, are as much a part of this chapter as if fully set forth and described in context. 
(Prior code § 013.27)  
Chapter 17.08 - ZONING DISTRICTS DESIGNATED 
 
17.08.010 - Zones established. 
For the purpose of this title as stated in Chapter 17.02, the city is divided into the following zones: 
A-R 	Agricultural reserve zone 
A-T 	Agricultural transition zone 
R-E 	Residential estate zone 
R-S 	Single-family zone 
R-M 	Multiple-family zone 
R-MH 	Mobilehome subdivision zone 
C-N 	Neighborhood commercial zone 
C-G 	General commercial zone 
C-T 	Tourist commercial zone 
M-S 	Manufacturing service zone 
M-H 	Heavy industrial zone 
M-W 	Wrecking yard zone 
 
(Prior code § 014.01)  
17.08.020 - Official zoning map. 
The areas assigned to these zones, their designations, and the boundaries of said zones shown on the map hereto attached and made part of this chapter, are hereby established. Said map being designated as the "Official Zoning Map" and such map and its proper notations, references, and other information shown thereon shall be as much a part of this chapter as if the matters and information set forth by such map were fully described in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 014.02)  
17.08.030 - Interpretation of district boundaries. 
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any zone shown on the official zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
A.  Where zone boundaries are indicated a approximately following street lines, alley lines, or lot lines, such lines shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
B.  In the case of unsubdivided property, or where the zone boundary divides a lot, the location of such boundary unless the same are indicated by dimension, shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on said zoning map. 
C.  Where any public street or alley is officially vacated or abandoned, the area comprising such vacated street or alley shall acquire the zone classification of the property to which it reverts. 
(Prior code § 014.03)  
17.08.040 - Area zoning symbols. 
A.  Where a number follows the zoning symbol on any zoning map hereafter adopted, the following interpretations shall govern the minimum permitted lot area: 
1.  Where the number is less than one hundred (100), it shall designate an area in acres; 
2.  Where the number is greater than one hundred (100), it shall designate an area in square feet; 
3.  In no case shall an area zoning symbol be established which would reduce the minimum lot area below that required in the zone itself. 
B.  The addition or deletion of such numbers to zoning symbols shall be deemed a change of zone, and shall be accomplished in accord with all provisions of Chapters 17.70 through 17.82. 
C.  Where no number follows the zoning symbol, the minimum building site shall be that prescribed by the designated zone. 
(Prior code § 014.04)  
17.08.050 - References to other parts. 
References made in this section to other parts of this chapter are designated thus as Section 17.02.190. 
(Prior code § 014.05)  
Chapter 17.10 - A-R AGRICULTURAL RESERVE ZONE 
 
17.10.010 - Intent and purpose. 
This zone is intended to preserve certain designated prime agricultural lands within the city and protect those lands, which are deemed to be agricultural preserves, from the intrusion of urban development incompatible with agricultural land uses. This zone designation is reserved for only those lands which are subject to recorded Williamson Act contracts pursuant to Government Code, Section 51200 et seq. 
(Prior code § 018.01)  
17.10.020 - Permitted uses. 
The following uses are permitted in the A-R zone subject to all provisions of this chapter: 
A.  Primary Uses. 
1.  The growing of field crops, trees, vegetables, fruits, berries, flowers, and nursery stock. 
2.  Animal raising, noncommercial, small animals, such as poultry, birds, fish, fowl, rabbits, chinchilla, mice, frogs, earthworms, bees, and others of similar nature, form and size, including hatching and fattening, and involving eggs or similar products derived therefrom. 
3.  Animal grazing, commercial, limited to horses, cattle, sheep and goats and including their supplementary feeding; provided such grazing is not a part of, nor conducted in conjunction with any dairy, livestock feed yard, livestock sales yard or commercial riding academy located on the premises. 
B.  Accessory Uses. The following buildings, structures, and uses are permitted when clearly incidental and accessory to the primary permitted use: 
1.  Single-Family Dwellings. No more than one such dwelling shall be permitted on one lot regardless of the size of the lot. 
2.  Storage of tools, supplies, equipment, and petroleum products intended for use on the premises, but not for resale. 
3.  Housing and storage (including corrals, coops, pens, etc.) for animals and for crop products produced on the premises. 
4.  Parking facilities, including cars, trucks, and vehicles owned by persons residing on the premises. 
5.  Accessory living quarters for persons employed on the premises, or for temporary use by guests of occupants on the premises. Such quarters shall not be rented or leased to persons not employed on the premises. Where not a part of the main building, such quarters shall be separated from the main building by twenty-five (25) feet. 
6.  Permitted Signs. Only the following signs shall be permitted: 
a.  One unlighted identification sign not to exceed twenty (20) square feet in area. 
b.  One unlighted sign pertaining to the rental, sale or lease of the premises, not to exceed twelve (12) square feet in area. Such signs shall be located at last ten (10) feet from any property line. 
7.  Home occupations, subject to the provisions of Section 17.58.010. 
C.  Conditional Uses. The following may be permitted in the A-R zone, subject to obtaining a conditional use permit as specified in Section 17.74.010. 
1.  Public parks; 
2.  One temporary stand, of temporary construction, for the display and sale of agricultural products produced on the premises, and placed not less than twenty-five (25) feet from any street or highway upon which such property fronts. When granting approval for such a temporary stand, the planning commission shall set a maximum time limit not to exceed one year on each such stand. Said time limit may be renewed at the option of the commission; 
3.  Cemeteries, crematories, columbariums, and mausoleums; 
4.  Reserved; 
5.  Reserved; 
6.  Farms or establishments for the selective or experimental breeding of cattle or horses, or the raising and training of horses or show cattle; 
7.  Dairy farms; 
8.  Kennels; 
9.  Animal raising, commercial; small animals, such as poultry, birds, fish, fowl, rabbits, chinchilla, mice, frogs, earthworms, bees, and others of similar nature, form and size, including hatching and fattening, and involving eggs or similar products derived therefrom; 
10.  Reserved; 
11.  Fruit and vegetable packing houses; and 
12.  Farm labor camps. 
(Prior code § 018.02)  
17.10.030 - Property development standards. 
A.  Lot Requirements. 
1.  Minimum Lot Size. Forty (40) acres, or one-sixteenth of a section as determined by government survey. 
2.  Minimum Lot Width. Six hundred (600) feet. 
3.  Minimum Lot Depth. Six hundred (600) feet. 
B.  Yard Requirements. 
1.  Building Setback. A building setback of not less than sixty (60) feet from the center line of any street, public or private, or not less than twenty (20) feet from the established street line of any street shall be maintained. 
2.  Side Yard. Each lot shall have side yards of not less than twenty (20) feet. 
3.  Rear Yard. Each lot shall have a rear yard of not less than twenty-five (25) feet. 
4.  Animals. Housing for animals (including corrals, coops, pens, stables, etc.) as permitted in this zone shall not be located within thirty-five (35) feet of any building or structure which is used for human habitation or assembly of persons. 
5.  Feed and Crop Storage. Feed and crop products shall not be stored within: 
a.  Fifty (50) feet of any front lot line. 
b.  Twenty (20) feet of any residential lot line. 
C.  Height Limits. 
1.  The maximum height of buildings or structures incidental to agricultural pursuits as permitted in Section 17.10.020 shall be equal to one-half the distance of such building or structure from any property line. 
2.  The maximum height of all dwellings, living quarters, garages, and other buildings permitted in this zone shall be two stories or thirty-five (35) feet, whichever is less. 
D.  Off-Street Parking. Off-street parking shall be provided for each dwelling unit. Parking for no less than four vehicles shall be provided on-site. 
E.  Architectural Review. 
1.  Allow mobilehomes in any residential zone subject to the architectural review process as set forth in Section 17.72.010 of this title. 
2.  All mobilehomes subject to this review process shall be certified under the National Mobilehome Construction and Safety Act of 1974; and permanent foundations shall be approved by the building official; and roof material. Roof overhang and exterior finish materials shall be the same as typically used on conventional single-family structures. 
3.  All mobilehomes shall be compatible with surrounding development. 
4.  All mobilehomes subject to the same development standards that apply to a conventional single-family dwelling. 
5.  All mobilehomes shall be allowed to be placed upon any lot of record. 
(Prior code § 018.03)  
Chapter 17.12 - A-T AGRICULTURAL TRANSITION ZONE 
 
17.12.010 - Intent and purpose. 
This zone has the purpose of permitting the continued agricultural use of those lands suited to eventual development in other uses and zones, pending proper timing for the economical provisions of utilities, major streets, and other facilities, so that compact, orderly development will occur. 
(Prior code § 020.01)  
17.12.020 - Permitted uses. 
The following uses are permitted in the A-T zone subject to all provisions of this chapter: 
A.  Primary Uses. 
1.  The growing of field crops, trees, vegetables, fruits, berries, flowers and nursery stock. 
2.  Animal raising, noncommercial, small animals, such as, poultry, birds, fish, fowl, rabbits, chinchillas, mice, frogs, earthworms, bees, and others of similar nature, form and size, including hatching and fattening, and involving eggs or similar products derived therefrom. 
3.  Animal grazing, commercial, limited to horses, cattle, sheep and goats and including their supplementary feeding; provided such grazing is not a part of, nor conducted in conjunction with any dairy, livestock feed yard, livestock sales yard or commercial riding academy located on the premises. 
B.  Accessory Uses. The following buildings, structures, and uses are permitted when clearly incidental and accessory to the primary permitted use: 
1.  Single-Family Dwellings. No more than one such dwelling shall be permitted on one lot regardless of the size of the lot. 
2.  Storage of tools, supplies, equipment, and petroleum products intended for use on the premises, but not for resale. 
3.  Housing and storage (including corrals, coops, pens, etc.) for animals and for crop products produced on the premises. 
4.  Parking facilities, including cars, trucks, and vehicles owned by persons residing on the premises. 
5.  Accessory living quarters for persons employed on the premises, or for temporary use by guests of occupants on the premises. Such quarters shall not be rented or leased to persons not employed on the premises. Where not a part of the main building, such quarters shall be separated from the main building by twenty-five (25) feet. 
6.  Permitted Signs. Only the following signs shall be permitted: 
a.  One unlighted identification sign not to exceed twenty (20) square feet in area. 
b.  One unlighted sign pertaining to the rental, sale or lease of the premises, not to exceed twelve (12) square feet in area. Such signs shall be located at least ten (10) feet from any property line. 
7.  Home occupations, subject to the provisions of Section 17.58.010. 
C.  Conditional Uses. The following may be permitted in the A-T zone, subject to obtaining a conditional use permit as specified in Section 17.74.010. 
1.  Public and private parks; golf courses; swimming, polo and country clubs; 
2.  One temporary stand, of temporary construction, for the display and sale of agricultural products produced on the premises, and placed not less than twenty-five (25) feet from any street or highway upon which such property fronts. When granting approval for such a temporary stand, the planning commission shall set a maximum time limit not to exceed one year on each such stand. Said time limit may be renewed at the option of the commission; 
3.  Cemeteries, crematories, columbariums, and mausoleums; 
4.  Equestrian establishments, provided that in no case shall permanent maintenance or stabling of horses, storage of feed, riding arenas, or storage or maintenance of equipment be permitted within three hundred feet of the boundary of any R-S or RM; 
5.  Borrow pits, gravel pits, and other recovery of natural mineral resources; 
6.  Farms or establishments for the selective or experimental breeding of cattle or horses, or the raising and training of horses or show cattle; 
7.  Dairy farms; 
8.  Kennels; 
9.  Animal Raising, Commercial. Small animals, such as, poultry, birds, fish, fowl, rabbits, chinchilla, mice, frogs, earthworms, bees, and others of similar nature, form and size, including hatching and fattening, and involving eggs or similar products derived therefrom; 
10.  Campgrounds, private, containing picnic areas, overnight camping facilities and temporary parking for travel trailers and camper trucks; 
11.  Fruit and vegetable packing houses; and 
12.  Farm labor camps. 
(Prior code § 020.02)  
17.12.030 - Property development standards. 
A.  Lot Requirements. 
1.  Minimum Lot Size. Five acres. 
2.  Minimum Lot Width. Two hundred sixty (260) feet. 
3.  Minimum Lot Depth. Two hundred sixty (260) feet. 
B.  Yard Requirements. 
1.  Building Setback. A building setback of not less than sixty (60) feet from the center line of any street, public or private, or not less than twenty (20) feet from the established street line of any street shall be maintained. 
2.  Side Yard. Each lot shall have side yards of at least twenty (20) feet in width. 
3.  Rear Yard. Each lot shall have a rear yard of at least twenty-five (25) feet. 
4.  Animals. Housing for animals (including corrals, coops, pens, stables, etc.) as permitted in this zone shall not be located within thirty-five (35) feet of any building or structure which is used for human habitation or assembly of persons. 
5.  Feed and Crop Storage. Feed and crop products shall not be stored within: 
a.  Fifty (50) feet of any front lot line. 
b.  Twenty (20) feet of any residential lot line. 
C.  Height Limits. 
1.  The maximum height of buildings or structures incidental to agricultural pursuits as permitted in Section 17.10.020 shall be equal to one-half the distance of such building or structure from any property line. 
2.  The maximum height of all dwellings, living quarters, garages, and other buildings permitted in this zone shall be two stories or thirty-five (35) feet, whichever is less. 
D.  Off-Street Parking. Off-street parking shall be provided for, subject to the requirements of Section 17.54.010 of this chapter. 
E.  Architectural Review. 
1.  Allow single-family dwellings (one only per parcel) in the A-T zone subject to the architectural review process as set forth in Section 17.72.010 of this chapter. Approval of such applications shall be made only after review by the planning division and concurrence by the director therefor. 
2.  All mobilehomes subject to this review process shall he certified under the National Mobilehome Construction and Safety Act of 1974; and permanent foundations shall be approved by the Building Official; and roof material, roof overhang and exterior finish materials shall be the same as typically used on conventional single-family structures. 
3.  All mobilehomes shall be compatible with surrounding development. 
4.  All mobilehomes subject to the same development standards that apply to a conventional single-family dwelling. 
5.  All mobilehomes shall be allowed to be placed upon any lot of record. 
(Prior code § 020.03)  
Chapter 17.14 - R-E RESIDENTIAL ESTATE ZONE 
 
17.14.010 - Intent and purpose. 
This zone is intended to provide for the establishment of residential areas which are to be developed at low density and with reasonable and adequate limitations, safeguards and controls for the keeping and maintenance of horses in those areas of the city where noncommercial equestrian activities may be an integral part of the neighborhood amenities. 
(Prior code § 025.01)  
17.14.020 - Permitted uses. 
The following uses are permitted in the R-E zone subject to all provisions of this chapter. 
A.  Primary Uses. 
1.  Dwellings, single-family detached. 
B.  Accessory Uses. The following buildings, structures, and uses are permitted when clearly incidental and accessory to the primary permitted use. 
1.  Accessory structures, habitable, including guest houses, accessory living quarters and servants quarters. 
2.  Accessory structures, nonhabitable, including private garages or carports, garden greenhouses, recreation rooms, pool bathhouses, or private stables and swimming pools. 
3.  Keeping of horses with the following specifications: 
a.  Minimum Lot Area. Twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. 
b.  Minimum Lot Area Per Horse. Five thousand (5,000) square feet. 
c.  No stable, shelter or corral shall be located within thirty-five (35) feet of any dwelling or other building used for human habitation. 
d.  Horses are kept or maintained for the private use of the family residing on the premises, except that a maximum of two horses owned by residents in the neighborhood may be boarded. 
4.  Parking facilities. 
5.  Home occupations, subject to the provisions of Section 17.58.010, 
6.  Pens and other shelter for domestic, noncommercial animals and pets. Such shelter shall not be nearer than thirty-five (35) feet from any building used for human habitation. 
7.  Permitted Signs. Only the following signs shall be permitted: 
a.  One unlighted identification sign not to exceed eight square feet in area. 
b.  One unlighted sign pertaining to the rental, sale or lease of the premises, not to exceed twelve (12) square feet in area. Such sign shall be located not less than ten (10) feet from any property line. 
8.  The growing of field crops, trees, vegetables, fruits, berries and nursery stock, including wholesaling of crops produced upon the premises. 
C.  Conditional Uses. The following uses may be permitted in the RE zone, subject to obtaining a conditional use permit as specified in Section 17.74.010. 
1.  Clubs and lodges, private, nonprofit when site fronting on an arterial street; 
2.  Public and private golf courses; and 
3.  School, private, nonprofit. 
(Prior code § 025.02)  
17.14.030 - Property development standards. 
A.  Lot Requirements. 
1.  Minimum Lot Area. Twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. 
2.  Minimum Lot Width. One hundred (100) feet. 
3.  Minimum Lot Depth. One hundred (100) feet. 
B.  Yard Requirements. 
1.  Building Setback. A building setback of not less than sixty (60) feet from the center line of any street, public or private, or not less than twenty (20) feet from the established street line of any street shall be maintained. 
2.  Side Yard. Each lot shall have side yards of at least twenty (20) feet in width. 
3.  Rear Yard. Each lot shall have a rear yard of at least twenty-five (25) feet. 
C.  Height Limits. 
1.  The maximum height of till dwellings, living quarters, garages, and other buildings permitted in this zone shall be two or thirty-five (35) feet, whichever is less except provided herein. No two-story structure shall be in any single-family zone where there is another dwelling within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the exterior boundaries of the property boundary. 
D.  Off-Street Parking. Off-street parking shall be provided for, subject to the requirement of Section 17.54.010 of this title. 
E.  Architectural Review. All development in the R-E, Residential Estate Zone, is subject to architectural review as set forth in Section 17.72.010 of this title. 
1.  Allow mobilehomes In any residential zone subject to the architectural review process as set forth in Section 17.72.010 of this title. 
2.  All mobilehomes subject to this review process shall be certified under the National Mobilehome Construction and Safety Act of 1974; and permanent foundations shall be approved by the building official; and roof material, roof overhang and exterior finish materials shall be the same as typically used on conventional single-family structures. 
3.  All mobilehomes shall be compatible with surrounding development. 
4.  All mobilehomes subject to the same development standards that apply to a conventional single-family dwelling. 
(Prior code § 025.03)  
Chapter 17.16 - R-S RESIDENTIAL SINGLE-FAMILY ZONE 
 
17.16.010 - Intent and purpose. 
This zone is intended to provide areas within the city where development is limited to low-density concentrations of single-family dwellings, and to stabilize and protect the residential character of such areas. It has the further purpose of the provision of community facilities needed to complement urban residential areas and for institutions which require a residential environment and to minimize traffic congestion and to avoid an overload of utilities designed to service only low-density residential uses. The provisions of this zone are intended to encourage a suitable environment for family life through the regulation of densities of development, yards, fencing, heights and similar aspects of development. 
(Prior code § 030.01)  
17.16.020 - Permitted uses. 
The following uses are permitted in the R-S (residential single-family) zone subject to all provisions of this chapter: 
A.  Primary Uses. 
1.  Single-family detached dwelling; 
2.  Family daycare homes; 
3.  Public parks and playgrounds; 
4.  Temporary subdivision sales offices; 
5.  The keeping of household pets so long as the number thereof does not exceed four dogs or cats, or a combination thereof, over four months of age, and other household pets that shall not be a public nuisance due to odors, noise or public health considerations; 
6.  Licensed day care centers for five or less children; and 
7.  Such other similar uses as are approved by the planning commission. 
B.  Conditional Uses. The following uses are permitted in the R-S (residential single-family) zone subject to the acquisition of a conditional use permit in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.74.010: 
1.  Single-family detached residential subdivisions using flexible standards of the planned development overlay zone in Chapter 17.38; 
2.  Public and quasi-public uses of an educational or religious type, including public and parochial elementary schools, junior high schools, high schools and colleges, commercial child daycare and pre-school facilities, churches, parsonages and other religious institutions; 
3.  Public and private golf courses; 
4.  Fire stations, police stations; 
5.  Libraries, museums; 
6.  Parks, playgrounds, court games and community centers; 
7.  Public utility distribution substations and public service facilities; 
8.  Private lighted or unlighted tennis courts and such other similar uses not to include swimming pools and spas; 
9.  Commercial radio and television towers. 
C.  Accessory Uses. The uses listed below are allowed as incidental uses to an existing permitted or conditional use on the site. 
1.  Utility and recreational uses including garages, carports, pool cabana, storage shed, laundry room, electrical equipment room, shade structure, and similar uses subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.60. 
2.  Swimming pools and related equipment, outdoor kitchen countertops and gas-fired pits/barbeque grills, subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.60. 
3.  Outdoor play courts with lighting up to ten (10) feet in height. 
4.  Greenhouses, date orchards, and other fruit and vegetable gardens for private use. 
5.  Home occupations, and cottage food operations, subject to the provisions of Section 17.58.010. 
6.  Secondary housing units, subject to the regulations listed below. 
a.  One secondary housing unit may be located on a site that contains a single-family residence with an approved two-car garage. 
b.  The secondary housing unit may be located only on sites with at least five thousand five hundred (5,500) square feet of lot area. 
c.  A detached secondary housing unit shall be located in the rear yard portion of the site, and shall not be within ten (10) feet of a corner street line. 
d.  The secondary housing unit shall be subject to an administrative architectural review by the planning director, and shall comply with current residential design guidelines and/or match the exterior building materials of the neighborhood. 
e.  The habitable floor area of a secondary housing unit may be up to thirty (30) percent of the size of the main dwelling or eight hundred (800) square feet, whichever is greater. 
f.  An attached secondary housing unit shall provide a twenty-foot rear yard setback, and a combined side yard setback of fifteen (15) feet, with no less than five feet on any one side. A detached secondary housing unit shall provide a minimum rear yard setback of fifteen (15) feet, a minimum side yard setback of five feet, and shall provide a minimum distance of ten (10) feet from any other structure or from any corner street line. 
g.  The secondary housing unit shall utilize sewer and water services and shall pay the appropriate fees, subject to review and approval by the city's utilities staff. 
h.  Off-Street Parking. A secondary housing unit up to six hundred forty (640) square feet must provide one covered parking space in a garage or carport. A secondary housing unit larger than six hundred forty (640) square feet shall provide two covered parking spaces in a garage or carport. The parking requirements for the secondary housing unit shall be in addition to the two-car garage required for the main residence. 
i.  Address and Building Permit Required. The owner of the property shall obtain a separate address, a building permit, and pay all applicable development impact fees for the secondary housing unit as a separate dwelling unit on the site. 
(Prior code § 030.02) 
(Ord. No. 1026, § 6, 1-12-11; Ord. No. 1075, § 3, 6-10-15)  
17.16.030 - Property development standards. 
The following standards of development shall apply in the R-S (residential single-family) zone: 
A.  General Development Standards. 
1.  Building height shall not exceed thirty (30) feet; not to exceed two stories; 
2.  Not more than one principal dwelling unit shall be located on each lot; 
3.  Front yard setbacks in subdivision developments may be reduced by twenty-five (25) percent provided the average of all such setbacks is not less than the minimum for the district; and 
4.  Off-street parking spaces shall be provided and continuously maintained (free of storage or other obstructions) in accordance with the requirements set forth in Section 17.56.010. 
B.  Lot Area Requirements. The minimum lot area for any new lot created in the R-S (residential single-family) zone shall be as follows: 
1.  Interior Lots. Seven thousand two hundred (7,200) square feet; however, the average lot size for any subdivision shall be a minimum of seven thousand (7,000) square feet. 
2.  Corner Lots. Seven thousand two hundred (7,200) square feet. 
3.  Exception. Whenever a lot is adjacent to a lower density zoning district or an existing developed parcel with a larger lot size than required in the R-S zone, a transition or buffer shall be provided between the adjacent property and a new subdivision, which may include, but is not limited to, lot size, lot width, lot depth, increased setbacks or slopes. The purpose of this transition shall be to minimize the disparity between different densities of development. The adequacy of this transition shall be subject to the review and approval of the planning commission and the city council on a case-by-case basis. 
4.  In the implementation of subsection 3 of this section, any change in a lot size which would leave the lot at a size at least seventy-five (75) percent the size of the largest adjacent developed lot will be presumed appropriate, absent unusual circumstances, and provided the minimum average lot size in the adjacent zone is eight thousand (8,000) square feet or greater. Any application to change a lot to a size lower than said seventy-five (75) percent standard will be permitted only upon showing of good cause. It is the intent of this paragraph to set a standard but also to allow flexibility. 
5.  Minimum lot width shall be sixty (60) feet; corner lots shall be seventy (70) feet minimum. Knuckle or cul-de-sac lots shall be forty (40) feet, provided the average width is sixty (60) feet. 
6.  Minimum lot depth shall be one hundred (100) feet. 
7.  Minimum side yards shall be fifteen (15) feet combined, one of five feet, the other ten (10) feet. 
8.  Minimum street side yard shall be ten (10) feet. 
9.  Minimum front yard shall be fifteen (15) feet for the habitable portion of the residence, and twenty (20) feet for front-loading garages. Side-loaded garages shall be a minimum of twelve (12) feet. The percentage of side-loaded garages shall not exceed fifty (50) percent within any block face. 
10.  Minimum rear yard shall be twenty (20) feet for the main residence. Accessory structures shall comply with the rear yard regulations of Section 17.60.010(F). 
11.  Maximum Lot Coverage. The maximum lot coverage by all buildings, main and accessory, shall be forty (40) percent. 
C.  Additional Regulations and Standards. 
1.  Architectural review by the planning commission is required for development projects involving the construction of more than three dwelling units. The planning commission shall make a decision pursuant to Chapter 17.72 after conducting a public hearing. An administrative architectural review is required by the planning director after routing submitted plans for agency comments, for projects involving new construction of three or fewer dwelling units. 
2.  Minimum Lot Size/Unit Size. 
a.  New single family residential subdivisions in the residential zones shall provide a minimum lot size of seven thousand two hundred (7,200) square feet. 
b.  All new single family homes shall provide a minimum floor area of one thousand fifty (1,050) square feet for one- and two-bedroom homes, and one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet for three-bedroom or larger homes. 
c.  All new single family homes shall provide a four hundred (400) square foot garage. 
3.  Covered Parking. All new single family homes shall provide a two-car garage with a minimum clear dimension of twenty (20) feet by twenty (20) feet. An approved two-car carport in the rear yard may satisfy the minimum parking requirements for an existing single family dwelling, and would qualify the home for a garage conversion into habitable space, provided the driveway and drive approach serving the garage are completely removed and replaced with front yard landscaping. 
4.  Landscaping in the front yard and within the public right-of-way abutting a site shall include the following. 
a.  A minimum of one twenty-four-inch box shade tree and one fifteen-gallon shade tree. 
b.  A minimum of twenty (20) shrubs, espaliers, and succulent plants. Landscaping shall include vertical shrubs to adequately screen the sides of utility boxes or cables boxes without obstructing access to the utility boxes. 
c.  Ground cover in the form of decomposed granite for yard or planter areas less than ten (10) feet in width, and ¾-inch pea gravel or larger gravel for planter or yard areas larger than ten (10) feet in width. 
d.  The use of sod shall be limited to no more than fifty (50) percent of the total required front yard area. The remainder of the yard shall be landscaped utilizing a variety of drought tolerant plant materials including shrubs, espaliers, and succulents. 
e.  The front yard area between the front building line of the home and the street line shall not be paved more than sixty (60) percent of the total front yard area. Those areas that are not paved shall be landscaped in accordance with this section. 
f.  A minimum thirty-inch landscaped planter is required along the interior property line abutting a residential driveway serving an attached garage, unless the side yard serves as an approved driveway, pursuant to Section 17.54.010(H). 
g.  A permanent underground irrigation system shall be installed for the front yard and public right-of-way areas of the site. 
h.  All trees, plants and groundcovers located in the front yard and in the adjacent public right-of-way shall be maintained by the land owner/occupier as needed to avoid overgrowth, and shall be adequately irrigated to avoid loss of plants. Dead plants shall be re-planted as needed with new plantings to provide a well-maintained front yard appearance. 
5.  Walls or fences not exceeding six feet in height shall be constructed in all side and rear yards along the property lines starting at the beginning of any primary structure. In subdivisions of five or more dwellings, solid masonry walls shall be required on side and rear property lines of those dwellings forming the boundaries of the respective subdivision. 
6.  Refer to Section 16.32.170 of the Coachella Municipal Code for proposed changes in product sizes within single-family residential tracts in which a previously approved product was constructed. 
D.  Fencing. All developments in the R-S (residential single family) zone shall have fencing as follows: 
1.  A six-foot high fence on all rear property lines and interior side lot lines. Fences shall be solid and substantially built. Openings in such fences shall be protected by doors which are normally kept closed. 
All wood fences shall be provided a two-inch by four-inch plate, top and bottom, and shall be well braced. 
The fence material shall be a minimum of three-fourths inch boards and shall be vertical in alignment and without interruption. 
2.  In subdivisions of five or more units, fencing on all rear property lines and those side yard lot lines of those units denoting the boundaries of the subdivisions shall be of solid masonry construction. Such walls shall be finished with caps of appropriate size. 
3.  Front and street side yard fencing shall conform to Section 17.60.010(D(3) of this code. 
4.  If a fence exists at the required location, the requirement may be waived. Waiver may be granted if the chief building official, with the concurrence of the director of community development, finds that the existing fence is of sound construction with an expected life of at least ten (10) years. 
E.  Prohibited Uses. The following uses are expressly prohibited in the R-S (residential single-family) district: 
1.  Outdoor advertising displays and billboards. 
F.  Lot Coverage. In no case shall more than forty-five (45) percent of the total lot area be covered by the combined area of the main building(s) and accessory building(s). 
(Ord. 909, 2004; prior code § 030.03) 
(Ord. No. 1021, § 2, 7-28-10; Ord. No. 1075, § 4, 6-10-15)  
Chapter 17.18 - R-O 6000 RESIDENTIAL OVERLAY ZONE 
 
17.18.010 - Intent and purpose. 
This zone is intended to provide adequate housing in a satisfying living environment for all persons regardless of age, race, ethnic background, national origin, religion, family size, marital status, handicap or any other arbitrary factor so long as such use is consistent with sound standards of public health and safety. It has the further purpose of maintaining and promoting residential living environments compatible and in harmony with the previously established patterns of development of existing low and moderate-income housing. As such, the objective of this chapter is to provide the city with a device needed to correct existing shortages and to meet projected growth needs within the city. The content of this chapter is intended to provide incentives to developers to build a range of housing that is affordable to city residents. 
(Prior code § 031.01)  
17.18.020 - Permitted uses. 
The following uses are permitted in the R-O 6000 zone subject to all provisions of this chapter: 
A.  Primary Uses. 
1.  One-family dwellings, subject to the following minimum dwelling unit sizes: 
a.  One-bedroom units shall not be permitted. 
b.  Two-bedroom units shall have a minimum of eleven hundred (1,100) square feet of living area. 
c.  Three-bedroom units shall have a minimum of twelve hundred (1,200) square feet of living area. 
2.  Minimum Dwelling Unit Sizes. 
a.  One and two bedroom units. One thousand (1,000) square feet. 
b.  Three bedrooms or more. One thousand one hundred fifty (1,150) square feet. 
3.  Household pets and gardens as permitted in the R-S zone. 
4.  Such other similar uses as are approved by the planning commission. 
B.  Conditional Uses. The following uses may be permitted subject to obtaining a conditional use permit: 
1.  Secondary housing units subject to the provisions of Section 17.16.020(D). 
2.  Multiple-family dwelling units; 
3.  Manufactured homes, provided they comply with the city's development standards and design guidelines for new single family homes; 
4.  Family daycare homes; 
5.  Boardinghouses, transient occupancy facilities, facilities used for the purposes of providing shelter for migrant agricultural workers, and other such facilities needed for emergency housing; 
6.  Public utility structures and public service facilities; 
7.  Hospitals; 
8.  Schools and colleges, not including art, business or trade schools, both public and private; 
9.  Parks and recreational facilities such as tennis courts and swimming pools without incidental commercial uses, both public and private; and 
10.  Planned unit development subject to the provisions of Chapters 17.38 and 17.52. 
C.  Prohibited Uses. The following uses are expressly prohibited in the R-O 6000 district: 
1.  Outdoor advertising displays or billboards. 
(Prior code § 031.02) 
(Ord. No. 1075, § 5, 6-10-15)  
17.18.030 - Property development standards. 
A.  Required Provisions. At least ten (10) percent of all units in one-family and multifamily units constructed will be required to be affordable to persons earning less than one hundred twenty (120) percent of the median-range income group throughout Riverside County. Half of the "below market rate" or subsidized units are required to be made available to households earning less than eighty (80) percent of the median county income. 
B.  Lot Requirements. All newly created lots shall meet the following minimum dimensions: 
1.  Minimum Lot Area. Six thousand (6,000) square feet. 
2.  Minimum Lot Width. As specified in Section 17.60.010. The width of corner lots shall be sufficient to meet all setback requirements. 
3.  Maximum Lot Coverage. The maximum lot coverage by all buildings, main and accessory shall be forty (40) percent. 
C.  Yard Requirement. 
1.  Minimum Front Yard Setback Depth. Twenty (20) feet except where the garage is a side entry (the door of the garage is perpendicular to the street) then twelve (12) feet. The percentage of side-entry garages with reduced setbacks shall not exceed fifty (50) percent within a subdivision. 
2.  Rear Yard. Each lot shall have a minimum rear yard of fifteen (15) feet. 
3.  Minimum Side Yard Width. 
a.  Interior Lots. Side yard setbacks shall be measured from the property line to the point representing the finished surface of the exterior wall of the dwelling unit. The minimum distance allowed shall not be less than five feet. 
b.  Corner Lots. Side yard setbacks shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet on the street side and a minimum of five feet on the interior lot side. 
D.  Height Limits. 
1.  The maximum height of all dwellings, living quarters, garages and other buildings permitted in this zone shall be two stories or thirty-five (35) feet, whichever is less. 
E.  Off-Street Parking. Off-street parking shall be provided for, subject to the requirements of Section 17.54.010 of this title. 
F.  Application Procedure. 
1.  Individual one-family and two-family dwellings on random lots shall require the approval of the director of community development. 
2.  Multiple dwelling units, either one-family or two-family, shall require approval of the planning commission through the architectural review process. 
G.  Lot Coverage. In no case shall more than forty-five (45) percent of the total lot area be covered by the combined area of the main building(s) and accessory building(s). 
H.  Refer to Section 16.32.170 of the Coachella Municipal Code for proposed changes in product sizes within single-family residential tracts in which a previously approved product was constructed. 
(Prior code § 031.03) 
(Ord. No. 1021, § 3, 7-28-10)  
Chapter 17.20 - R-M MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE 
 
17.20.010 - Intent and purpose. 
This zone is intended to provide for the establishment and expansion of multiple-family residential development areas at various medium and high population densities and related community services, all located in conformance with the general plan. 
(Prior code § 032.01)  
17.20.020 - Permitted uses. 
The following uses are permitted in the R-M zone, subject to all provisions of this chapter: 
A.  Primary Uses. 
1.  Single-family and duplex dwelling unit sizes. 
a.  Single-family dwellings shall conform to the standards as set forth in the R-S (single family) zone (Chapter 17.16). 
b.  Duplex dwellings shall conform to the standards as set forth in the R-O (residential overlay) zone (Chapter 17.18). 
2.  Multi-family, single-family townhouses, two-family townhouses and two-family detached dwellings. 
3.  No mobilehomes shall be allowed. 
B.  Accessory Uses. The following buildings, structures, and uses are permitted when clearly incidental and accessory to the primary permitted use. 
1.  Accessory structures, nonhabitable, including private garages, carports, garden greenhouses, recreation rooms or pool bathhouses and swimming pools. 
2.  Permitted Signs. Only the following signs shall be permitted: 
a.  One unlighted identification sign of a maximum of twenty (20) square feet in area, placed on the wall of the building, containing only the name and address of the building. 
b.  One unlighted sign pertaining to the rental, sale, or lease of the premises, not to exceed ten (10) square feet in area. 
c.  Conditional Uses. The following uses may be permitted in the R-M zone, subject to obtaining a conditional use permit as specified in Section 17.74.010. 
1.  All conditional uses listed in Section 17.16.020(C) of the R-S zone; 
2.  Boarding and lodging houses; 
3.  Child nurseries, day care centers; 
4.  Hospitals, convalescent homes, rest homes, and sanitaria, excepting animal hospitals; subject to the following: 
a.  Minimum lot size shall be five acres. 
b.  All buildings shall be at least fifty (50) feet removed from any lot lines. 
5.  Professional offices and uses accessory thereto, including medical and dental laboratories; subject to the following: 
a.  Minimum lot size shall be twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. 
b.  Access on arterial or collector. 
(Prior code § 032.02)  
17.20.030 - Property development standards. 
A.  Density and Lot Size Requirements. 
1.  Single-family detached residential subdivisions shall comply with the allowable density range of the general plan land use designators. A minimum lot size of five thousand (5,000) square feet shall be required. 
2.  Single-family attached residential subdivisions shall comply with the allowable density range of the general plan land use designators. A minimum lot size of four thousand five hundred (4,500) square feet shall be required. 
3.  Multiple-family residential developments shall comply with the allowable density ranges (dwelling units per acre) of the general plan land use designators. A minimum site area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet is required for multifamily developments of five or more dwelling units. Multifamily residential developments on less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet of site area shall be limited one dwelling unit per three thousand two hundred (3,200) square feet of land area. 
B.  Yard Requirements. 
1.  Front Yard. Each lot or building site shall have a front yard of at least fifteen (15) feet in depth. 
2.  Side Yard. Each lot or building site shall have a minimum side yard as follows: 
a.  Interior and Corner Lots. Ten (10) percent of the lot width, but not less than five feet, and need not be greater than ten (10) feet, except as specified below. 
b.  Street Side of Corner Lots. Ten (10) feet. 
3.  Rear Yard. Each lot or building site shall have a minimum rear yard of twenty (20) feet. 
C.  Height Limit. 
1.  The maximum height of all buildings shall be three stories, or forty-five (45) feet, whichever is less. 
D.  Distance Between Buildings. 
1.  Between two main buildings; 
2.  Between a main building and an accessory building, or between two accessory buildings: Ten (10) feet; 
3.  Between a single-family dwelling and either another single-family dwelling or a multiple-family dwelling: Twenty (20) feet; 
4.  Where one or both of the main buildings above are three stories in height, the distance enumerated above shall be increased by five feet. 
E.  Usable Open Space. 
1.  Usable open space equal to twenty-five (25) percent of the indicated required lot area per dwelling unit shall be provided for each multiple-family dwelling unit. Portions of spaces required under the yard and distance between buildings provisions of this section may be included in the calculation of usable open space, provided they are integrated with and clearly usable as part of a larger area. 
2.  Usable open space may be provided as private outdoor living areas, balconies, decks, or as common recreational-leisure areas. Except in the case of balconies, such areas shall be landscaped. 
3.  Usable open space, when provided as common recreational leisure area, may extend into the required front yard to within five feet of the front lot line, subject to the following provisions: 
a.  No more than forty (40) percent of the required front yard may be so used. 
b.  No permanent structures, except swimming pools and those structures required by law, shall be permitted in the required front yard. 
c.  Such areas shall be screened from the street and adjacent properties by landscaping and/or decorative fencing of a maximum height of forty-two (42) inches, except where a greater height is required by law. 
d.  The remaining portion of the required front yard, except for access drives and walks, shall be landscaped and maintained. 
F.  Off-Street Parking. Off-street parking shall be provided for each dwelling unit subject to the requirements of Section 17.54.010 of this title. 
G.  Architectural Review. All development in the R-M zone is subject to architectural review as set forth in Section 17.72.010 of this title. 
H.  Minimum Dwelling Unit Sizes. 
a.  Minimum floor area per dwelling unit: 
Efficiency 	600 square feet 
One bedroom 	750 square feet 
Two bedroom 	900 square feet 
Each additional bedroom 	150 square feet 
 
b.  Refer to Section 16.32.170 of the Coachella Municipal Code for proposed changes in product sizes within single-family residential tracts in which a previously approved product was constructed. 
(Prior code § 032.03) 
(Ord. No. 1021, § 4, 7-28-10; Ord. No. 1075, § 6, 6-10-15)  
Chapter 17.22 - R-MH MOBILEHOME PARK SUBDIVISION 
 
17.22.010 - Intent and purpose. 
It is the intent of this chapter to provide regulations for the placement of mobilehomes on individual lots within an approved subdivision specifically designed and designated for the sale, not rental, of lots to accommodate mobilehomes as the dwelling unit. The minimum site that may be zoned for this purpose shall be twenty (20) acres, including one-half but not to exceed thirty-three (33) feet of width of adjacent boundary streets dedicated to the public. 
(Prior code § 036.01)  
17.22.020 - Permitted uses. 
The following uses are permitted in the R-MH zone, subject to all provisions of this chapter: 
A.  Primary Uses. 
1.  Mobilehomes for residential use; in no event shall more than one mobilehome be used for residential purposes on a lot. 
B.  Accessory Uses. The following buildings, structures, and uses are permitted when clearly incidental and accessory to the primary permitted use: 
1.  Patio slab, awning, carport or garage, swimming pool, pool bathhouse, storage and washroom building. 
2.  Permitted Signs. Only the following signs shall be permitted: 
a.  One nameplate not to exceed one foot square in area. 
b.  One unlighted sign pertaining to the rental, sale or lease of the premises, not to exceed six feet in area. Such signs shall be located at least ten (10) feet from any property line. 
C.  Conditional Uses. The following uses may be permitted in the R-MH zone, subject to obtaining a conditional use permit as specified in Section 17.74.010. 
1.  Community recreation facilities for the use of individual lot owner within the subdivision may be developed after the provisions for their continued and proper operation have been approved by the planning commission. The maintenance of the community recreation and service areas shall be assured by provisions in the deeds, such as covenants running with the land, providing for participation by the individual lot owners and the responsibility and cost thereof. 
2.  Temporary real estate tract offices, to be used only during the original sale of the subdivision, but not to exceed a period of one year. 
(Prior code § 036.02)  
17.22.030 - Property development standards. 
A.  Lot Requirements. 
1.  Minimum Lot Area. Four thousand five hundred (4,500) square feet. 
2.  Minimum Lot Width. Forty (40) feet. 
3.  Minimum Lot Depth. Ninety (90) feet. 
4.  Minimum Street Frontage. Not less than thirty-five (35) feet. 
B.  Yard Requirement. 
1.  Minimum Front Yard Depth. Twenty (20) feet. 
2.  Minimum Side Yard Width. Five (5) feet. 
3.  Minimum Rear Yard. Five (5) feet. 
C.  Height Limit. 
1.  Primary Use. Fifteen (15) feet. 
2.  Accessory Use. Fifteen (15) feet. 
3.  Conditional Use. Two (2) stories or thirty-five (35) feet, whichever is less. 
D.  Off-Street Parking. Off-street parking shall be provided for, subject to the requirements of Section 17.54.010 of this title. 
E.  On-Site Recreation. 
1.  A concrete slab or other standard metal or wood deck containing at least two hundred (200) square feet shall be installed on each lot prior to placing a mobilehome on each lot for residential purposes. This area is to be in addition to any area required for parking. 
(Prior code § 036.03)  
17.22.040 - Other regulations. 
A.  No R-MH zone shall be applied to an area containing structures that do not conform to the R-MH zone. 
B.  Camping and boat trailers may be stored on the property providing they are kept on the rear half of the lot. All other materials shall be maintained within a completely enclosed storage structure. 
C.  All trailers and mobilehomes shall be kept mobile. 
D.  All trailers and mobilehomes shall carry a current state license. 
(Prior code § 036.04)  
Chapter 17.24 - C-N NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL ZONE 
 
17.24.010 - Intent and purpose. 
This zone is intended to provide for everyday, convenience shopping intended to serve residential neighborhoods, consistent with the environmental requirements of such neighborhoods. Convenience shopping facilities are those which provide space for retail and service businesses serving the immediate neighborhood. The provisions of this zone are intended to minimize or eliminate, insofar as possible, any conflicting aspects of commercial land use within residential neighborhoods, particularly as related to traffic, type of activity, and site requirements. 
(Prior code § 040.01)  
17.24.020 - Permitted uses. 
The following uses are permitted in the C-N zone, subject to all provisions of this chapter: 
A.  Primary Uses. 
1.  Local retail businesses primarily intended to serve the immediate neighborhood, provided that no one use shall exceed five thousand (5,000) square feet of floor area, including the following: 
a.  Grocery, fruit, or vegetable store; meat market; 
b.  Meat, fish, or dressed poultry (no live poultry) sales; 
c.  Bakery; 
d.  Drugstore; 
e.  Reserved; 
f.  Hardware store; and 
g.  Restaurant, cafe or soda fountain, not including entertainment, dancing, sale of liquor, beer or other alcoholic beverages. 
2.  Local service business primarily intended to serve the immediate neighborhood, including the following: 
a.  Barber or beauty shop; 
b.  Child care centers; 
c.  Clothes cleaning and laundry pickup stations, laundromat, coin-operated dry cleaning establishment; 
d.  Offices of physicians, dentists, optometrists, chiropractors, accountants and realtors; and 
e.  Tailor, dressmaker. 
B.  Accessory Uses. The following buildings, structures, and uses are permitted when clearly incidental and accessory to the primary permitted use: 
1.  Signs as follows, subject to all provisions of Section 17.56.010 of this title. 
a.  One unlighted sign pertaining to the rental, sale or lease of the premises, not to exceed twenty (20) square feet in area. 
b.  Advertising signs pertaining only to the goods and services sold on the premises, or to the name of the establishment. The total aggregate area of all signs pertaining to any one establishment shall be eighty (80) square feet. 
2.  Canopies, arcades, carports or similar shading devices. 
3.  Other accessory buildings, structures and uses customarily appurtenant to a primary permitted use. 
C.  Conditional Uses. The following uses may be permitted in the C-N zone, subject to obtaining a conditional use permit as specified in Section 17.74.010 of this title. 
1.  Those uses allowed as conditional uses by Section 17.16.020(C) of the R-S zone; 
2.  Lodges, fraternal organizations, and clubs; 
3.  Automobile service stations; 
4.  Dwelling units, multiple-family, limited to second story; 
5.  Liquor sales, subject to Section 17.74.015; and 
6.  Automotive repair garage as an accessory to automobile service station. 
(Prior code § 040.02) 
(Ord. No. 1088, § 1, 12-14-16)  
17.24.030 - Property development standards. 
A.  Lot Requirements. 
1.  Minimum Lot Area. Five thousand (5,000) square feet parcels not contiguous to C-N zoned property shall have a minimum area of one-half acre. 
2.  Minimum Lot Width. Fifty (50) feet. 
3.  Minimum Lot Depth. None. 
4.  Maximum Lot Coverage. No limit. 
B.  Yard Requirements. 
1.  Front Yard. Where one or both adjoining zones are residential, a yard shall be provided which is equal in depth to the average of the required front yards of the adjoining zones. 
2.  Side Yard. Where a C-N zone adjoins a street or a residential zone, there shall be a side yard of not less than ten (10) feet on the side or sides adjoining such street or residential zone. In the case of a reversed corner lot, the side yard adjoining the street shall be not less than the required front yard of the adjoining key lot to the rear. 
3.  Rear Yard. Where the C-N zone adjoins a residential zone, there shall be a rear yard of not less than ten (10) feet adjoining that residential zone. In the case of a building or structure for residential use, there shall be a rear yard of not less than twenty (20) feet. 
4.  Permitted Encroachments in Required Yard. The yards required in subsections 1—3 of this section may be used as part of an automobile parking area, provided however that a minimum three-foot wide screen planting strip shall be maintained adjacent to the planned highway right-of-way line. 
C.  Height Limit. The maximum height of any building or structure shall be two stories or thirty-five (35) feet, whichever is less. 
D.  Distance Between Buildings. Buildings not actually adjoining shall be provided with a minimum eight-foot separation. 
E.  Off-Street Parking and Loading. Off-street parking and loading facilities shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.54.010 
F.  Screening. Where the C-N neighborhood commercial zone abuts upon any residential zone, there shall be provided screening not less than six feet or more than eight feet in height on the zoning boundary line. Said screening shall be reduced to forty-two (42) inches in height within a setback area adjacent to a street or highway. 
G.  Other Property Development Standards. 
1.  Any structure originally designed or intended for residential purposes may be used for service businesses, (except clothes cleaning, etc.) as permitted in this zone, subject to all provisions of this article, and further subject to the following conditions: 
a.  The required front yard of the structure shall be permanently maintained in landscaping as defined in Section 17.60.010(D)(4). 
b.  All parking shall be provided to the rear of the residential structure. 
c.  All structures shall conform to all provisions of the applicable building, housing and fire codes of the city. 
d.  Signs permitted shall be limited to a total surface area twenty (20) square feet. 
e.  No structure shall be used for residential and commercial uses at the same time. 
2.  All uses shall be conducted entirely within a completely enclosed building, except for off-street parking and loading facilities, and automobile service stations permitted subject to Section 17.24.020(C)(3). 
H.  Architectural Review. All development in the C-N Neighborhood Commercial Zone, is subject to architectural review as set forth in Section 17.72.010 of this title. 
(Prior code § 040.03)  
Chapter 17.26 - C-G GENERAL COMMERCIAL USE ZONE 
 
17.26.010 - Intent and purpose. 
This zone is intended to provide for and encourage the orderly development of commercial areas designed to serve the community-wide needs. Such areas provide a wide variety of goods and services, and must be consistent with the overall development of the city and its environs. The provisions of this zone are intended to insure that such commerce will be compatible with adjacent, noncommercial development, and to minimize the undesirable effects of heavy traffic, type of activity, and to set forth site requirements. 
(Prior code § 042.01)  
17.26.020 - Permitted uses. 
The following uses are permitted in the C-G zone, subject to all provisions of this chapter: 
A.  Primary Uses. 
1.  All uses permitted by subsection A of this section the C-N zone except laundromats/coin-operated dry cleaning establishments. 
2.  Retail Uses; 
a.  Antique shop; 
b.  Appliance store; 
c.  Automobile accessories and parts; 
d.  Art gallery; 
e.  Bicycle shop; 
f.  Bookstore; 
g.  Cigar or tobacco store; 
h.  Clothing or apparel sales; 
i.  Confectionery store; 
j.  Department store; 
k.  Dress or millinery shop; 
1.  Furniture store; 
m.  Hobby shop; 
n.  Interior decorator; 
o.  Jewelry store; 
p.  Lapidary; 
q.  Notions store; 
r.  Reserved; 
s.  Pet shop, including grooming, but no kennel; 
t.  Photographic supplies; 
u.  Radio and television; 
v.  Restaurant without liquor sales; 
w.  Shoe store; 
x.  Studio, dancing, music, art, etc.; 
y.  Sporting goods store; 
z.  Toy store; 
aa.  Unfinished furniture sales (new); 
bb.  Yardage store; 
cc.  Motorcycle sales and accessories; 
3.  Service Businesses. 
a.  Bicycle repair shop; 
b.  Blueprinting service; 
c.  Business, trade schools; 
d.  Drafting service; 
e.  Exhibition hail, theater, auditorium; 
f.  Hotels, motels; 
g.  Job printer; 
h.  Library or reading room; 
i.  Locksmith; 
j.  Medical or dental clinic; 
k.  Microfilm service; 
1.  Mortuary; 
m.  Photo studio; 
n.  Private lodges, clubs, meeting halls; 
o.  Radio, television repair; 
p.  Rental of household, sickroom and office equipment; 
q.  Secretarial service; 
r.  Shoe repair; 
s.  Small appliance repair; 
t.  Telephone answering service; 
u.  Tuxedo/costume rental. 
4.  Office uses of all types, including but not limited to the following: 
a.  Medical and dental offices; 
b.  Administrative, business, executive and editorial; 
c.  Professional offices; 
d.  Financial, insurance, real estate offices, including banks and related institutions; 
e.  General offices. 
5.  Outdoor Uses. Only the following outdoor uses are permitted: 
a.  Automobile service stations, including self-service stations or self-service islands at a store, but only if such self-service establishments maintains restroom facilities for both sexes and water and air for the vehicles; 
b.  New and used automobile sales and mobile home sales, provided that a ten-foot landscaped setback from the planned highway right-of-way line be maintained; 
c.  Plant nurseries, provided that all areas devoted to outdoor storage of other than live plant material shall be completely screened from view from arterial highways and abutting residential properties. No bulk storage of sand, gravel, fertilizer, or other chemical or organic materials is permitted; 
d.  Auto parking and loading area; 
e.  Storage yards; provided, that a ten (10) foot landscaped setback from planned street right-of-way be permanently maintained and that all outside storage shall be completely screened from view from streets, highways and abutting properties. Bulk storage of sand, gravel or other materials which may be conveyed by wind onto adjacent properties shall be located within walled structures allowing enclosure on all sides. 
B.  Accessory Uses. The following buildings, structures, and uses are permitted when clearly incidental and accessory to a primary permitted use: 
1.  Wholesaling of products. 
2.  The manufacturing, processing, treatment or storage of products which is clearly incidental to the retail or service business conducted on the premises, provided that: 
a.  The premises are not the primary source of the production of goods sold on the premises. 
b.  Not more than twenty-five (25) percent of the ground floor area shall be used for such purposes. 
c.  No motor exceeding one horsepower be used for manufacturing, treatment, or processing in connection therewith, and that the total horsepower so used shall not exceed five horsepower. This restriction shall not apply to air conditioning equipment. 
d.  No portion of any building or premises so used shall be less than fifty (50) feet from any residential district. 
3.  Dwelling, where used by a proprietor, manager, or custodian of a use permitted within this zone, provided that the minimum floor area of such a dwelling shall be that which may be required in the R-M zone. 
4.  Signs as follows, subject to all provisions of Section 17.56.010 of this title: 
a.  One unlighted sign pertaining to the rental, sale or lease of the premises, not to exceed twenty (20) square feet in area. 
b.  Advertising signs pertaining only to the goods and services sold on the premises, or to the name of the establishment. The total aggregate area of all signs pertaining to any one establishment shall be one hundred fifty (150) square feet for those establishments with less than one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of gross floor area, and two hundred fifty (250) square feet for those establishments with one thousand five hundred (1,500) or more square feet of gross floor area. 
5.  Canopies, arcades, carports, or similar shading devices. 
6.  Other accessory uses customarily appurtenant to a primary permitted use. 
C.  Conditional Uses. The following uses may be permitted in all sectors of the CG zone subject to obtaining a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.74. 
1.  Drive-in, walk-up or other fast-food establishments; 
2.  Bus terminals, depots, and similar transit facilities; 
3.  Reconditioned or used merchandise sales; 
4.  Ambulance services; 
5.  Car washes; 
6.  Pawn shops; 
7.  Bowling, pool or billiard centers; 
8.  Commercial parking lots; 
9.  Tourist camps; 
10.  Automotive repair garage as an accessory to automobile service station; 
11.  Commercial psychic activities; 
12.  Liquor sales, subject to Section 17.74.015; 
13.  Automobile accessories and parts; 
14.  New and used automobile sales and mobilehome sales; 
15.  Multi-bay auto repair; 
16.  Engineering research and testing firms and laboratories; 
17.  Truck, farm implement and machinery sales and rental, sale of parts; 
18.  Laundromat/coin operated laundry so long as a full time attendant is provided; 
19.  Plumbing shop, provided all outside storage is completely screened; 
20.  Sign manufacture; 
21.  Parcel or overnight delivery services; 
22.  Photocopying, photo processing and blueprinting; 
23.  Ceramic products manufacture; 
24.  Printing establishments; 
25.  Drycleaners; 
26.  Mattress manufacture; 
27.  Bookstore; 
28.  Mortuaries; 
29.  Swap meet, indoor; 
30.  Swap meet, outdoor; 
31.  Multi-tenant retail; 
32.  Tattoo and body piercing parlors; 
33.  Neighborhood recycling centers, pursuant to Chapter 17.90. 
34.  Commercial cannabis testing laboratories, pursuant to Chapter 17.85. 
D.  Area-Specific Conditional Uses. Because of unique or special constraints, the following uses may be permitted within certain specified sectors of the C-G zone subject to obtaining a conditional use permit as specified in Section 17.74.010. Each use is followed by a general location designating areas within the C-G zoning district where these applications may be approved. 
1.  North of Mitchell Drive and East of Frederick Street: 
a.  Automotive repair garage, body and fender works, within a completely enclosed building. 
b.  Upholstering and reupholstering establishments within a completely enclosed building. 
c.  Prohibited in all other areas. 
2.  North of the Highway 86/Highway III split or south of Avenue 52: 
a.  Mini-storage warehouses. 
b.  Storage yards: 
(a)  Building materials, retail sales. 
(b)  Lumber yards, retail sales. 
(c)  Equipment rental yards. 
Prohibited in all other areas. 
(Prior code § 042.02) 
(Ord. No. 1033, § 2, 1-11-12; Ord. No. 1065, § 2, 6-11-14; Ord. No. 1088, § 2, 12-14-16; Ord. No. 1108, § 1, 7-12-17)  
17.26.030 - Property development standards. 
A.  Lot Requirements. 
1.  Minimum Lot Size. Parcels not contiguous to C-G zoned property shall have a minimum area of five acres. 
2.  Minimum Lot Width. Fifty (50) feet. 
3.  Minimum Lot Depth. None. 
4.  Maximum Lot Coverage. No limit. 
B.  Yard Requirements. 
1.  Front Yard. Where one or both adjoining zones are residential, a yard shall be provided which is equal in depth to the average of the required front yards of the adjoining zones. 
2.  Side Yard. Where a C-G zone adjoins a street or residential zone, there shall be a sideyard of not less than ten (10) feet on the side or sides adjoining said street or residential zone. In the case of a reversed corner lot, the side yard adjoining the street shall be not less than the required front yard of the adjoining key lot to the rear. 
3.  Rear Yard. Where the C-G zone adjoins a residential zone, there shall be a rear yard of not less than ten (10) feet adjoining that residential zone. This shall not apply where there exists a public alley separating the two zones. 
4.  Permitted Encroachments in Required Yards. The yards required in subsections 1—3 of this section may be used as part of an automobile parking area, provided however that a minimum three-foot wide screen planting strip shall be maintained adjacent to the planned highway right-of-way lines. 
C.  Height Limits. 
1.  The maximum height of any building within one hundred thirty (130) feet of any residential zone shall be two stories or thirty-five (35) feet, whichever is less. Vehicular rights-of-way shall be included in calculating distance. The distance of one hundred thirty (130) feet is a minimum setback and setbacks requirements may be increased based on safety, privacy, views, noise and light issues. 
2.  The maximum height of all other buildings shall be fifty (50) feet or three stories, whichever is less. 
D.  Distance Between Buildings. Buildings not actually joined, shall be provided with a minimum eight-foot separation. 
E.  Off-Street Parking And Loading. Off-street parking and loading facilities shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.54.010. 
F.  Screening. Where the C-G general commercial zone abuts any residential zone, there shall be provided screening not less than six feet or more than eight feet in height on the zone boundary line. Said screening shall be reduced to forty-two (42) inches in height within a required yard adjacent to a street or highway. 
G.  Other Property Development Standards. 
1.  Any structure originally designed or intended for residential purposes may be used for the purposes indicated below, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  The required front yard of the residential structure shall be permanently maintained in landscaping as defined in Section 17.60.010(D)(4). 
b.  All parking shall be provided to the rear of the residential structure. 
c.  All structures shall conform to all provisions of the applicable building, housing and fire codes of the city. 
d.  Signs permitted shall be limited to a total surface area of twenty (20) square feet. 
e.  No structure shall be used for residential and commercial uses at the same time. 
f.  The following uses shall be permitted: 
(A)  All uses permitted by Section 17.26.020(A)(4). 
(B)  Antique shop; 
(C)  Art gallery; 
(D)  Bather and beauty shop; 
(E)  Bookstore; 
(F)  Drafting service; 
(G)  Dressmaker; 
(H)  Gift shop; 
(I)  Hobby shop; 
(J)  Interior decorator; 
(K)  Knitting shop; 
(L)  Restaurant; and 
(M)  Tailor. 
2.  All uses shall be conducted entirely within a completely enclosed building, except for off-street parking and loading facilities, those outdoor uses permitted by Section 17.26.020(A)(5) and certain uses permitted subject to a conditional use permit by Section 17.26.020(C). 
H.  Architectural Review. All development in the C-G general commercial use zone, is subject to architectural review as set forth in Section 17.72.010 of this title. 
(Prior code § 042.03)  
Chapter 17.28 - C-T TOURIST COMMERCIAL ZONE 
 
17.28.010 - Intent and purpose. 
This zone is intended to provide for and encourage the orderly development of commercial areas designed to serve the needs of tourists and the vacationing and motoring public, consistent with the overall development of the community. Such uses constitute an important an important activity to the community, and are vital to its health and well-being. The provisions of this zone are intended to insure that tourist commercial areas will be compatible with adjacent development. 
(Prior code § 046.01)  
17.28.020 - Permitted uses. 
The following uses are permitted in the C-T zone, subject to all provisions of this chapter: 
A.  Primary Uses. 
1.  Hotel; 
2.  Motel; 
3.  Restaurants without liquor sales; 
4.  Retail establishments for the sale of souvenirs, curios, film, magazines and other products customarily provided to meet the needs of the public; 
5.  Exhibit hall, tourist centers; 
6.  Automobile club offices; 
7.  Outdoor Uses. Only the following outdoor uses are permitted: 
a.  Golf courses, driving ranges; 
b.  Swimming pools; 
c.  Automobile service station. 
B.  Tourist-Related Uses. The following uses are permitted only where integrated with and clearly incidental to a primary use, and where part of a hotel or motel building, and where the intent is to serve the needs of tourists: 
1.  Barber or beauty shop; 
2.  Drugstores; 
3.  Tobacco, candy, newspaper and magazine counter; 
4.  Laundromat, clothes cleaning agency; 
5.  Travel agency; 
6.  Automobile rental agency office (no auto storage or service permitted.) 
C.  Accessory Uses. The following buildings, structures, and uses are permitted when clearly incidental and accessory to primary permitted use: 
1.  Dwelling, where used by a proprietor, manager, or custodian of a use permitted within this zone, provided that the minimum floor area of such a dwelling shall be that which may be required in the R-M zone. 
2.  Ice vending machines, of three-ton capacity or less subject to all other provisions of this zone. Such machines shall be located so as not to interfere with the movement of traffic on the site. 
3.  Recreational buildings, structures, and uses designated to serve the patrons of primary permitted use. 
4.  Signs as follows, subject to all provisions of Section 17.56.010 of this title. 
a.  One unlighted sign pertaining to the rental, sale or lease of the premises, not to exceed twenty (20) square feet in area. 
b.  Advertising signs pertaining to the goods and services sold on the premises, or to the name of the establishment. The total aggregate area of all signs pertaining to any one establishment shall be two hundred fifty (250) square feet. 
5.  Other accessory uses customarily appurtenant to a primary permitted use. 
D.  Conditional Uses. The following uses may be permitted the C-T zone subject to obtaining a conditional use permit as specified in Section 17.74.010. 
1.  Theater, including drive-in; 
2.  Drive-in or walk-up or other fast-food service establishments; 
3.  Bowling alley; 
4.  Billiard parlor; 
5.  Skating rinks; 
6.  Liquor sales, subject to Section 17.74.015; 
7.  Bus terminals, depots, and similar transit facilities; 
8.  Car washes; 
9.  Tourist camps; 
10.  Automotive repair garage as an accessory to automobile service station. 
(Prior code § 046.02) 
(Ord. No. 1088, § 3, 12-14-16)  
17.28.030 - Property development standards. 
A.  Lot Requirements. 
1.  Minimum Lot Size. The minimum lot size shall be ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
2.  Minimum Lot Width. None. 
3.  Minimum Lot Depth. None. 
4.  Maximum Lot Coverage. None. 
B.  Yard Requirement. 
1.  Front Yard. Each lot or building site shall have a front yard of at least fifteen (15) feet in depth, except where one or both adjoining zones are residential, in which case the required yard shall be increased to equal the average of the required front yards of the adjoining zones. 
2.  Side Yard. There shall be no side yard requirement except where a C-T zone adjoins a street or a residential zone, in which case there shall be a side yard of not less than ten (10) feet on the side or sides adjoining said street or residential zones. In the case of a reversed corner lot, the side yard adjoining the street shall be not less than the required front yard of the adjoining key lot to the rear. 
3.  Rear Yard. There shall be no rear yard requirement except where the C-T zone adjoins a residential zone, in which case there shall be a rear yard of not less than ten (10) feet adjoining that residential zone. This shall not apply where there exists a public alley separating the two zones. 
4.  Permitted Encroachments in Required Yards. 
a.  The yards required in subsections 1—3 of this section may be used as part of an automobile parking area, provided however that a minimum three-foot wide screen planting strip shall be maintained adjacent to the planned highway right-of-way line. 
b.  Swimming pools provided as an accessory use to a hotel or motel may encroach into the rear two-thirds of the required front yard. 
C.  Height Limits. 
1.  The maximum height of any building located within one hundred fifty (150) feet of any R-S, single-family residential zone, or any agricultural zone, shall be one story or twenty (20) feet, whichever is less. Vehicular rights-of-way shall be included in calculating the distance. 
2.  The maximum height of all other buildings shall be two stories or thirty-five (35) feet, whichever is less. 
D.  Distance Between Buildings. No requirements, except that buildings not actually adjoining shall be provided with a minimum eight foot separation. 
E.  Off-Street Parking and Loading. Off-street parking and loading facilities shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.54.010. 
F.  Screening. Where the C-T zone abuts upon a residential zone, there shall be provided screening not less than six feet, or more than eight feet in height on the zone boundary line. Said screening shall be reduced to forty-two (42) inches in height within a required yard adjacent to a street or highway. 
G.  Other Property Development Standards. 
1.  All uses shall be conducted entirely within a completely enclosed building, except for off-street parking and loading facilities, those outdoor uses permitted by Section 17.28.020(A)(7), and certain uses permitted subject to a conditional use permit by Section 17.28.020(D). 
2.  No building or structure having exterior walls of sheet metal shall be erected in this zone. 
H.  Architectural Review. All development in the C-T Tourist Commercial Zone, is subject to architectural review as set forth in Section 17.72.010 of this title. 
(Prior code § 046.03)  
Chapter 17.30 - M-S MANUFACTURING SERVICE ZONE 
 
17.30.010 - Intent and purpose. 
This zone is intended to provide for and encourage the orderly development of light manufacturing, wholesaling, and commercial service within the community. Such areas are vital to the community's economic health and well-being. The provisions of this zone are intended to insure that manufacturing service areas will be compatible with adjacent, non-industrial development and will protect such areas from potential hazards of industrial development. 
(Prior code § 050.01)  
17.30.020 - Permitted uses. 
The following uses are permitted in the M-S zone subject to all provisions of this chapter. 
A.  Primary Uses. 
1.  Engineering research and testing firms and laboratories; 
2.  Trailer, camper, mobile home manufacturer or assembly; 
3.  Automotive repair garage, body and fender works, within a completely enclosed building; 
4.  Sales and rental of trucks, autos, farm machinery and implements, and truck and auto parts; 
5.  Bakery; 
6.  Boat building; 
7.  Bottling plant; 
8.  Cabinet shop; 
9.  Carpet cleaning plant; 
10.  Ceramic products manufacture; 
11.  Cleaning and dyeing plant; 
12.  Dairy products processing; 
13.  Drugs manufacture; 
14.  Electrical, electronic, or electro-mechanical machinery manufacturing; 
15.  Food products processing, manufacturing, canning, preserving and freezing; 
16.  Fruit and vegetable packing house; 
17.  Furniture manufacturing, refinishing; 
18.  Garment manufacture; 
19.  Glass manufacture; 
20.  Ice and cold storage plant; 
21.  Laboratories. Experimental, testing, motion picture; 
22.  Laundry; 
23.  Machine shop; 
24.  Metalworking, fabrication, or welding firm; 
25.  Newspaper printing plants; 
26.  Parcel delivery services; 
27.  Photo-engraving, photocopying, photo-processing and blueprinting; 
28.  Plastic, fabrication firm; 
29.  Plumbing shop; 
30.  Prefabricated buildings manufacture; 
31.  Printing establishments; 
32.  Sheet metal shop; 
33.  Sign manufacture; 
34.  Textile manufacture; 
35.  Tire rebuilding, recapping, and retreading; 
36.  Upholstering and reupholstering; 
37.  Wholesale business, storage buildings, and warehouses; 
38.  Woodworking shop; 
39.  Storage yards: 
a.  Contractors storage yards, 
b.  Building materials, 
c.  Lumber yards, 
d.  Machinery, truck rental yards, 
e.  Draying and freight yard, and 
f.  Truck terminal; and 
40.  Retail sales. 
41.  Emergency shelters complying with the following criteria. 
a.  Emergency shelters shall be operated by a responsible agency or organization, with experience in managing or providing social services. 
b.  The shelter shall provide at least one qualified on-site supervisor at all times, plus one attendant for each fifty (50) occupants. 
c.  A shelter shall not be approved when another homeless shelter is existing within three hundred (300) feet of the proposed site. 
d.  Emergency shelters shall provide a setback of thirty (30) feet from the shelter building to any residential zone. 
e.  Parking shall be supplied at a ratio of one vehicle space per ten (10) beds, and one secured bicycle parking area designed to accommodate up to one bicycle per ten (10) beds. 
f.  Each shelter shall be limited to a maximum occupancy of fifty (50) persons, including warming shelters and daytime facilities. 
g.  A management plan shall be required to address how the immediate sheltering needs of individuals who may be turned away from the shelter will be handled. The management plan shall establish a maximum length of time for which clients may be accommodated. 
B.  Accessory Uses. The following buildings, structures, and uses are permitted when clearly incidental and accessory to a primary permitted use: 
1.  Detached dwelling, where used by a proprietor, manager, or custodian of a use permitted within this zone; 
2.  Retail distribution of products produced on the premises (where not the primary retail outlet for said products); 
3.  Storage of equipment, materials, finished products, or refuse basic to operations of a permitted use; 
4.  Signs as follows, subject to all provisions of Section 17.56.010 of this title: 
a.  One unlighted sign pertaining to the rental, sale or lease of the premises, not to exceed twenty (20) square feet in area, 
b.  Advertising signs pertaining to the goods and services sold on the premises, or to the name of the establishment. The total aggregate area of all signs pertaining to any one establishment shall be two hundred (200) square feet; 
5.  Other accessory uses customarily appurtenant to a primary permitted use. 
C.  Conditional Uses. The following uses may be permitted in the M-S zone subject to obtaining a conditional use permit as specified in Section 17.74.010. 
1.  Restaurant with cocktail lounge; 
2.  Stone monument works; 
3.  Exterminating or disinfecting service firm; 
4.  Cotton gins, oil mills, vegetable oil plants; 
5.  Oil cloth or linoleum manufacture; 
6.  Paint, oil, shellac, turpentine, or varnish manufacture; 
7.  Plastic manufacture; 
8.  Planing mills; 
9.  Poultry dressing and packaging; 
10.  Wire and wire products manufacture; 
11.  Service stations; 
12.  Metal plating; 
13.  Automotive repair garage as an accessory to automobile service station; 
14.  Mini storage warehouse; and 
15.  Tattoo and body piercing parlors. 
D.  Industrial-Related Uses. Certain non-industrial uses are functionally related to industrial areas. The following uses are permitted only where intended to serve industrial areas and employees. 
1.  Restaurants and coffee shops; 
2.  Industrial hospitals or clinics; and 
3.  Industrial training center. 
(Ord. 925 § 1, 2005; Ord. 918 § 1, 2005; prior code § 050.02) 
(Ord. No. 1033, § 3, 1-11-12; Ord. No. 1051, § 2, 5-22-13)  
17.30.030 - Property development standards. 
A.  Lot Requirements. 
1.  Minimum Lot Size. Ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
2.  Minimum Lot Width. None. 
3.  Minimum Lot Depth. None. 
4.  Maximum Lot Coverage. None. 
B.  Yard Requirements. None, except in the following instances: 
1.  Where an M-S zone abuts upon a street or highway where two-thirds of the property in the block on the opposite side of the street is zoned residential, a yard shall be provided of ten (10) feet in depth. 
2.  Where an M-S zone abuts upon a street or highway and where one or both adjoining zones are residential, a yard shall be provided which is equal in depth to the average of the required yards of the adjoining zones. 
3.  Where an M-S zone abuts upon a primary highway as designated on the circulation element of the general plan, a yard shall be provided of ten (10) feet in depth. 
4.  Where an M-S zone directly abuts a residential zone, there shall be a yard of not less than thirty (30) feet adjoining that zone. This shall be reduced to twenty (20) feet where there exists a public alley separating the two zones. 
5.  Permitted Encroachments in Required Yards. The yards required in subsections 1—3 of this section may be used as part of an automobile parking area, provided however that a minimum three-foot wide screen planting shall be maintained adjacent to the planned highway right-of-way line. 
C.  Height Limits. 
1.  The maximum height of any buildings or structures located within one hundred fifty (150) feet of any residential zone shall be two stories or thirty-five (35) feet, which ever is less. Vehicular rights-of-way shall be included in calculating distance. 
2.  The maximum height of all other buildings or structures shall be fifty (50) feet. 
D.  Distance Between Buildings. No requirements, except that buildings not actually adjoining shall be provided with a minimum eight-foot separation. 
E.  Off-Street Parking and Loading. Off-street parking and loading facilities shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.54.010. 
F.  Walls and Screening. 
1.  Where an M-S zone abuts upon any residential zone there shall be provided a solid masonry wall not less than six feet nor more than eight feet in height along the zone boundary. Said wall shall be reduced to forty-two (42) inches in height within a required yard adjacent to a street or highway. 
2.  Where property in an M-S zone is used for operations incidental to a primary permitted use, as a storage yard, or where material necessary to the conduct of a primary permitted use is stored outside, there shall be provided screening not less than six feet or more than eight feet in height. Said screening shall screen storage areas from adjacent residential and/or commercial zones. 
G.  Other Property Development Standards. 
1.  No structure originally designed or intended for residential purposes shall be occupied by uses permitted in this zone, except when used as a dwelling by a proprietor, manager or custodian or custodian of a permitted use. 
2.  No use shall be established in any M-S zone which causes or emits any dust, gas, smoke, fumes, odors, noises, vibrations, electromagnetic disturbance, radiation, or other similar effects which are or may be detrimental to the public health, safety or general welfare. All uses shall be continuously maintained so that they are neither obnoxious or offensive by reason of the above emissions. 
3.  All lot area not in use by buildings shall be paved, planted, or otherwise surfaced to eliminate dust. Use of gravel, decomposed granite and similar materials is permitted, subject to continuous maintenance in a neat and sightly manner. Use of oil is permitted only where treated areas will not be visible from public streets, or adjacent residential or commercial zones. Yards and off-street parking and loading areas shall be treated as required in this title. 
H.  Architectural Review. All development in the M-S, Manufacturing Service Zone, is subject to architectural review as set forth in Section 17.72.010 of this title. 
(Prior code § 050.03)  
Chapter 17.32 - M-H HEAVY INDUSTRIAL ZONE 
 
17.32.010 - Intent and purpose. 
This zone is intended to provide for and encourage the orderly development of heavy industrial areas within the community. Such areas are vital to the community's health and well-being and must be protected from intrusion by dwellings and inharmonious commercial uses. The provisions of this zone are intended to provide an industrial environment which will be compatible with the inherent characteristics of heavy industry, and also to provide proper safeguards and appropriate transition for surrounding land uses. 
(Prior code § 055.01)  
17.32.020 - Permitted uses. 
The following uses are permitted in the M-H zone subject to all provisions of this chapter. 
A.  Primary Uses. 
1.  All uses permitted by Section 17.30.020 of the M-S zone, except emergency shelters; 
2.  Blacksmith shop; 
3.  Cotton gins, oil mills, vegetable oil plants; 
4.  Exterminating or disinfecting service firm; 
5.  Glass manufacture; 
6.  Hemp products manufacture; 
7.  Heavy metals fabrication; 
8.  Oil cloth or linoleum manufacture; 
9.  Oil Paint, oil, shellac, turpentine, or varnish manufacture; 
10.  Paper, pulp manufacture; 
11.  Plastic manufacture; 
12.  Planing mills; 
13.  Poultry dressing and packaging; 
14.  Railroad yards, repair shops; 
15.  Salt works; 
16.  Slaughterhouses; 
17.  Soap manufacture; 
18.  Stone monument works; and 
19.  Wire and wire products manufacture. 
B.  Accessory Uses. The following buildings, structures and uses are permitted when clearly incidental and accessory to a primary permitted use: 
1.  Detached dwelling, where used by a proprietor, manager, or custodian or a use permitted within this zone; 
2.  Retail distribution of products produced on the premises where not the primary retail outlet for said products; 
3.  Signs as permitted in the M-S zone; 
4.  Storage of equipment, materials, finished products, or refuse basic to operations of a permitted use; and 
5.  Other accessory uses customarily appurtenant to a primary permitted use. 
C.  Conditional Uses. The following uses may be permitted in the M-H zone subject to obtaining a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.74. 
1.  Acid manufacture; 
2.  Animal (including fish) products manufacture or processing; 
3.  Asphalt or asphaltic concrete manufacturing plants; 
4.  Borrow pits; 
5.  Brick yards; 
6.  Breweries and alcoholic beverage manufacture; 
7.  Bulk distributing stations—Hazardous materials; 
8.  Cement block, concrete block manufacture, storage yards; 
9.  Concrete ready-mix plants; 
10.  Community recycling collection facilities, pursuant to Chapter 17.90; 
11.  Creosote manufacture; 
12.  Distillation of alcohol, bones, coal, coal tar, coke, wood; 
13.  Drop forge industries; 
14.  Explosives or fireworks manufacture; 
15.  Feed yards, feed mills; 
16.  Foundry; 
17.  Gas manufacture, including but not limited to chlorine and other noxious gases; 
18.  Glue manufacture; 
19.  Livestock sales and feed yards; 
20.  Lamp black manufacture; 
21.  Prison, jail, correctional facility or detention facility; 
22.  Quarries; 
23.  Rock crushing operations; 
24.  Smelting operations; 
25.  Tannery; 
26.  Tar distillation or tar products manufacture; 
27.  Transfer station, small scale, pursuant to Chapter 17.90; 
28.  Winery. 
D.  Industrial-Related Uses. Certain nonindustrial uses are functionally related to industrial areas. The following uses are permitted only where intended to serve industrial areas and employees. 
1.  Restaurants and coffee shops; 
2.  Industrial hospital or clinics; and 
3.  Industrial training center. 
(Prior code § 055.02) 
(Ord. No. 1051, § 3, 5-22-13; Ord. No. 1065, § 3, 6-11-14)  
17.32.030 - Property development standards. 
The property development standards of Section 17.30.030 shall apply to all M-H zones. 
(Prior code § 055.03)  
Chapter 17.34 - M-W WRECKING YARD ZONE 
 
17.34.010 - Intent and purpose. 
This zone is intended to provide for, and to encourage the orderly development of heavy industrial uses and recycling operations deemed to be of regional significance, but of such nature that extra care must be taken in the regulation of said uses to protect the community's health and wellbeing, and where said uses are subject to aesthetic and environmental conditions which require the provision of safeguards to control and suppress some of the heavier manifestations of said uses to prevent adverse effects on the community. 
(Prior code § 057.01; Ord. No. 1065, § 4, 6-11-14)  
17.34.020 - Permitted uses. 
A.  Primary Uses. 
1.  All uses permitted by Section 17.32.030(A) of the M-H zone; 
B.  Accessory Uses. The following buildings, structures, and uses are permitted when clearly incidental and accessory to a primary permitted use. 
1.  Those uses permitted by Section 17.32.020(B) of the M-H zone. 
C.  Conditional Uses. The following uses may be permitted in the M-W zone subject to obtaining a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.74 of this code. 
1.  Those conditional uses allowed by Section 17.32.020(C) in the M-H zone; 
2.  Automobile dismantling or wrecking yard; 
3.  Automobile impounding yard; 
4.  Community recycling collection facilities, pursuant to Chapter 17.90; 
5.  Construction and demo material recycling facilities pursuant to Chapter 17.90; 
6.  Wood and green waste recycling facilities, pursuant to Chapter 17.90. 
7.  Medical cannabis cultivation, manufacturing, distribution, testing, and transportation facilities, pursuant to Chapter 17.85. 
D.  The following uses may be permitted in the M-W zone subject to obtaining a specific plan adoption pursuant to Chapter 17.36 of this code. 
1.  Transfer station, large scale, pursuant to Chapter 17.90. 
(Prior code § 057.02; Ord. No. 1065, § 4, 6-11-14) 
(Ord. No. 1083, § 2, 1-27-16)  
17.34.030 - Property development standards. 
A.  Lot Requirements. 
1.  Minimum Lot Area. Ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
2.  Minimum Lot Width. One hundred (100) feet. 
3.  Minimum Lot Depth. One hundred (100) feet. 
4.  Maximum Lot Coverage. None. 
B.  Yard Requirements and Height Limits. The yard requirements and height limits as set forth in Section 17.30.030(B) and (C), respectively, shall apply in the M-W zone. 
C.  Enclosure Required. All operations and storage, including all equipment used in conducting an automobile dismantling or junk and salvage business, other than parking, shall be conducted within an enclosed building, or within an area enclosed by screening. 
D.  Requirements for Screening. Where screening is provided, it shall be developed as provided in this chapter: 
1.  All screening shall be of a uniform height in relation to the ground upon which it stands, and shall be a minimum of eight feet and shall not exceed ten (10) feet in height. Where screening exceeds a height of eight feet and is located on street or highway frontages, it shall be set back at least three feet from the lot line. The area between the screening and the lot line shall be fully landscaped. 
2.  Two gates not less than eight feet in height and not more than twelve (12) feet in width each, may be installed at a convenient place in said screening. Such gates shall be kept closed when not in use. Such gates shall be of material and color compatible with said screening. 
E.  Paving. All driveways, fire lanes, or other access ways shall be paved with an asphalt surfacing or an oil and aggregate mixture to prevent emission of dust or tracking of dust and mud onto public rights-of-way, provided however, the planning commission may approve other paving materials while provide, in their opinion, the equivalent in service and useful life. 
F.  Parking Spaces. 
1.  Regardless of the size of the yard area, a minimum of six parking spaces shall be provided. 
2.  The parking spaces required herein shall not be used for the parking of vehicles used directly in the conducting of such use or of renovated, repaired, or reassembled vehicles which are owned, operated or in the possession of the proprietor of the automobile dismantling yard, or junk and salvage yard. 
G.  Landscaping. At least two square feet of landscaping shall be provided for each lineal foot of street frontage and said landscaping shall be developed in accordance with a site plan that complies with the following criteria: 
1.  Landscaping shall be distributed along said frontage in accordance with the site plan approved by the planning commission. 
2.  No planting area shall have a horizontal dimension of less than three feet. 
3.  A permanent watering system or hose bibs shall be provided which satisfactorily irrigates all planted area. When hose bibs are utilized, they shall be located not more than twenty-five (25) feet apart. 
4.  All landscaped areas shall be continuously and properly maintained in good condition. 
H.  Junk Outside Yard. No wrecked or dismantled vehicles, salvage or junk shall be placed or allowed to remain outside of the enclosed yard area. 
I.  Junk Exceeding Height of Wall. No wrecked or dismantled vehicles, salvage or junk shall be stored at a height greater than that of the surrounding screening. 
J.  Architectural Review. All development in the M-W, wrecking yard zone, is subject to architectural review as set forth in Section 17.72.010 of this title. 
(Prior code § 057.03)  
Chapter 17.36 - SPECIFIC PLAN DISTRICT 
 
17.36.010 - Intent and purpose. 
The purpose of this district includes the following: 
A.  To encourage the planned development of parcels and to permit comprehensive site planning and building design; 
B.  To provide a more flexible regulatory procedure by which the basic public purpose of the city's general plan and the city's zoning code may be accomplished; 
C.  To encourage creative approaches to the use of land through variation in siting of buildings and the appropriate mixing of several land uses, activities and dwelling types; 
D.  To enhance the appearance and living environment of the community through encouragement of creative approaches to the use of land and the design of facilities; 
E.  To promote and create public and private open space as an integral part of land development design; 
F.  To reduce, when appropriate, the amounts of public and private improvements normally required by developments; 
G.  To maximize choice in types of environments available in the city; and 
H.  To encourage private development of older areas of the city and for the enhancement and preservation of property with unique features, such as property having historical significance, unusual topography and landscape features. 
(Prior code § 058.01)  
17.36.020 - General requirements for a specific plan proposal. 
A.  Property that is held in single or multiple ownerships may be considered for a specific plan. The city, property owner or his or her representative may initiate the specific plan proposal. Components of the specific plan shall include the submittal of a development plan and text. Land development within the specific plan area shall be initiated and completed by the applicant or his or her agents, whichever the case may be. Unless otherwise provided in the approval of the specific plan, the applicant may divide and transfer units within the specific plan area, provided the total density permitted by the specific plan is not exceeded. The applicant or his or her agent shall complete, use and maintain the development in strict accordance with the specific plan and subsequent conditions of approval as required. To be in addition to; in concert with etc. 
B.  All provisions of this district are supplemental to the city's subdivision ordinance. Any site plans and/or maps contemplated for the specific plan area or for portions thereof may be processed concurrently with the specific plan as specified under this chapter. 
(Prior code § 058.02)  
17.36.030 - General provisions and standards for a specific plan district. 
The following provisions shall apply in this specific plan district, together with all other applicable provisions of the city's zoning and subdivision ordinances. Where conflict in a regulation occurs, the regulations specified in this district or in an approved specific plan shall supersede and apply: 
A.  Specific plan zones may be established pursuant to the regulations and requirements specified in the specific plan district ordinance codified in this appendix to the Municipal Code. It is the intent of the individual specific plan zones to provide innovative development plan design and development standards in which development standards may vary between specific plan zones. 
B.  The specific plan shall consist of a development plan and text material and is recognized as a guide to the developers and designers of land use plans for the property. The development standards are, in effect, performance standards, the ramifications of which become manifest when a site plan has been drawn. 
C.  Specific plan zones may be established on parcels of land which are suitable for and of sufficient size to be planned and developed in a manner consistent with the purposes of this district. Such suitability and scope shall be reviewed and approved by the planning commission and shall be in accordance with the general plan. 
D.  The purpose of this district may be accomplished only upon satisfactory demonstration by the applicant that the specific plan is in conformance with the intent of the city's general plan and any element thereof, and in accordance with other applicable plans and policies adopted by the city. 
E.  Specific plans may combine several land uses on the development plan. Mixed uses may include any combination of residential, commercial, industrial, open space and agricultural uses, and may occur among or within buildings as long as the uses are compatible with each other and with existing and potential uses surrounding the specific plan zone. 
F.  Standards for building coverage, light and air orientation, building height, sign placement and design, yard requirements, open spaces, off-street parking, and screening for specific plan uses and other specified standards shall be governed by the development standards set forth in the specific plan and subsequent documents. 
G.  The provision of public and private open space, as an integral part of land development planning and design, is set forth as a purpose of this specific plan district. The specific plan shall contain criteria providing for open space and performance standards for the improvement and maintenance of required open space. 
H.  All electrical and telephone facilities, fire alarm conduits, street light wiring, cable television, and other wiring, conduits or facilities shall, where feasible, be placed underground. Electric and telephone facilities shall be installed in accordance with standard specifications of the serving utilities. 
I.  Standards for private and public improvements shall be governed by the specific plan and may vary from adopted city standards. 
(Prior code § 058.03)  
17.36.040 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning indicated: 
"Applicant" means the party filing the application for and requesting a specific plan zone designation for particular parcels) of land. The applicant may be the city, a property owner or a group of property owners or their designated representative for the particular parcel(s) of land for which the specified plan zone is requested. 
"Building permit" means a permit issued by the city that allows the building of a structure, according to the specified conditions of the permit, where located on the approved grading plan. 
"Conceptual" means a working combination of land uses and development intensities designed as a mandatory component of the draft specific plan. 
"Criteria" means the actual means employed to review and judge the effectiveness of the specific plan. 
"Dedicated" means land, improvements, or both, dedicated by the landowner or developer to a public or quasi-public agency thereby releasing certain obligations from the land-owner or developer. 
"Development plan" means a mandatory requirement of the specific plan identifying areas on a map proposed for various land uses, backbone circulation systems, public use areas, open space areas, major landscape features and other general items as required by the city. 
"Development standards" means a set of customized standards devised for the purpose of guiding and controlling future development on the property to ensure compliance with the proposed character of design described in the specific plan. They may be developed for a particular project or reference existing zoning districts. 
"Draft specific plan" means a preliminary compilation of specific plan components, including conceptual plans of the development plan and an outline of the text material, the purpose of which is to expose the development concept and to solicit city responses and comments on the development concept. 
"Environmental studies" includes various requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act. 
"Final specific plan" means a final representation of the proposed development for a specific plan area that includes the information required by the city. The final specific plan, as approved by the planning commission and city council, shall be considered an official zoning document for parcel(s) with approved specific plan (SP) zoning as placed on the official zoning map. 
"Grading permit" means a permit issued by the city that allows grading to occur, according to the specified conditions of the permit, on the terrain of the specific plan area. 
"Performance standards" means the development standards provided by the specific plan area to be enforced as performance standards when detailed site plans and subdivision maps are prepared. Project design is to be evaluated by the measure of performance described by the development standards. 
"Private open space" means open-space lands identified in the specific plan that are recognized as being for the private use, enjoyment or primary benefit of a limited group of people, generally restricted to the residents and their guests of the specific plan area. 
"Public open space" means open-space lands identified in the specific plan that are recognized as being for the use, enjoyment or primary benefit to the general public. 
"Reservation (reserved)" means the setting aside of land for a specific purpose as required in the specific plan. 
"Site plan" means a detailed development plan illustrating the precise locations and dimensions of parcels, buildings, circulation systems, public uses, urban design elements and other precise development elements as required by the city, the specific plan district or, as necessary, to illustrate site plan concepts. 
"Specific plan" means the legal document consisting of a development plan and text material that describes the character and building intensity of proposed development standards to guide developers and designers of the property. 
"Specific plan designation" means a special-purpose specific plan area that is designated in the city's general plan. The development intensity policy is designated on the general plan. All areas that have a specific plan designation in the city's general plan must be developed with an approved specific plan and must have specific (SP) plan zoning. 
"Specific plan district" means that district of the Coachella Zoning Ordinance permitting the establishment of specific plan zones. 
"Specific plan zones" means an official zone established for specific parcel(s) of land for which particular intensities of land uses or combination of land uses are proposed and guided by a specific plan document. A designation of (SP) is placed on the city's official zoning map upon approval, by ordinance, of specific plan zoning for parcel(s) of land. 
"Subsequent reviews" means reviews of discretionary actions, as required to complete the development process concurrent with or subsequent to specific plan and specific plan (SP) zone approval. 
"Text material" means a mandatory requirement of the specific plan describing, in written form, the character of the proposed development standards. 
(Prior code § 058.04)  
17.36.050 - Application procedure. 
The application procedure allows the applicant to receive conditional specific plan (SP) zoning prior to final specific plan approval. (See Exhibit "A", Specific Plan Process, found on file in the office of the city clerk). The application for specific plan (SP) zoning shall be made on a form supplied by and submitted to the planning staff for review. It shall be the responsibility of the planning staff to contact interested departments and all agency personnel regarding necessary meetings with the applicant. 
(Prior code § 058.05)  
17.36.060 - Conditional specific (SP) plan zoning procedure. 
The purpose of selecting the process for conditional specific plan (SP) zoning is to allow the applicant to receive an (SP) zoning designation for properties prior to preparing and submitting specific land documents. 
A.  Subsequent to acceptance of any application for conditional specific plan (SP) zoning by the planning staff, the city shall conduct the necessary public hearings as provided in Chapters 17.70—17.82 of this title. 
B.  At such time as conditional specific plan (SP) is approved, the planning commission shall determine the residential, commercial or industrial development intensity policy, as provided in Section 17.36.070 of this chapter and it shall be placed on the city's official zoning map. This zoning designation will remain conditional until a final specific plan is approved for the subject parcel(s). 
C.  The applicant shall submit a draft specific plan to the planning staff for review and comment. The draft specific plan shall consist of conceptual plan for the development plan and a general outline describing the content of the text material, as provided in Section 17.36.080 of this chapter. 
D.  The applicant shall submit a final specific plan to the planning staff for processing to the planning commission for review and comment. The final specific plan shall consist of the information contained in the draft specific plan and additional information, as provided in Section 17.36.090 of this chapter. 
E.  The city shall notice said specific plan and conduct necessary public hearings as provided in Chapters 17.70—17.82 of this code. Upon approval of the final specific plan, the specific plan (SP) zoning designation will be implemented thereby removing the conditional status. 
(Prior code § 058.06)  
17.36.070 - Residential, commercial or industrial development intensity policy. 
A.  The residential, commercial or industrial development intensity policy shall be established for each specific plan zone concurrent with the approval of specific plan (SP) zoning or other applicable zoning district(s). The planning commission shall determine the allowable development intensity for specific plan zones and shall designate said density on the official zoning map of the city and/or as described in the text of the zoning code. 
B.  Development intensity for specific plan zones shall be determined by one of two processes described as follows: 
1.  Development intensity for specific plan zones may be governed by the land use category designated in the city's general plan, or in other city plans and policies that may be in the process of preparation. 
2.  Development intensity for specific plan areas shall generally be evaluated with reference to other similar specific plan developments or evaluation procedures within the city, or in the case where other similar developments do not exist, with reference to other similar developments in comparable jurisdictions. 
(Prior code § 058.07)  
17.36.080 - Draft specific plan. 
The draft specific plan shall describe the intensity of land uses proposed and their interrelationship, and shall not be construed to endorse the precise location of uses, configuration of parcels or engineering feasibility. The draft specific plan shall be submitted to the planning staff, and shall include the following information: 
A.  A preliminary plan of the development plan for the entire specific plan area delineated on one or more maps showing: 
1.  Project land uses, densities, existing and proposed major streets, public use areas (schools, parks, fire stations, etc.) and open space and major landscape features. 
2.  General plan, regional and sub-regional or community plan land use designations. 
3.  Slope analysis, utilizing categories provided by the planning staff. Included in the slope analysis is the number of acres in each slope category; 
B.  A general outline of the text material describing the general objectives/concept; a tabulation of the land area to be devoted to various uses, including open spaces, a calculation of the overall density and the average densities per net residential acre of the various residential areas; and a summary of development standards for commercial or industrial uses when those uses are proposed. The text material shall include development standards to be implemented as performance standards for the specific plan area: 
1.  A statement proposing the method of maintaining common open areas and facilities. 
2.  A description of the proposed grading program. 
3.  Identification of proposed future ownership and maintenance of streets, driveways, sidewalks, pedestrian ways and open space areas. 
4.  A discussion of the project as it relates to each of the general plan elements, including land use, circulation, open space safety, noise, housing; conservation and community design. If a community plan is adopted or pending that includes the project site, the relationship of the project with the growth management plan should be discussed. 
C.  After planning commission review, the planning staff shall furnish the applicant with written comments regarding, the review conference(s), including appropriate recommendations to inform and assist the applicant prior to preparing the final specific plan. 
(Prior code § 058.08)  
17.36.090 - Final specific plan. 
The final specific plan shall consist of the information contained in the draft specific plan and other additional as determined by the planning staff, planning commission, city council or redevelopment agency. This additional information shall include all or a portion of the following: 
A.  Survey of the property, showing existing features including trees, structures, streets, easements, utility lines, land uses, existing zoning, and existing ownerships; 
B.  Topographic map showing area of major grading; 
C.  Proposed standards for height, open space, building intensity and public improvements; 
D.  Copies of legal documents required for dedication or reservation of public or private open space, or for the creation of homeowner's associations for open space maintenance. 
(Prior code § 058.09)  
17.36.100 - Criteria for reviewing specific plans. 
Before recommending approval, the planning commission and city council shall find that the proposed development conforms to the following criteria: 
A.  The location and design of the proposed development shall be consistent with the goals and policies of the city's general plan and with any other applicable plan or policies adopted by the city, or in the process of being prepared and adopted. 
B.  The proposed location shall allow the development to be well-integrated with or adequately buffered from its surroundings, whichever may be the case. 
C.  All vehicular traffic generated by the development, either in phased increments or at full build-out, is to be accommodated safely and without causing undue congestion upon adjoining streets. 
D.  The final specific plan shall identify a methodology(s) to allow land uses to be adequately serviced by existing or proposed public facilities and services. In appropriate circumstances, and as provided elsewhere by this code, the city may require that suitable areas be reserved for schools, parks and pedestrian ways; or public open spaces shall be dedicated or reserved by private covenant for the common use of residents, establishments or operations in the development. 
E.  The overall design element of the specific plan will produce an attractive, efficient and stable development. 
F.  In accordance with the requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), impacts have been reduced to a level of nonsignificance, or in the case where impacts remain, a statement of overriding considerations must be adopted to justify the merits of project implementation. 
(Prior code § 058.10)  
17.36.110 - Approval by ordinance. 
Approval of the final specific plan and/or establishment of (SP) specific plan zoning may be by resolution or by ordinance. Approval of zoning to the specific plan zone shall include, but not be limited to, the following stipulations: 
A.  Unless otherwise specified in the final specific plan, the regulations provided in the city zoning code shall apply. Approval of the specific plan shall not be interpreted as waiving compliance with other provisions of this code, except in those areas where the specific plan expressly regulates a use. 
B.  The approved final specific plan shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and in the office of the planning staff. 
C.  No building shall be constructed, maintained or used other than for the purpose specified in the approved final specific plan, as filed, nor prior to the approval of a site plan as required in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 058.11)  
17.36.120 - Specific plan approval, denial and modifications. 
A.  The planning commission may recommend to the city council approval or denial of the specific plan, or may recommend approval subject to specified modifications and conditions. 
B.  The city council may approve, approve with modifications or conditions, or deny the final specific plan; provided, that in overruling a planning commission recommendation for denial, the city council shall make the finding listed in Section 17.36.100 of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 058.12)  
17.36.130 - Concurrent actions. 
The planning commission and the city council may act upon a subdivision map and site plan for all portions of the final specific plan concurrently with an approval action on the final specific plan. 
(Prior code § 058.13)  
17.36.140 - Site plan and subdivision map review. 
A.  The purpose of a site plan is to provide the city with a detailed development plan that utilizes the development standards defined in the specific plan. The following criteria shall be applied to all portions of the specific plan requiring site plan review: 
1.  A topographic map or sufficient detail to show all cuts and fills, precise drainage and flood-control proposals, and boundary data; 
2.  Detailed site plan, showing lot or site dimensions; traffic and pedestrian circulation; location, widths, grades and types of improvements proposed for all streets, parking areas, driveways, walkways, trails, utilities and other public improvements; building height, location, size and proposed use; yards and space between buildings and distances from property lines and right-of-ways, walls, fences to include location, height and materials; location, size and height of all signs; and loading areas; 
3.  Building plans and elevations (typical); 
4.  A landscape, staking and irrigation plan; 
5.  A tentative subdivision map shall be submitted, if applicable, showing precise divisions of the land for sale or lease of individual property, if any, as provided in the State Map Act and the city's subdivision ordinance; 
6.  Location and dimensions of public or quasi-public areas, including, but not limited to, schools, parks, playgrounds and parking areas. The area of required open space and parks shall be based on this code in effect at the time of tentative map filing; 
7.  A statement setting forth a program for installation and continued maintenance of parking areas; location and general design of lighting, courts, public and private grounds, landscaping, streets, utilities, parks, playgrounds or public or quasi-public community buildings and facilities. 
B.  Within forty-five (45) days following acceptance of the application for site plan approval, and after all environmental certifications have been obtained, the planning commission may approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the proposed site plan, and shall notify the applicant of its action. 
C.  An appeal of the planning commission action may be made to the city council by the applicant in accordance with the appeal procedure of this district. 
(Prior code § 058.14)  
17.36.150 - Site plan modifications. 
Modifications shall be processed as a site plan amendment and shall be subject to all site plan procedures. 
(Prior code § 058.15)  
17.36.160 - Dedication—Maintenance of open space. 
A.  The planning commission or city council, as the appropriate responsible reviewing body, may, as an approval, require that suitable areas for parks be dedicated or in-lieu fees be paid as determined for the entire specific plan area, and for schools and other public use facilities land be reserved for public use or be reserved for the owners and residents in the development by deed restrictions. Whenever group or common open space is provided, whether required or not, the planning commission or city council shall, as a condition of approval upon review, require that some provision be made for perpetual maintenance of such open space. The form of any instrument used to assure open space maintenance shall be approved by the city attorney and planning staff as to form and content. Agreements and covenants running with the land shall include provisions for charges to be levied for carrying out the specified functions and administrative expenses of such perpetual maintenance. The city shall be a party in interest in any such development and may, by mandatory injunction or other appropriate actions, enforce the provisions of this district. 
B.  To assure that open space shall be available for the specific plan zone, public sites and transfer of development rights within the specific plan area in exchange for open spaces shall be dedicated in advance of development (prior to issuance of the first building permit). 
(Prior code § 058.16)  
17.36.170 - Tentative and final subdivision map. 
A.  A master subdivision map or parcel map, the purpose of which is to subdivide large parcels, may be prepared and submitted for approval to the city prior to individual site plan and tentative map approval. A grading permit based on all or a portion of this master subdivision map or parcel map may be issued after approval of such master subdivision map or parcel map. 
B.  A tentative subdivision map or parcel map, submitted in combination with or after approval of the site plan, shall not be approved for recordation by the city council until after the specific plan (SP) zoning and an approved final specific plan have become effective. 
C.  No building permit shall be issued until a final subdivision map or parcel map, if required, has been prepared for the site plan or any approved state thereof, in compliance with the State Map Act and city's subdivision ordinance. 
(Prior code § 058.17)  
17.36.180 - Site plan and tentative subdivision map appeal. 
The applicant may appeal the action of the planning commission in writing to the city council. Such appeal shall be filed in triplicate with the planning staff within ten (10) days after the decision. The planning staff shall forward the triplicate copy of the appeal to the city clerk and planning commission. The city council shall consider the appeal at a regular meeting within thirty (30) calendar days following the receipt by the clerk of the triplicate copy, or within such time as the council shall continue the matter. The city council shall review the site plan and shall recommend approval, approval with conditions or disapproval. 
(Prior code § 058.18)  
Chapter 17.38 - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS 
 
17.38.010 - Intent and purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for attractive, planned, residential districts in accordance with the general plan; to provide a means of achieving greater quality, variety and flexibility in residential development on relatively large areas of land; to encourage more imaginative and innovative design of projects; to promote more desirable living environments that would not be possible through the strict application of zoning standards; to assist in the development of old or blighted neighborhoods by providing incentives for higher quality multiple residential housing and project design; to require a more efficient use of open space, separation of pedestrian and vehicular traffic and increased project amenities; to insure that such projects will be assets to their surrounding neighborhoods, and safeguards will be required through the conditional use procedure. The overall plan shall provide equivalent or higher standards of development, operation, light, air, safety, convenience and aesthetics, than if developed under the underlying zone. 
(Prior code § 060.01)  
17.38.020 - Procedure and regulations. 
A.  Procedure. An application for a planned development project or mobile home project shall submit a request for change of zone to allow a "PD" overlay zone on base district zone, pursuant to Chapter 17.82. 
B.  Land Use Regulations. All planned development projects shall comply with the land use and density regulations of the base district, except as may be modified by the PD overlay zone regulations, subject to compliance with the general plan. 
C.  Development Standards. All planned development projects shall comply with the applicable development standards of the base district and other sections of the municipal code, except that an applicant for a PD project may utilize flexible development standards in order to meet the policy directives of the general plan. 
D.  Conditional Use Permit. A conditional use permit must be obtained by the applicant as a part of the PD overlay zone and related entitlements in order to vest modified land use regulations, utilize flexible standards of the PD overlay zone and vest the design guidelines for the planned development. 
(Ord. No. 1075, § 7, 6-10-15) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1075, § 7, adopted June 10, 2015, amended § 17.38.020 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 17.38.020, pertained to uses, and derived from prior code, § 060.02; and Ord. No. 1026, § 7, adopted Jan. 12, 2011.  
17.38.030 - Design guidelines. 
A.  Design Guidelines. All planned developments shall submit a comprehensive set of design guidelines for the project as part of the conditional use permit required under Section 17.38.020(D), that include the following items. 
1.  Circulation and Streets Plan. The design guidelines shall incorporate a street network plan showing street and pedestrian connectivity for future neighborhoods of the planned development. This shall include the typical roadway diagrams proposed for neighborhood streets and shall incorporate the use a landscaped parkway with street trees separating the sidewalk from the street curb line. Any deviations, for private streets, from the city's public street improvement requirements shall be included in the circulation and streets plan. 
2.  Open Space Plan. A plan for the major common open space elements of the community shall be included in the design guidelines of the project. This shall include conceptual plans for park amenities, recreational facilities, and gathering spots for the future residents. 
3.  Building Massing Plan. A colored site plan showing the typical building massing and relationship of buildings to streets and pedestrian paths and open space features for the various neighborhoods within the planned development shall be included as part of the design guidelines. 
4.  Architectural Theming. Detailed architectural and/or artist renderings of allowable building types, architectural themes, and typical front yard landscaping shall be provided for all planned developments. Conceptual design guidelines in text describing the architectural theming and exterior building materials, window treatments, and garage door designs, and landscaping plant palettes, must accompany the planned development submittal. 
5.  Signs. A comprehensive sign program shall be included as a part of all planned developments. 
B.  Change in Product Size. Refer to Section 16.32.170 of the Coachella Municipal Code for proposed changes in product sizes within single-family residential tracts in which a previously approved product was constructed. 
(Ord. No. 1075, § 8, 6-10-15) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1075, § 8, adopted June 10, 2015, amended § 17.38.030 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 17.38.030, pertained to property development standards, and derived from prior code, § 060.03; and Ord. No. 1021, § 5, adopted July 28, 2010.  
17.38.040 - Mobile home parks. 
A.  Intent and Purpose. These regulations are intended to provide for the development of mobile home parks within the city, consistent with the general plan. These provisions are further intended to create standards of development consistent with those in other residential areas of the community. 
B.  Review Procedure. A mobile home park community may be established in the RM base district zone through a planned development overlay zone, subject to approval of the conditional use permit and design guidelines required under Sections 17.38.020 and 17.38.030, and subject to compliance with the regulations contained herein. 
C.  Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted in any mobile home park: 
1.  Mobilehomes, trailers, trailer coaches, campers, camp cars; 
2.  Recreational buildings, structures, and uses intended to serve only the residents of the mobile home park; and 
3.  Accessory buildings normally appurtenant to the conduct of a mobile home park, including buildings and structures required by law. 
D.  Lot Requirements for Mobile home Parks. 
1.  Minimum Lot Size. Five acres. 
2.  Density Permitted. One mobile home for each four thousand five hundred (4,500) square feet of gross lot area. 
3.  Lot width and depth shall be determined by the planning commission or city council when the conditional use permit is considered. 
E.  Yard Requirements for Mobile home Parks. 
1.  Front Yard. Each park shall have a front yard of at least twenty-five (25) feet in depth. 
2.  Side Yard. Each park shall have side yards of at least fifteen (15) feet in depth. 
3.  Rear Yard. Each park shall have a rear yard of at least fifteen (15) feet in depth. 
F.  Requirements for Individual Mobile home Sites Within a Mobile home Park. 
1.  Minimum individual site size shall be three thousand (3,000) square feet. 
2.  Each individual mobile home site shall have a minimum width of thirty-five (35) feet. 
3.  Each mobile home shall be set back at least five feet from the edge of any interior site roadway. 
G.  Height Limits. Height limits shall be those in the zone in which a mobile home park is authorized. 
H.  Distance Between Buildings and Mobile homes. 
1.  There shall be a minimum average distance between mobile homes of twenty (20) feet; except that where placed end to end, the distance may be reduced by ten (10) feet. 
2.  There shall be a minimum distance between mobile homes and accessory buildings of fifteen (15) feet. 
3.  There shall be a minimum distance between accessory buildings of ten (10) feet. 
I.  Usable Open Space. 
1.  A common recreational-leisure area shall be provided for each mobile home park. Such recreational-leisure area shall be for the purpose of providing usable open space for the residents of the mobile home park, and shall not be for the use of the general public. 
2.  The size of such recreational-leisure area shall be equal to at least four hundred (400) square feet for each mobile home site. Cabanas, swimming pools, decks, game areas, and similar uses may be included in such an area. 
(Prior code § 060.04) 
(Ord. No. 1075, § 8, 6-10-15)  
17.38.050 - Nonresidential uses. 
The planning commission shall approve the appropriate number, location, area requirements, access, parking, identification and operating conditions for all institutional, recreational, commercial and health facilities in the planned unit development. 
(Prior code § 060.05)  
17.38.060 - Special conditions and procedures. 
In addition to the following special conditions and procedures for planned unit development, the planning commission may impose such other conditions as it deems necessary or desirable in carrying out the general purpose and intent of this section. 
A.  A conditional use permit obtained through procedures contained in this chapter and in Sections 17.74.010 through 17.74.050 of this title is required for any planned unit development. 
B.  Tract or Parcel Maps. A tentative tract or parcel map is required to be submitted to the planning director subsequent to approval of the application, but may be filed with the application for zone change and conditional use. However, if the property is located in a hillside area, the tentative tract or parcel map shall be filed concurrently with the application. 
No building permit shall be issued for any building within a planned unit development, except for sales models, recreational buildings or community facilities, unless a final tract or parcel map has first been recorded for the property on which the building or buildings are located. 
C.  Project Site Plans. 
1.  A preliminary project site plan is required to be filed with the application for planned unit development. Contour intervals shall be indicated for property in hillside areas. The site plan required by Section 17.62.010 shall, in addition to other requirements, indicate compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
2.  Landscape Plans and List. A plan for landscaping all common area, including plant lists and sprinkler system, shall be approved by the planning director. 
3.  Phasing Plans. A progress plan delineating the various development phases, if more than one, and specifying a reasonable time allocation for each phase, shall be submitted and made a condition of approval by the planning commission. No phase component shall have a residential density that exceeds by twenty (20) percent the proposed residential density of the entire planned unit development. The total area of common open space provided in each phase shall, at a minimum, be in the same proportion as in the entire development. 
4.  Highway Access. Each planned unit development shall be located on and have direct access to a major or secondary arterial or a collector street. 
5.  Utilities. All utility lines necessary to serve the development shall be installed underground. 
6.  Vehicular Access. The approved site plan shall indicate all vehicular access. In order to encourage inward orientation, increased living amenities, and variety and flexibility of parking areas, direct access to all dwelling units is not required. However, the planning director shall determine the property access system. 
7.  Specific Plan. The project plans for a planned unit development may be adopted as a specific plan amendment to the general plan. 
D.  Condominium Common Areas. Except for property dedicated to the city for inclusion within a public park, school site or park maintenance district, every owner of a dwelling unit or lot shall own as an appurtenance to such dwelling unit or lot, either an undivided interest in the common areas and facilities of the entire project or of the tract in which the ownership is located; or a share in the corporation, or voting membership in an association owning the common areas and facilities of the entire project or of the tract in which the ownership is located. 
1.  Management Agreement for Control and Maintenance of Common Areas. No lot or dwelling unit in the development shall be sold until a corporation, association, property owner's group or similar entity has been formed with the right to assess all the properties which are jointly owned with interests in the common areas and facilities in the entire development or in the tract which is a part of the entire development to meet the expenses of such entity, and with authority to control, and the duty to maintain, all of said mutually available features of the development or tract portion thereof. Such entity shall operate under recorded conditions, covenants and restrictions which shall include compulsory membership of all owners of lots and/or dwelling units, and flexibility of assessments to meet changing costs of maintenance, repairs and services. The developer shall submit evidence of compliance with the requirement to the planning director. This condition shall not apply to land dedicated to the city and included in a park maintenance district or dedication to the city for other public purposes. 
2.  Maintenance. The right to maintain the buildings and use the property for a residential planned unit development as indicated on the approved revised site plan shall continue in effect only so long as all of the mutually available features, such as recreational areas, community buildings, and landscaping, as well as the general appearance of the premises and buildings are all well maintained. 
3.  Covenants. 
a.  The provisions of subsections (C)(1) and (C)(2) of this section shall be included in the conditions, covenants, and restrictions applying to the property, which are recorded in the office of the county recorder, and copies of said provisions shall be furnished to the individual purchasers of units in the development. 
b.  The provisions of subsections (C)(1) and (C)(2) of this section shall also be in each of the preliminary and final drafts of the conditions, covenants, and restrictions submitted to the real estate commissioner. 
E.  Separate Lots. No portion of land within a residential planned unit development shall be divided in ownership unless it is first recorded as a separate lot on a recorded final tract or parcel map. 
F.  Sale of Lots or Units. No dwelling unit or lot shall be sold or encumbered separately from an interest in the common areas and facilities in the development which shall be appurtenant to such dwelling unit or lot. No lot shall be sold or transferred in ownership from the other lots in the total development, unless all approved community buildings, structures, and recreational facilities for the total development, or approved phase thereof, have been completed, or completion is assured, to the satisfaction of the planning director. 
G.  Nonconformities. All nonconformities existing prior to development of the project must be eliminated or alleviated to the satisfaction of the planning commission. 
(Prior code § 060.06)  
Chapter 17.40 - TEMPORARY CLASSIFICATION FOR ASSESSMENT IMPROVEMENTS 
 
17.40.010 - Intent and purpose. 
To provide a means to assist property owners in commercial or other use districts to request the assistance of the city in improving or upgrading the appearance or functional operation of the area; to permit the preparation of development improvement plans, including such matters as improved pedestrian and vehicular circulation systems, planting boxes or other street furniture, lighting fixtures, building facade modifications, improvement in parking and traffic facilities, construction of pedestrian malls, signs, or any other visual or functional appurtenances for the area; to provide for the establishment of a special assessment district to defray all or part of the costs of such improvement projects. 
(Prior code § 061.01)  
17.40.020 - Initiation. 
An application for an assessment improvement temporary classification may be filed with the planning commission. As a prerequisite for filing, the application shall be signed by the owners of at least seventy-five (75) percent of the land area on which such business or other establishments are operating. In lieu of their signature, owners may submit letters indicating their consent. The area involved shall comprise at least one block or one block frontage on both sides of a public highway, street, pedestrian mall, or other appropriate area. 
(Prior code § 061.02)  
17.40.030 - Commission action. 
The planning commission shall investigate the feasibility of establishing the temporary classification, hold public hearings and make a recommendation in the same manner as a change of zone. See Section 17.80.010. 
(Prior code § 061.03)  
17.40.040 - Procedures subsequent to the designation of an assessment improvement area. 
A.  Selection of Consultant. The city council shall direct the planning commission in cooperation with the petitioners, to select and recommend to the city council the appointment of a specific architect or other professional designer to serve as consultant for the improvement of the area, and determine the probable cost of the consultant's services. 
The planning commission, after consultation with the city engineer, shall recommend what portion of this cost shall be paid by a special assessment district, and what portion should be paid by the city. The city council shall direct the city engineer to prepare a tentative assessment district to defray the cost of the consultant's services to be paid by the assessment district. 
B.  Preparation by Assessment Roll. Upon appointment of a consultant and approval of his or her fee by the city council, the city engineer shall be directed by the council to prepare a special assessment roll, which shall be transmitted to the city council. Upon confirmation, the council shall direct the roll to the city treasurer, who shall thereupon proceed to collect this assessment. If this assessment is not paid within sixty (60) days after receipt of the special assessment roll, then the city treasurer shall report this fact to the city council who may then order the assessment improvement area ordinance cancelled and the assessment refunded. 
C.  Preparation of Plans. When all assessments have been collected, the city council shall notify the appointed consultant to proceed with the preparation of the improvement plan. The plan shall be submitted to the planning commission which shall, in conjunction with the petitioners, investigate the practicality and feasibility of the proposed improvement and transmit their recommendation to the council regarding the acceptability of the project and the cost estimate. If the city council approves the plans and the cost estimate, such documents shall be forwarded to the city engineer with the request that the city engineer prepare a benefited district and a tentative special assessment roll to pay for the proposed improvement. The city engineer shall then submit his or her report to the city council which may authorize its transmittal to the planning commission for consideration. 
D.  Commission and Petitioner Review of Assessment Roll. The planning commission shall meet with the petitioners to review the tentative special assessment roll and the entire improvement program. If fifty-one (51) percent of the petitioners within the proposed assessment district concur with the plans and wish to proceed with the improvements, a petition containing their signature and indicating their concurrence shall be filed with the city council. Such fifty-one (51) percent majority of property owners shall represent at least fifty-one (51) percent of the proposed assessment. 
E.  Institution of Assessment Proceedings. Upon receipt of the petition representing the owners of at least fifty-one (51) percent of the proposed assessment, the city council shall order the city engineer to institute proceedings as provided in the Improvement Act of 1911, State of California Street and Highways Code. 
F.  Termination of Temporary Classification. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter to the contrary, no public hearing need be held nor further notice be given as a requisite to the completion or termination of any (A) Assessment Improvement classification. 
(Prior code § 061.04)  
Chapter 17.42 - T TEMPORARY CLASSIFICATION ZONE 
 
17.42.010 - Intent and purpose. 
To ensure that the property to be rezoned will conform to all specified standards and conditions deemed necessary to protect the best interests of the surrounding property or neighborhood and secure an appropriate development in harmony with the objectives of the general plan. 
(Prior code § 062.01)  
17.42.020 - Definition of tentative zone change. 
A temporary classification which is combined for a specified period of time with another zone and which, according to the terms of the ordinance, either terminates and returns the property to its underlying zone classification, or becomes final, in which case the (T) classification symbol and the underlying zone classification are removed and the proposed or tentative zone classification becomes finally effective. 
(Prior code § 062.02)  
17.42.030 - Imposition of (T) tentative zone change classification. 
When the planning commission or city council finds that an application for a zone change is consistent with the objectives of this chapter, provided certain dedications of land, waivers of access, or installations of improvements in a public right-of-way or on private property are completed or security for improvements is offered and accepted within a specified time period, it shall recommend or adopt the zone change subject to compliance with specified conditions. In such cases, the ordinance changing the zone of the property concerned shall, instead of immediately and finally rezoning the property, place it in the (T) tentative zone change classification. Such ordinance shall specify the change in zone, the conditions to be met, and the time allowed for satisfying the conditions. 
(Prior code § 062.03)  
17.42.040 - Zoning map designations. 
The (T) tentative zone change classification shall be shown on the zoning map by the symbol "T", in parenthesis, immediately followed by the proposed zoning designation, a comma, and the underlying zoning designation, for example, (T) RM 400, R9S 6,000. When the rezoning proceedings are completed in accordance with this article, the (T) symbol and the underlying zone designation shall be removed leaving only the proposed zoning designation on the property, for example, RM 400. When the rezoning proceedings terminate in accordance with this chapter, the (T) symbol and the proposed zone designation shall be removed leaving only the original zoning designation on the property, for example, RS 6,000. 
(Prior code § 062.04)  
17.42.050 - Maximum time periods. 
Where either a final map or a parcel map is required by the rezoning, the (T) tentative zone change classification may remain on the property for up to two and one-half years after the effective date of the ordinance creating said temporary classification. The planning commission may extend such periods of time for one additional period not to exceed one year, provided a written application requesting such extension is filed not less than thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the originally specified period. Applications for time extensions shall set forth all applicable facts and evidence supporting such request. 
(Prior code § 062.05)  
17.42.060 - Completion or termination. 
If all conditions are met within the specified time period, or an authorized extension thereof, the rezoning proceedings shall be deemed to be complete, the (T) tentative zone classification shall be removed in accordance with Section 17.42.040 (Zoning map designation), and the new zone designation shall finally become effective. If all conditions are not met within the specified time period, or an authorized extension thereof, the rezoning proceedings shall terminate, the (T) tentative zone change classification shall become null and void and shall be removed in accordance with Section 17.42.040 (Zoning map designations), and the property shall be restricted to its previously designated zone classification. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter to the contrary, no public hearing need be held nor further notice be given as a requisite to the completion or termination of the rezoning proceedings as provided in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 062.06)  
17.42.070 - City engineer's report. 
Prior to the finalization of the zone change proceedings and the removal of the (T) tentative zone change classification, the planning department shall have received a report from the city engineer, or other appropriate city agency, verifying that all required dedications of land or installations of improvements on public or private property have been completed or security for such improvements has been offered and accepted, or that any other applicable requirement has been satisfactorily met in compliance with the specified conditions of the (T) tentative zone change ordinance. 
(Prior code § 062.07)  
17.42.080 - Interim use of property. 
While property remains in the (T) tentative zone change classification, it may continue to be used only for the purposes permitted in the zone applicable to the property prior to the establishment of, such (T) classification; and no permits shall be issued, no structures shall be erected or constructed, and no land shall be used for any other purpose; provided, however, that grading or other improvements required as conditions of the zone change may be accomplished. In addition, no new structures or uses shall be established for the duration of the (T) temporary classification which would become nonconforming upon the finalization of the zone change and no such existing structure or use shall be enlarged or increased in intensity of use during such period. Such limitation on the use of the property shall continue until the building department has received notification from the planning department of the removal of the (T) tentative zone change classification and the finalization or termination of the zone change proceedings. 
(Prior code § 062.08)  
Chapter 17.44 - SUPPLEMENTAL CLASSIFICATION GEOLOGICAL HAZARD ZONE 
 
17.44.010 - Intent and purpose. 
This zone is intended to implement the Alquist-Priolo Geologic Hazard Zones Act and satisfy the requirements of the Policies and Criteria adopted by the State Mining and Geology Board November 21, 1973. 
(Prior code § 063.01)  
17.44.020 - Affected area. 
The area or areas affected by this supplemental classification are those indicated as Special Studies Zones on the official map of said zones in the Indio Quadrangle effective July 1, 1974. 
(Prior code § 063.02)  
17.44.030 - Specific criteria. 
The following specific and detailed criteria shall apply within special studies zones: 
A.  No structure for human occupancy shall be placed across the trace of an active fault. Furthermore, the area within fifty (50) feet of an active fault shall be assumed to be underlain by active branches of that fault unless and until proven otherwise by an appropriate geologic investigation and submission of a report by a geologist registered in the state of California. This fifty-foot standard is intended to represent minimum criteria only for all structures. Critical structures, such as hospitals and schools, require thorough investigation and a report to be prepared for any location within the special studies zone. 
B.  Applications for all real estate developments and structures for human occupancy within special studies zones shall be accompanied by a geologic report prepared by a geologist registered in the state of California, and directed to the problem of potential surface fault and displacement through the site. 
C.  Three copies of all such geologic reports shall be filed with the city engineer. 
D.  Requirements for geologic reports may be satisfied for a single-family residence if sufficient information regarding the site is available from previous studies in the same area. 
E.  No building permit shall be issued for any structure within a special studies zone until required reports have been evaluated on behalf of the city by technically qualified personnel. 
(Prior code § 063.03)  
Chapter 17.46 - IP INDUSTRIAL PARK OVERLAY ZONE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1103, § 1, adopted April 26, 2017, amended Ch. 17.46 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 17.46, §§ 17.46.010—17.46.040, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from prior code §§ 064.01—064.04. 
 
17.46.010 - Intent and purpose. 
This overlay zone is intended to provide for the well-planned and orderly development of industrial parks within the community and to eliminate or adequately mitigate any adverse impacts on the community related to such types of development. The IP (industrial park) overlay zone designation may be applied to certain property described herein that is zoned M-S (manufacturing service). When the IP overlay zone designation is added to such property, the provisions of this article shall apply in addition to the regulations provided by the underlying M-S zone. Whenever there is a conflict or inconsistency between the provisions of this article and the underlying zone, the provisions of this chapter shall be controlling. 
(Ord. No. 1103, § 1, 4-26-17)  
17.46.015 - Property eligible for IP industrial park overlay zone classification. 
The IP industrial park overlay zone classification shall be limited to those projects that are: 
A.  Located within Sub-Areas #6 (Downtown Expansion), #7 (South Employment District), or #10 (North Employment District) of the city of the Coachella General Plan; and 
B.  Zoned as M-S (manufacturing service); and 
C.  A minimum of thirty (30) acres in project area (all lots developed according to common plan or scheme). 
(Ord. No. 1103, § 1, 4-26-17)  
17.46.020 - Permitted uses. 
A.  Except as expressly conditioned or prohibited in this chapter, all uses permitted in the underlying M-S zone shall be permitted in the IP overlay zone; 
B.  Research and development; 
C.  Professional office; 
D.  Warehousing and distribution. 
(Ord. No. 1103, § 1, 4-26-17)  
17.46.023 - Conditional uses. 
The following uses may be permitted in the IP overlay zone subject to obtaining a conditional use permit as specific in Section 17.74.010: 
A.  Cannabis cultivation, processing, testing, manufacturing and/or wholesale distribution, subject to the regulatory requirements of Chapter 5.68 of this code. Retail transaction of cannabis of any kind is prohibited in this zone. 
1.  For purposes of this subsection A., "cannabis cultivation, processing, testing, manufacturing and/or wholesale distribution" shall not be deemed as the permitted uses of "drugs manufacture", "food products processing, manufacturing, canning, preserving and freezing", "fruit and vegetable packing house", or "testing laboratories" under Section 17.30.020(A). 
(Ord. No. 1103, § 1, 4-26-17)  
17.46.026 - Prohibited uses. 
The following uses are prohibited in the IP overlay zone: 
A.  Cannabis dispensaries or other uses engaging in the retail sale, exchange or distribution of cannabis; 
B.  Outdoor storage yard; 
C.  Automobile repair business; 
D.  Automobile body and fender works; 
E.  Any other conditional uses in the M-S zone, except as set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1103, § 1, 4-26-17)  
17.46.030 - Property development standards. 
A.  Reserved. 
B.  Front Yard Requirements. 
1.  Twenty-five (25) feet from the curb on all property fronting on Avenue 54 and Avenue 52. 
2.  Twenty (20) feet from the curb on all property fronting Industrial Way, Enterprise Way or Polk Street. 
3.  Ten (10) feet from the curb on all property fronting any local street. 
4.  All front setbacks shall be landscaped in a manner approved by the planning commission. 
5.  No buildings, facilities or other improvements shall be allowed in a required front yard except for landscaping or block entryways approved by the planning commission. Notwithstanding the foregoing, required yards may be used for automobile parking; provided, that landscaping approved by the planning commission is provided along the frontage of the property. 
C.  Height Limits. The maximum height of any building or structure shall be fifty (50) feet. 
D.  Distance Between Uses/Buildings. No cannabis cultivation, processing, testing, manufacture or distribution use shall be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of any residentially zoned lot. The distance shall be measured at the nearest point between any part of the building containing the cannabis use and any lot line of the residential use. 
E.  On-Street/Off-Street Parking and Loading. 
1.  Off-Street Parking and Loading. Off-street parking and loading facilities shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.54.010 of this title. 
2.  On-Street Parking and Loading. On-street parking or loading shall be prohibited. 
F.  Walls and Screening. 
1.  Each development on a lot or parcel of property shall be enclosed with decorative masonry walls and/or wrought iron fencing, subject to review by the planning commission. 
2.  All parking lots and loading areas shall be screened from view to the street with low decorative masonry walls and landscaping, subject to review by the planning commission. 
G.  Other Property Development Standards. 
1.  All utilities shall be underground, until such time as the power transmitted is greater than thirty-four (34) KV and then it shall be brought to the attention of the planning commission prior to any construction. 
2.  All developments shall include an exterior lighting system to provide adequate are security. Such lighting system shall use high-pressure sodium lights or an equivalent type of light approved by the planning commission. 
3.  All developments shall be landscaped in a manner approved by the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 1103, § 1, 4-26-17; Ord. No. 1108, § 2, 7-12-17)  
17.46.040 - Architectural review. 
All developments shall be subject to architectural review in accordance with Section 17.72.010 of this title, including planning commission review of design guidelines and signs as described below. Any addition to or exterior alteration of an existing development also shall be subject to such architectural review. 
A.  Design Guidelines. Detailed architectural and/or artist renderings, or pictorial depictions, of allowable building types, architectural themes, and typical common-area landscaping and lighting shall be provided for all industrial park overlay zone developments. Conceptual design guidelines in text describing allowable architectural theming and exterior building materials, roofing and roof line treatments, window and door opening designs, and landscaping plant palettes, must accompany the industrial park overlay zone architectural review submittal. The use of green houses, butler buildings, or other pre-fabricated structures are prohibited unless they are treated architecturally to have the appearance of a contemporary concrete tilt-up building with parapet roof structures. All main buildings shall have variation in exterior wall planes and roof lines to limit massing and monotone design features, subject to review by the planning commission. 
B.  Signs. A comprehensive sign program shall be included as a part of architectural review for new industrial park overlay zone developments. 
(Ord. No. 1103, § 1, 4-26-17)  
Chapter 17.47 - RC RETAIL CANNABIS OVERLAY ZONE 
 
17.47.010 - Intent and purpose. 
This overlay zone is intended to provide for the well-planned and orderly development of retail cannabis businesses within the community and to eliminate or adequately mitigate any adverse impacts on the community related to such types of development. The RC (retail cannabis) overlay zone designation may be applied to certain property described herein that is zoned C-G (general commercial), R-M (residential multi-family), and M-S (manufacturing service). When the RC overlay zone designation is added to such property, the provisions of this chapter shall apply in addition to the regulations provided by the underlying C-G zone, R-M, M-S zones. Whenever there is a conflict or inconsistency between the provisions of this article and the underlying zone, the provisions of this chapter shall be controlling. 
(Ord. No. 1115, § 2, 2-14-18)  
17.47.020 - Property eligible for RC retail cannabis overlay zone classification. 
The RC retail cannabis overlay zone shall be divided into two sub-zones. This overlay classification shall be limited to those projects that: 
A.  Sub-Zone #1: 
1.  Are located either along the west side of Grapefruit Boulevard (State Highway 111) between 2nd Street and 9 th Street, on the east side of Grapefruit Boulevard between 4th Street and 9th Street, or on the east side of Vine Street between 4 th Street and 6th Street; and 
2.  Have either a front or side lot line facing Grapefruit Boulevard, a front lot line facing 5th Street from Grapefruit Boulevard to Vine Avenue, a front lot line facing 6th Street from Grapefruit Boulevard to 200 feet south of Orchard Street, a front lot line facing 7th Street within 200 feet of Grapefruit Boulevard, a front lot line facing 8th Street within 200 feet of Grapefruit Boulevard; a front lot line on the north side of 9th Street within 200 feet of Grapefruit Boulevard; or a front lot line on the west side of Orchard between 6th Street and 200 feet past 5th Street, no front lot lines facing Vine between 4th Street and 6th Street are permitted, and 
3.  Are zoned C-G (general commercial), R-M (residential multi-family), or M-S (manufacturing-service). 
B.  Sub-Zone #2: 
1.  Are located along the south side of Avenue 48, between the east side of Van Buren Street and the Dillon Road Grade separation access road; and 
2.  Have either a front or side lot line fronting Avenue 48; and 
3.  Are zoned C-G (general commercial). 
(Ord. No. 1115, § 2, 2-14-18)  
17.47.030 - Permitted uses. 
Any uses permitted in the underlying zoning district of the property. 
(Ord. No. 1115, § 2, 2-14-18)  
17.47.040 - Conditional uses. 
The following uses may be permitted in the RC overlay zone subject to obtaining the appropriate approval: 
A.  In Sub-Zone #1: The retail sale, exchange, transaction or delivery of cannabis, including retailers or microbusinesses, subject to a conditional use permit as specified in Section 17.74.010, as well as the regulatory requirements of Chapters 5.69 and 17.84 of this code. 
B.  In Sub-Zone #2: The retail sale, exchange, transaction or delivery of cannabis, including retailers or microbusinesses, subject to obtaining a conditional use permit as specified in Section 17.74.01, and subject to a development agreement as specified in Chapter 17.100, as well as the regulatory requirements of Chapters 5.69 and 17.84 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 1115, § 2, 2-14-18)  
17.47.050 - Prohibited uses. 
Any uses not identified as "permitted" or "conditionally permitted" by this ordinance or by the chapter of this code applicable to the site's underlying zone are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 1115, § 2, 2-14-18)  
17.47.060 - Property development standards. 
A.  Project Area/Lot/Building Height Requirements. Except as specified in the applicable development agreement, CUP or regulatory permit, the project area, lot size, lot coverage and building height requirements of the underlying zone shall apply. 
B.  No Drive-Thru Retail Cannabis Facilities. No retail cannabis business within the RC Overlay Zone shall operate "drive-thru", "drive up", "window service" or similar facilities whereby a customer can order, purchase and receive retail cannabis without leaving his or her vehicle. 
C.  No Non-Storefront Retailers. No retail cannabis business within the RC overlay zone shall be operated as "non-storefront" or "delivery only". Delivery may only be approved as ancillary to the operation of a permitted cannabis retail business which is physically located within the RC overlay zone and which primarily provides cannabis to customers on the premises. 
D.  Distance Restrictions. No retail cannabis business within the RC overlay zone shall be located within two hundred fifty (250) feet of any public or private school (K-12), day care center or youth center. The distance shall be measured from the nearest point between any part of the building containing the retail cannabis business to any lot line of the other use. For purposes of this paragraph, the following definitions shall apply: 
1.  "Day care center" means any child day care facility other than a family day care home, and includes infant centers, preschools, extended day care facilities and school age child care centers. 
2.  "Youth center" means any public or private facility that is primarily used to house recreational or social activities for minors, including, but not limited to, private youth membership organizations or clubs, social service teenage club facilities, video arcades, or similar amusement park facilities. 
E.  Location of Customer Entrance. No retail cannabis business shall have a customer entrance that is adjacent to or directly across the street from a residentially zoned lot. 
F.  On-Street/Off-Street Parking and Loading. 
1.  Off-Street Parking and Loading. Off-street parking and loading facilities for a retail cannabis business shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.54.010-C(1) of this title. 
2.  On-Street Parking and Loading. On-street parking or loading shall be prohibited for a retail cannabis business. 
(Ord. No. 1115, § 2, 2-14-18)  
17.47.070 - Architectural review. 
All developments shall be subject to architectural review in accordance with Section 17.72.010 of this title, including planning commission review as described below. Any addition to or exterior alteration of a retail cannabis use in an existing development also shall be subject to such architectural review. 
A.  Design Criteria. Detailed architectural and/or artist renderings, or pictorial depictions, of the architectural designs and/or theming of the business shall be submitted for planning commission review. All retail cannabis businesses shall be designed to have a storefront with glass door and windows facing the street, providing visibility into the front lobby or showroom of the business. The applicant shall submit information regarding proposed interior and exterior wall and roof finishes, windows and awnings, lighting fixtures, flooring materials, and paint colors for the business for review by the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 1115, § 2, 2-14-18)  
Chapter 17.48 - SPECIAL USES 
 
17.48.010 - Intent and purpose. 
This chapter is intended to provide for the placement and regulation of uses and activities that are temporary in nature or which may be allowed in all zoning districts. It shall also be the purpose of this chapter to set forth standards and conditions which shall apply to various special uses. 
(Prior code § 065.01)  
17.48.020 - Display of merchandise out-of-doors. 
A.  In no event shall an outdoor use be established that is not directly associated as part of a primary use on the same property unless a special permit has been obtained from the chief of police or the chiefs designee after payment of a permit fee based upon the actual cost to the city of processing the application for such permit. 
B.  Display of merchandise out-of-doors is permitted as follows: 
1.  Where specifically provided for in the zoning district where the event will take place. 
2.  By any merchants association or individual business which has been recognized by the city. Such organizations may sponsor one sidewalk sale per quarter. The maximum display of merchandise out-of-doors by a commercial merchant shall not exceed fifteen (15) days. 
3.  Any one merchant outdoor sale, limited to one table, one rack or other means and one sign approved by staff. 
4.  Sale sponsored by a recognized merchants' association according to all of the criteria provided by that associated. 
5.  The applicant must be filed with the chief of police or the chiefs designee five working days prior to the sale. 
C.  In no event shall a display of merchant out-of-doors interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic. The applicant shall agree to avoid the creation of litter, trash or debris, and shall keep any such displays and the surrounding areas neat, clean and free of trash, paper and debris. The applicant shall abide by any reasonable conditions imposed by the city staff to protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
D.  Any permit denial by the chief of police or the chief's designee may be appealed to the city council. 
(Prior code § 065.02)  
17.48.030 - Special event sales—Permitted. 
Special event sales may be permitted in stores, churches, assembly halls or other indoor and outdoor locations, subject to the approval by the chief of police or the chief's designee of the location, and subject to the requirements of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 065.03)  
17.48.040 - Same—Definition. 
"Person" means an individual, corporation, association, churches, or any other group or organization of individuals. 
"Special event sales" means garage sales, yard sales, patio sales, rummage sales, and other such sales in residential districts for the purpose of offering for sale household or personal goods of the occupant of the premises. Special event sales do not include commercial sale of goods purchased for resale. Special event sales to not include swap meets. 
(Prior code § 065.04)  
17.48.050 - Same—Permits. 
A.  No person shall conduct a special event sale until that person obtains a special event sale permit from the chief of police or the chief's designee and pays a fee of five dollars ($5.00) for each special event sale. 
B.  The application for a special event sale permit shall contain the name of the person, the person's residence where the special event sale will take place, the date for the special event sale, the total number of special event sales the person has conducted during the same calendar year, and an acknowledgement that only eight days are permitted for special event sales each calendar year. 
(Prior code § 065.05)  
17.48.060 - Same—Signs. 
Persons granted a permit to conduct a special event sale shall comply with the provisions of this code that regulate signs. Failure to comply shall result in the permit being revoked and may be cause to deny future requests for a permit. 
(Prior code § 065.06)  
17.48.070 - Same—Time and number. 
A.  No special event sale permit shall be issued for days other than weekends and official holidays when city hail is closed for business. Each special event permit shall last no more than eight hours. 
B.  A person wishing special event sales permits for two or more consecutive days must apply for a special events sales permit for each day. 
C.  A maximum of eight days may be conducted by any one person at any one location during each calendar year. 
(Prior code § 065.07)  
17.48.080 - Exemption. 
The numerical limitation of eight special event sale permits per person per location contained in Section 17.48.070 shall not apply to carwashes that are conducted by non-profit organizations or by school-based groups or clubs. For these situations, the city council shall have discretion to grant permits in excess of eight. 
(Ord. 886 § 1, 2003: Ord. 885 § 1, 2002)  
17.48.090 - Violation—Penalties. 
Any violation of this Chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
(Prior code § 065.08) 
(Ord. No. 1098, § 39, 12-14-16)  
17.48.100 - Temporary parking lots. 
Temporary parking lots may be approved by the chief of police or the chief's designee subject to the following conditions: 
A.  Duration of use not to exceed twenty (20) days; 
B.  Provisions to assure that the parking lot remains free of dust and blowing sand or dirt; 
C.  Conformity to any applicable sign regulations; 
D.  Prohibition of overnight camping; and 
E.  Adequate provisions to guarantee the cleanup of the temporary parking lot. 
(Prior code § 065.09)  
17.48.110 - Circuses, carnivals, animal rides, and displays, amusement rides, auctions, and outdoor or tent meetings. 
Circuses, carnivals, animal rides, and displays, amusement rides, auctions, and outdoor or tent meetings shall be permitted only by city council approval. Such events require a business license, sign approval and permit and the approval of fire clearance by the fire department. 
(Prior code § 065.10)  
17.48.120 - Christmas tree lots. 
Christmas tree lots may be approved by the chief of police or the chief's designee subject to the following conditions: 
A.  Provision to assure that the parking lot remains free of dust and blowing sand or dirt; 
B.  Adequate provisions to guarantee the cleanup of the temporary Christmas tree lots; 
C.  Business license; 
D.  Sign approval and permit; and 
E.  Approval of fire clearance by fire department. 
(Prior code § 065.11)  
Chapter 17.49 - SHO SENIOR HOUSING OVERLAY ZONE 
 
17.49.010 - Intent. 
The senior housing overlay district (SHO) is established to provide for the development of senior citizen housing pursuant to standards that reflect the unique needs and character of senior citizen housing in the city of Coachella. As such, it is the objective of this overlay district to encourage the development of senior citizen housing with appropriate amenities tailored to the needs of seniors to address the current shortage of affordable senior housing in the city as well as the projected growth needs of the senior citizen community. The SHO District shall provide standard incentives for the development of a wide variety of specialized housing designed and restricted to residents aged fifty-five (55) years or older and qualified disabled residents. 
(Ord. 991 (part), 2007)  
17.49.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
"Apartment" means a residential unit accessible by passage through common hallway shared with other units. 
"City" means the city of Coachella, a California municipal corporation. 
"City council" means the city council of the city of Coachella. 
"Cluster-style development" means a development project in which buildings are concentrated together in specific areas to minimize infrastructure and development costs while achieving the allowable density. Such a project also allows the preservation of natural open space for recreation, common open space, and preservation of environmentally sensitive features. 
"Condominium" means a structure of two or more units, the interior space of which is individually owned; the balance of the property is owned in common by the owners of the individual units. 
"Density bonus" means those density increases, concessions and incentives granted by city for the development of senior project in accordance with Government Code, Section 65915. 
"Low-income households" means those households meeting the criteria contained in California Health & Safety Code, Section 50079.5. 
"Moderate-income households" means those households meeting the criteria contained in California Health & Safety Code, Section 50093. 
"Senior" or "senior citizen" means, as more particularly set forth in Section 51.3 of the California Civil Code, as said section may be hereinafter amended to succeeded, a person fifty-five (55) years or older. 
"Townhome" means a residence, often including two or three stories that are connected by a common wall to another residence. 
"Very low-income households" means those households meeting the criteria contained in California Health & Safety Code, Section 50105. 
(Ord. 991 (part), 2007)  
17.49.030 - Map designation. 
The senior housing overlay district shall be in the form of an overlay zone and shall be established only in conjunction with another residential zone. When the SHO zone designation is added to such property, the provisions of this chapter shall apply in addition to the regulations provided by the underlying zone. Wherever there is conflict or inconsistency between the provisions of this chapter and the underlying zone, the provisions of this chapter shall be controlling. Any parcel designated with this overlay zone shall be designated on the official zoning map with the symbol "SHO" together with the underlying zoning designation (i.e., R3/SHO). 
(Ord. 991 (part), 2007)  
17.49.040 - Permitted uses. 
Only the primary use, accessory uses and structures related to the primary use, and support facilities directly related to the following senior housing residential facilities shall be permitted in the SHO District. Specific types of senior residential development that may occur within the SHO District include the following: 
Active Retirement Community. A project in this category is specifically designed with the senior resident in mind and provides appropriate amenities and designs to accommodate the active senior lifestyle. Typical residents are healthy, active, and completely capable of independent living. Projects provide a common amenity package in return for smaller lots, unit sizes and other design incentives. Amenity packages may include a golf course, clubhouse, sport facilities, cultural facilities, and/or arts and crafts activity areas. Dwelling unit types may be single-family, attached or detached, or multiple-family attached including apartments, condominiums and townhomes. 
Independent Living Units. A project designed for the senior resident who needs specialized services and amenities to accommodate their special needs and prolong their ability to live independently. Such services include meal preparation, common dining facilities, emergency call monitoring, housekeeping services, shuttle services, and delivery of groceries and pharmaceuticals. The project includes specially designed units and grounds to accommodate reduced mobility, sight, and hearing problems. Services to support the care of an ailing spouse such as adult day care services, limited nursing services may also be provided. Unit types may range from single-family detached to multiple-family clustered buildings. 
Congregate Housing Community. A project in this category is designed for the senior resident who needs significant care and services including nursing care and medical services. Unit types may include smaller apartments with small kitchenettes, but also common dining facilities and community activity centers. Specific services may include security, activity centers, housekeeping, emergency monitoring and transportation. 
(Ord. 991 (part), 2007)  
17.49.050 - Density. 
The density shall be determined based upon the base zone for which the SHO Districts is applied and shall be consistent with density of the general plan designation. Increased density may be granted for affordable housing projects pursuant to the provisions of California Government Code, Section 65915. 
(Ord. 991 (part), 2007)  
17.49.060 - Affordability. 
The city council may approve a conditional use permit that modifies the project's density and development standards for qualified affordable projects. The proposed modification shall be requested in writing by the applicant and accompanied by documentation that demonstrates that the project qualifies as a project for very low-, low-, and/or moderate-income residents as defined by state law. 
In the event that the city council determines that the project qualifies as an affordable housing project, they may approve an incentive program designed to assist the project in achieving affordability. The incentive program may include, but is not limited to, an increase in density, a reduction in parking, setbacks, open space, or a modification of any other design requirement as determined by the city council. 
(Ord. 991 (part), 2007)  
17.49.070 - Architectural review. 
All development within the SHO District designation shall be subject to architectural review in accordance with Section 17.72.010 of this title. 
(Ord. 991 (part), 2007)  
17.49.080 - Property development standards. 
A.  Minimum Building Area. The minimum total lot area for multifamily senior housing projects shall be twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. 
Individual single-family residential lots developed in a "cluster" style shall have a minimum lot area of two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet. 
B.  Minimum Dwelling Unit Size. The minimum unit size for senior residences shall vary according to the presence or absence of a common dining facility within the project that is available to all residents within the project. Each unit shall contain a kitchen/kitchenette that will include at least two burners, an oven, a refrigerator/freezer, sink, counter space and storage. Minimum unit size by unit type shall be: 
Habitable Space by Unit Type 
Unit Type 	With Common Dining Area 	Without Common Dining Area 
Studio 	360 square feet 	450 square feet 
1 Bedroom 	500 square feet 	600 square feet 
2 Bedroom 	700 square feet 	800 square feet 
 
C.  Parking. Parking requirement shall be based upon the type of senior housing facility proposed. 
1.  Active Retirement Community. 
a.  Single-Family Units. Two enclosed parking spaces per unit; one space for every nonresidential employee on the largest shift. 
b.  Townhome/Condominium. Two enclosed parking spaces per unit with at least one space must be enclosed; one space for every nonresidential employee on the largest shift; one guest space for every five units. 
c.  Apartment. One space for every bedroom within the comple; one space for every nonresidential employee on the largest shift; one guest space for every five units. 
d.  Additional parking may be required based upon the amenity package of the project and may include supplemental parking for golf cart or other vehicle types. 
2.  Independent Living Units. One covered or enclosed parking space for each unit; one parking space for every nonresident employee on the largest shift; one guest space for every five units. 
3.  Congregate Housing. One-half covered or enclosed space per unit; one parking space for every nonresident employee on the largest shift; one guest space for every five units; one space for every two nonresident employee on the largest shift. 
4.  Loading. All multifamily senior housing projects shall provide designated loading space of an adequate size to meet the loading and unloading needs of the project. These designated loading areas will be for the loading and unloading of both goods and people. All loading areas shall be located so that they do not interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic or block access to parking areas. Each designated loading area shall be paved with six inches of concrete over suitable base and shall be not less than ten (10) feet in width and thirty-five (35) in length, with a minimum of fourteen (14) feet clearance, exclusive of driveways. 
5.  All parking lots shall include spaces designated for handicapped parking in compliance with the provisions established under Section 070.03(D) of the Zoning Ordinance. Additional handicapped spaces may be required based upon the specific project and resident needs. 
6.  Reduced Parking Standards. Parking requirements may be reduced if the applicant provides evidence that the project will serve residents of an age category that is over sixty-two (62) years of age or other evidence that the proposed project will generate less demand for parking. 
D.  Binding Covenant or Agreement. A covenant or agreement shall be recorded against the property with the Riverside County recorder's office. The covenant and/or agreement shall bind owners, successors, heirs and assigns to use the property as a multifamily senior housing project by senior citizens and/or the handicapped and may include approved affordability covenants. The covenant and/or agreement shall be in a form and fashion as approved by the city attorney of the city of Coachella, shall be recorded prior to issuance of an occupancy permit for the building(s) and shall run with the land in favor of the city of Coachella, and all tenant occupants of said project stating that the property shall not be used for any purpose other than for the housing of senior citizens and handicapped. 
E.  Building Setbacks. Building setbacks shall be provided along all property lines. Building setbacks for detached single-family senior housing shall be: 
Single-Family Senior Units Building Setbacks 
Location 	Setback from PL 
Front 	20 feet 
Rear 	10 feet 
Interior Side 	5 feet 
Exterior Side 	10 feet 
 
F.  Building Height. Building heights of single-family detached senior units shall not exceed eighteen (18) feet in height. All building and structures shall have a height of over seventy (70) percent of the horizontal roof area, not exceeding fifteen (15) feet of which no point of the roof extending above eighteen (18) feet. 
For every foot of building height over eighteen (18) feet, an additional one foot of setback is required. 
G.  Unit Design Standards. All senior residential units shall be designed to reflect the safety and convenience needs of senior residents. Specific design features shall include: 
1.  Drawers and Shelves. All drawers and shelves shall be on gliders or rotating to assist in reaching; 
2.  Door Handles. All door handles shall be of a lever design instead of knobs for easier grip; 
3.  Security. All units shall have the following: 
a.  A front door peep hole, 
b.  A dead bolt lock on all exterior doors, 
c.  A mechanism that will activate an emergency signal at a designated central location; 
4.  Convenience Features. Multifamily senior projects should be designed in a manner that offers convenience to their residents. Convenience features that shall be provided for all multifamily senior housing projects include: 
a.  Long hallways should be avoided, 
b.  A minimum of one hundred (100) cubic feet of storage space per unit shall be provided. Storage space may be provided as part of individual units or combined into combined areas with individual locked storage compartments, 
c.  The living room or living space with the greatest square footage shall have an operable window facing an open space or landscaped area. At least one window in the living room or living space shall have a window with a sill no greater than thirty (30) inches from the floor, 
d.  Every multifamily senior housing project shall contain at least one common recreation room for use by all project residents. Spaces shall be provided for both and passive activities. The total usable area shall not be less than four hundred fifty (450) square feet, 
e.  All buildings housing senior residential units that are over one story in height shall be served by at least one elevator. At least one elevator shall be capable of handling a two thousand five hundred (2,500) pound load suitable for handling ambulance stretchers. The requirement for elevators may be waived by the city council if evidence is provided that the residents of the project are capable of accessing upper floors without the need for an elevator and that stairways have been designed and maintained in compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act (42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq.) and Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations, 
f.  Ramps shall be provided between every change of elevation intended to be used by pedestrians or persons in wheelchairs except for any change in elevation between stories that is served by an elevator, 
g.  All common areas shall be wheelchair accessible, 
h.  All multifamily senior residential projects shall provide for units that are handicapped accessible as specified in Title 24, § 1214 of the California Code of Regulations; 
5.  Roof-Mounted Equipment. Roof-mounted mechanical equipment is not permitted; 
6.  Outdoor Lighting. All outdoor lighting shall be low-level, hooded fixtures along walkways, open space and recreation areas. Lighting, per Chapter 17.54 of the Zoning Ordinance shall be provided in all parking areas; 
7.  Structural Appendages and Projections. Structural appendages and projections shall be located entirely within the maximum height and setback envelope of the unit without exception. 
a.  Open Space. Usable open space shall be provided for all senior housing projects. The total usable open space shall total one hundred (100) square feet for each unit and will include: 
i.  Private Open Space. A minimum of fifty (50) square feet of private open space shall be provided adjacent to each dwelling unit. Private open space shall be defined so that its boundaries are evident. The minimum horizontal dimension of balconies shall be five feet; 
ii.  Common Open Space. A minimum of fifty (50) square feet of open space per unit shall be provided within a unified project for the use by all residents within a project or designated portion of a project. The minimum horizontal dimension of patios, decks, courtyard areas, and other common open space shall be ten (10) feet. Common open space shall be designed for active and passive recreational uses and be of a type and intensity compatible with the residents' lifestyle and health. 
(Ord. 991 (part), 2007)  
Chapter 17.50 - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES 
 
17.50.010 - Intent and purpose. 
A.  The intent and purpose of this chapter is to: 
1.  Regulate sexually oriented businesses to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city; 
2.  Establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent deleterious effects of sexually oriented businesses within the city; and 
3.  Discourage and to minimize the opportunity for criminal conduct. 
B.  The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. 
C.  The provisions of this chapter are not intended to: 
1.  Limit or restrict the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials; 
2.  Restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment; 
3.  Deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment; 
4.  Deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market; and/or 
5.  Condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene or harmful materials to minors. 
(Prior code § 066.01)  
17.50.020 - Definitions. 
All specially defined words and phrases concerning sexually oriented businesses, as set forth in Section 5.60.040 of this code shall apply to this chapter and shall be incorporated by this reference as though fully set forth at length. 
(Prior code § 066.02)  
17.50.030 - Establishment and classification of businesses regulated. 
The establishment of any sexually oriented business shall be permitted only in the particular zones located within the specified area, as set forth in Section 17.50.050 of this chapter, and shall be subject to the following restrictions. No person shall cause or permit the establishment of any of the following sexually oriented businesses within one thousand (1,000) feet of another such business or within one thousand (1,000) feet of any religious institution, school, boys' club, girls' club, or similar existing youth organization, or public park or recreation area, or any public building regularly frequented by children, or within five hundred (500) feet of any property in the city zoned for residential use. These limitations apply to sexually oriented businesses classified as follows: 
A.  Adult arcades; 
B.  Adult bookstores; 
C.  Adult cabarets; 
D.  Adult motels; 
E.  Adult motion picture theaters; 
F.  Adult novelty stores; 
G.  Adult theaters; 
H.  Adult video stores; and 
I.  Nude model studios. 
(Prior code § 066.03)  
17.50.040 - Measurement of distance. 
Distance between any two sexually oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures, from the closest exterior structural wall of each business. The distance between any sexually oriented business and any religious institution, school, boys' club, girls' club, or similar existing youth organization, or public park or recreation area or public building regularly frequented by children or any properties zoned for residential use shall also be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as part of the premises where sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises of a religious institution, public or private elementary or secondary school, or the nearest boundary of an affected public park or recreation area, public building regularly frequented by children, residential district, or residentially zoned lot. 
(Prior code § 066.04)  
17.50.050 - Location of sexually oriented business. 
Sexually oriented businesses shall be permitted only in the "C-T (commercial tourist) and "C-G" (commercial general) zones located within the entertainment area plan, which plan is more particularly defined as all property with a general plan land use designation of "entertainment commercial" and bordered by Avenue 44 to the north, Coachella Valley Stormwater Channel to the south, the All American Canal to the east and Harrison Street to the west. Permits for sexually oriented businesses shall be required and governed by the procedures and policies specified in Chapter 5.60 of this code. 
(Prior code § 066.05)  
17.50.060 - Remedies and penalties for violation of this chapter. 
A.  Operation Outside of Permitted Area. It is unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated a sexually oriented business outside of the permitted zones within the Entertainment Area Plan, as specified in Section 17.50.050 of this Chapter. 
B.  Operation In Violation of Distance Requirements. 
1.  It is unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated a sexually oriented business within 1,000 feet of: (a) any religious institution; (b) any school; (c) any public park or recreation area; (d) any boys' club, girls' club, or similar existing youth organization; (e) any public park or recreation area or public building regularly frequented by children; and (f) another sexually oriented business, which, as classified in this Section shall include, any adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult novelty store, adult theater, adult video store, or nude model studio. 
2.  It is unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated a sexually oriented business within five hundred (500) feet of any residential zone. 
3.  It is unlawful for any person to cause or permit the operation, establishment, or maintenance of more than one sexually oriented business within the same building, structure, or portion thereof, or to cause the substantial increase of floor areas of any sexually oriented business in any building structure or portion thereof containing another sexually oriented business. 
C.  Public Nuisance. A violation of Subsections A and B of this section by any person responsible for committing, causing, or maintaining such violation shall constitute a public nuisance which shall be subject to the nuisance abatement provisions of Section 3.10.010 of this code. 
D.  Additional Remedies. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent or restrict the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation or noncompliance. Such other lawful actions shall include, but shall not be limited to, a civil nuisance abatement or equitable action for injunctive relief, or an action at law for damages in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
E.  Defenses to Prosecution Under this Section. It is a defense to prosecution under this Section if a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated: 
1.  By a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; 
2.  By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or 
3.  In a structure: 
a.  Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing, 
b.  Where, in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll at least three days in advance of the class, and 
c.  Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one time. 
(Prior code § 066.06) 
(Ord. No. 1098, § 40, 12-14-16)  
17.50.070 - Other zoning regulations. 
A.  Non-conforming uses: Any sexually oriented business operating on or before the day immediately prior to the effective date of this section and in violation of Section 17.50.010 through Section 17.50.060 of this chapter shall be deemed a nonconforming use. A nonconforming use will be permitted to continue for a two year period from the effective date of this section codified in this chapter with possible extensions for extenuating circumstances to be granted by the city council only upon a convincing showing of extreme financial hardship. Such extensions shall not exceed a total of three years in addition to the initial amortization period. Such an amortization period has been found to be valid in Lydo Enterprises, Inc. vs. City of Las Vegas, United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, 745 F. 2d 1211. Any such nonconforming business loses its right to operate as a nonconforming use, if, for any reason, it voluntarily discontinues its business operation for a period of thirty (30) days or more or if its permit to operate is revoked, and such revocation covers a period of thirty (30) days or more and such revocation is not overturned by a court of competent jurisdiction. Such nonconforming uses, while nonconforming, shall not be increased, enlarged, extended or altered except that the use may be changed to a conforming use. 
B.  Conforming Sexually Oriented Businesses. A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is not rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the grant or renewal of a sexually oriented business permit, of a religious institution, school, boys' club, girls' club, or similar youth organization, public park or recreation area, or public building regularly frequented by children within one thousand(1,000) feet of the sexually oriented business, or by the location, subsequent to the grant or renewal of a sexually oriented business permit, of a residential district within five hundred (500) feet of the sexually oriented business. This provision applies only to the renewal of a valid permit, but this provision does not apply when an application for a permit is submitted after a permit and/or license has expired or has been revoked. 
(Prior code § 066.07)  
Chapter 17.52 - MOBILEHOME PARKS 
 
17.52.010 - Mobilehome parks. 
A.  Intent and Purpose. These regulations are intended, to provide for the development of mobilehome parks within the city, in such a manner as to create a desirable living environment for both semipermanent and recreational use. These provisions are further intended to create standards of development consistent with those in other residential areas of the community. 
B.  Permit Required. A conditional use permit shall be required for the establishment or enlargement of any mobilehome park. In addition to any requirements which the planning commission or the city council may impose on the granting of any permit, the requirements of this section shall apply. 
C.  Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted in any mobilehome park: 
1.  Mobilehomes, trailers, trailer coaches, campers, camp cars. 
2.  Recreational buildings, structures, and uses intended to serve only the residents of the mobilehome park. 
3.  Accessory buildings normally appurtenant to the conduct of a mobilehome park, including buildings and structures required by law. 
D.  Lot Requirements for Mobilehome Parks. 
1.  Minimum Lot Size. Five acres. 
2.  Density Permitted. One mobilehome for each four thousand five hundred (4,500) square feet of gross lot area. 
3.  Lot width and depth shall be determined by the planning commission or city council when the conditional use permit is considered. 
E.  Yard Requirements for Mobilehome Parks. 
1.  Front Yard. Each park shall have a front yard of at least twenty-five (25) feet in depth. 
2.  Side Yard. Each park shall have side yards of at least fifteen (15) feet in length. 
3.  Rear Yard. Each park shall have a rear yard of at least fifteen (15) feet in depth. 
F.  Requirements for Individual Mobilehome Sites within a Mobilehome Park. 
1.  Minimum individual site size shall be three thousand (3,000) square feet. 
2.  Each individual mobilehome site shall have a minimum width of thirty-five (35) feet. 
3.  Each mobilehome shall be set back at least five feet from the edge of any interior site roadway. 
G.  Height Limits. Height limits shall be those in the zone in which a mobilehome park is authorized. 
H.  Distance Between Buildings and Mobilehomes. 
1.  There shall be a minimum average distance between mobilehomes of twenty (20) feet; except that where placed end to end, the distance may be reduced by ten (10) feet. 
2.  There shall be a minimum distance between mobilehomes and accessory buildings of fifteen (15) feet. 
3.  There shall be a minimum distance between accessory buildings of ten (10) feet. 
I.  Useable Open Space. 
1.  A common recreational-leisure area shall be provided for each mobilehome park. Such recreational-leisure area shall be for the purpose of providing usable open space for the residents of the mobilehome park, and shall not be for the use of the general public. 
2.  The size of such recreational-leisure area shall be equal to at least four hundred (400) square feet for each mobilehome site. Cabanas, swimming pools, decks, game areas, and similar uses may be included in such an area. 
(Prior code § 060.04)  
Chapter 17.54 - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING 
 
17.54.010 - Parking requirements. 
A.  Purpose and Intent. The purpose of this section is to provide sufficient off-street parking and loading spaces for all land uses and to assure the provision and maintenance of safe, adequate and well-designed off-street parking facilities. It is the intent of this section that the number of parking spaces shall be in proportion to the need created by the particular type of use. The standards for parking facilities are intended to reduce street congestion and traffic hazards, promote vehicular and pedestrian safety and efficient land use. Off-street parking and loading areas shall he established in a manner which will promote compatibility between parking facilities and surrounding neighborhoods; protect property values and enhance the environment through good design by providing such amenities as landscaping, walls, fencing and setbacks; improve the appearance of parking lots, yards, uncovered sales areas and buildings; control heat, wind and air pollutants; minimize nuisances; and promote aesthetic values and the general well-being of the residents of the city. Off-street vehicle parking shall be provided in accordance with this section when the building or structure is constructed or the use is established. Additional off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with this section if an existing building is altered or dwelling units, apartments or guest rooms are added, or a use is intensified by the addition of floor space or seating capacity, or there is a change of use, at the time of such alteration, addition, intensification or change of use. 
B.  General Provisions. 
1.  All required parking and loading spaces and driveways shall be maintained in good condition and available for its intended use as long as the use for which it was required continues to operate or exist. Except in residential districts, inside a garage, no storage shall encroach into any required parking or loading space or driveway and no vehicles shall be continuously parked in these areas, and all vehicles so parked shall be operable and have current registration. All motor vehicles incapable of movement under their own power and/or not licensed to operate on California highways, other than in the cases of emergency, shall be deemed detrimental to the public welfare and shall be stored in either an entirely enclosed building or in the rear yard of commercial and industrial zoned property that is entirely enclosed by a view-obscuring fence or wall. After due notice of noncompliance, said vehicles shall be required to be removed from the premises. 
2.  Where automobile parking spaces are provided and maintained on a lot in connection with a structure, at the time this section became effective, are insufficient to meet the requirements for the use with which they are associated, or where no such parking has been provided, said structure may be altered or enlarged, or such use may be extended or intensified only if additional automobile parking spaces are provided to meet the standards for said use in conformity with the requirements set forth in this section for the enlargements, extension or addition proposed. 
3.  Where calculations of the number of spaces required results in a fractional number, the next higher whole number shall be used. 
4.  In cases of mixed use in a building or on a lot, the total requirements for off-street parking shall be the sum of the requirements for the various uses computed separately. 
5.  When a garage is specifically required, or provided to meet required parking, entry doors shall be maintained in an operable condition at all times and no structural alteration or permanent obstruction shall be permitted within the required parking area that would reduce the number of required parking spaces. Use of garages shall be limited to vehicular and general storage purposes only and shall not conflict with any applicable building, housing or fire codes. 
6.  Vacant lots, privately owned lots, and parking lots of commercial and industrial businesses shall not be used for the advertising and sale of motor vehicles, boats or trailers, or similar property unless they are duly licensed by the city to do so, except that occupied property may be used for the sale of personal vehicles of the property owners, provided not more than two vehicles may be displayed, which is not otherwise prohibited by this section and subject to the provisions of subsection J of this section. 
7.  Additional Permitted Uses. 
a.  Uses other than those specifically mentioned in this chapter as uses permitted in each of the zones or uses in zones whose boundaries have been established by ordinance and deemed subject to a specific plan may be permitted therein and may be allowed other specific parking requirements, provided such uses are similar to those mentioned and are, in the opinion of the city planning commission, as evidenced by resolution of record, not more obnoxious or detrimental to the welfare of the community than the permitted uses specifically mentioned in any zone. 
b.  The planning director shall maintain a permanent list of additional permitted uses, together with the date of determination and the resolution number. 
c.  The planning commission shall not, under the provisions of this subsection, include uses in a zone which are specifically listed as permitted uses in another zone. 
C.  Number of Parking Spaces Required. The following minimum numbers of off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with this section for all new buildings or uses and when any building or use is altered, extended, changed, or intensified in any manner whatsoever: 
1.  In commercial districts and generally for commercial uses, including offices, except in the manufacturing service (M-S) zone, one parking space shall be provided for each two hundred fifty (250) square feet of gross floor area, unless otherwise specified in subsection 4 of this section. 
A.  Exemption near public parking or business within the Sixth Street downtown area. 
Any existing buildings for commercial use located within five hundred (500) feet of a publicly owned parking lot and located within the Sixth Street commercial core area defined as the area bounded by Harrison Street, Fourth Street, Highway 111, Eighth Street and property bordered by Harrison Street, Cairo Avenue, Baghdad Avenue and three hundred (300) feet east of Harrison Street shall be exempt from this subsection. 
Any existing building for commercial use located more than five hundred (500) feet from a publicly owned parking lot and located within the Sixth Street commercial core area bounded by Harrison Street, Fourth Street, Highway 111, Eighth Street and property bordered by Harrison Street, Cairo Avenue, Baghdad Avenue and three hundred (300) feet east of Harrison Street will be required to meet the parking requirements except that the required number of parking spaces may be reduced by sixty (60) percent with the approval of the planning commission as a part of architectural review. Private parking lots developed for uses within this exempt area shall comply with this section, including the size of parking spaces and required aisle width. 
Expansions of any existing buildings for commercial uses located within the Sixth Street commercial core area bounded by Harrison Street, Fourth Street, Highway 111, Eighth Street and property bordered by Harrison Street, Cairo Avenue, Baghdad Avenue and three hundred (300) feet east of Harrison Street will be required to meet the parking requirements except that the required number of parking spaces may be reduced by sixty (60) percent with the approval of the planning commission as a part of architectural review. 
New building structures for commercial use will be required to meet the parking requirements by this chapter. 
2.  In the manufacturing service (M-S) zone, one parking space shall be provided for each four hundred (400) square feet of unit area up to twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, plus one space for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of unit area over twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, plus one space for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of outside sale, display or storage area, unless otherwise specified in subsection 4 of this section. Parking in this district shall be based on the individual unit size into which a building is divided, and the cumulative total of spaces required for the individual units shall be the required parking for a building. 
3.  In manufacturing districts, except the commercial manufacturing district, one parking space shall be provided for each five hundred (500) square feet of unit area for up to twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, plus one space for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of unit area over twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, unless otherwise specified in subsection 4 of this section. Parking in this district shall be based on the individual unit size into which a building is divided, and the cumulative total of spaces required for the individual units shall be required parking for the building. 
4.  For the following uses, the minimum number of parking spaces required shall be as specified below. The required parking shall be the cumulative total for all uses on the same site. 
a.  Residential Uses. 
(1)  Single-Family Detached Dwellings. Two spaces per dwelling unit, both to be in an enclosed garage. Single-Family units within the R-O 6000 Overlay zone may reduce this requirement to one space in an enclosed garage so long as all requirements of that zone are met. 
(2)  For Multifamily, Attached Single-Family Dwellings and Duplexes. 
0 to 1 bedroom 	One per dwelling unit, to be covered or in a garage. Plus two-thirds open space per dwelling unit. 
2 or more bedrooms 	One per dwelling unit, to be covered or in a garage. Plus one and one-third open space per dwelling unit. 
 
b.  Auditoriums, Churches, Theaters and Places of Assembly. One space per each three seats. Where there are no fixed seats, one space per twenty-one (21) square feet of floor area in places of assembly. Where fixed seats consist of pews or benches, eighteen (18) lineal inches of pew or bench shall be considered one seat. 
c.  Boardinghouses, Fraternities and Group Living Quarters. One space per resident. 
d.  Bowling Alleys. Four spaces per lane. 
e.  Clubs, Discos, Ballrooms, Cabarets, Cocktail Lounges, Dance Halls, Lodges, and Incidental Dancing Areas, and Similar Facilities Where Dancing Is the Principal Use Of the Area. One parking space for every thirty (30) square feet of dance floor area. 
f.  Game Courts, such as Tennis and Racquetball. Two spaces for each court. 
g.  Golf Courses. Four spaces per hole. 
h.  Golf Driving Ranges. One space per tee. 
i.  Hospitals for Acute Care. One space per licensed bed. 
j.  Hospitals, Convalescent and Sanitariums, Nursing Homes, Rest Homes, Retirement Homes and Similar Establishments. One space for each three licensed beds. 
k.  Hotels and Motels. One space per room or suite, plus one space per every three employees on the largest work shift, plus one space per three persons to the maximum capacity of each public meeting and/or banquet room, plus fifty (50) percent of the spaces otherwise required for accessory uses (e.g. restaurants and bars). 
l.  Outdoor Display, Sales and Storage Areas, Including but not Limited to, Contractor's Storage Yards, Rental Equipment Yards and Outdoor Plant Nurseries. One space per two hundred fifty (250) square feet of office/retail floor area plus one space per two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of outdoor area or one space for every two employees, whichever is greater. 
m.  Restaurants and Other Eating, Drinking and Food Establishments. One space for each forty-five (45) square feet of customer area, plus one space for each two hundred (200) square feet of noncustomer area. 
n.  Schools, Private. 
(1)  Elementary and Junior High. One space per teacher and staff member, plus one space per two classrooms; 
(2)  Senior High. One space per teacher and staff member on the largest shift, plus five spaces for every classroom; 
(3)  College. One space per staff member on the largest shift, plus ten (10) spaces per classroom; 
(4)  Commercial or Trade Schools. One space per two students, plus one space per employee (including faculty) at capacity class attendance period; 
(5)  Day Care/Pre-School. One space for each employee plus one space for each ten (10) children the facility is designed to accommodate. 
o.  Vehicle Repair And Service. Three spaces for each service bay, plus one space for each two hundred fifty (250) square feet of office, sales and storage areas. 
p.  Used Car Lots. Require a minimum of five parking spaces per used car lot or one space per two hundred fifty (250) square feet of office area plus one space per two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of the outdoor display/sales area, whichever is greater. 
D.  Size of Parking Spaces and Required Aisle Width. 
1.  Residential. Garage/enclosed spaces with a minimum clear dimension of ten (10) feet width by twenty (20) feet length and ninety (90) degree aisle width of twenty-eight (28) feet. 
Residential. Carport/covered spaces with a minimum clear dimension of nine feet width by eighteen (18) feet length and ninety (90) degree aisle width of twenty-eight (28) feet. 
Residential. Open/uncovered spaces with a minimum clear dimension of nine feet width by eighteen (18) feet length and ninety (90) degree aisle width of twenty-four (24) feet. 
2.  Reserved. 
3.  Handicapped parking spaces shall be provided on the basis of total parking provided on-site as follows: 
Number of Spaces 	Number of Handicapped Spaces 
1—25 	1 
26—50 	2 
51—75 	3 
76—100 	4 
101—150 	5 
151—200 	6 
201—300 	7 
301—400 	8 
401—500 	9 
501—1000 	Two percent of total parking space. 
1001 and over 	Twenty (20) plus one for each one hundred (100) spaces over one thousand (1,000). 
 
a.  Parking spaces for disabled people shall be at least nine feet wide and shall have an adjacent access aisle five feet wide. Parking spaces shall be grouped and located near major building entrances. Two accessible parking spaces may share a common access aisle. 
b.  Signage. Accessible parking spaces shall be designated as reserved for the disabled by a sign showing the symbol of accessibility. Such signs shall not be obscured by a vehicle parked in the space. 
c.  Pavement Markings. All parking spaces for disabled people shall be clearly marked in blue. 
E.  Loading Space Requirements. All buildings which are newly constructed, altered with respect to use or occupancy, or expanded shall be provided with off-street loading spaces per the following schedule: 
1. 
Square Feet of Unit 
Space 
(Gross Floor Area) 	Loading Spaces 
Required 
Commercial Uses 	
12,000—20,000 	1 Type A 
Over 20,000 	1 Type B 
Manufacturing Uses (including all uses in the M-S District) 	
Under 7,500 	1 Type A 
7,500—15,000 	1 Type B 
15,001—25,000 	2 Type B 
25,001—40,000 	2 Type C 
40,001—50,000 	3 Type C 
For each 
 additional 50,000 	1 Type C 
 
a.  Loading spaces shall be provided for each individual unit in accordance with the sizes listed. 
2.  Minimum specifications for loading spaces. 
3.  Loading spaces shall not encroach into any drive aisle or other required spaces. 
4.  Wherever a loading space is located adjacent to parking spaces, there shall be a protective landscaped buffer a minimum of five feet wide separating the two. 
5.  Loading spaces shall be located and designed such that trucks shall not need to maneuver or back onto a public street or alley. 
F.  Drive-Through Establishments. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, additional vehicle storage spaces shall be provided for all establishments having vehicle pickup windows as follows: 
1.  A drive-through lane with minimum storage for eight vehicles shall be provided at twenty (20) feet per vehicle. 
2.  The drive-through lane shall be designed such that it will not interfere with free and orderly circulation of the parking lot. 
3.  The drive-through lane shall not encroach upon or block driveways or parking spaces and shall be separated from adjoining driveways, parking spaces, and property lines by a landscaped planter a minimum of five feet in width. 
G.  Shared and Off-Site Parking. The planning commission may approve a conditional use permit to allow the use of shared and off-site parking requirements to reduce the total number of required on-site parking spaces for different uses when and also to allow sharing of loading spaces when the following requirements have been complied with: 
1.  A parking study addressing the potential peak parking demand and an actual parking survey of the parking facility under consideration shall be submitted. 
2.  Sufficient evidence shall be presented demonstrating that no substantial conflict in the principal hours or periods of peak demand for the structures or uses for which the joint use is proposed will exist. 
3.  Parties concerned in the use of shared or off-site parking facilities shall provide evidence of agreements for such use by a proper legal instrument, which shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder with two copies thereof filed with the planning division as a condition of any approval. 
4.  In no case shall the total parking reduction be allowed to exceed fifty (50) percent of the total parking for all uses combined. 
5.  Any off-site parking shall be located so that it will adequately serve the use for which it is intended, with safe and convenient access without unreasonable hazard to pedestrian, vehicular traffic, or traffic congestion, and shall not be detrimental to the use of any business, property or residential neighborhood in the vicinity. 
H.  Circulation and Parking Space Layout. All parking areas shall be designed as follows: 
1.  The location and dimensions of aisle areas adjacent to parking spaces shall be arranged in accordance with the minimum parking standards required by this section. 
2.  For all uses other than one-family and multifamily dwellings located in residential districts, parking shall be arranged so as to permit vehicles to move out of the parking area without backing onto a street. No tandem spaces shall be allowed, except single-family dwellings. 
3.  No two-way drive aisle shall be less than twenty (20) feet. 
4.  All parking shall be designed to provide complete and through circulation wherever possible. In any case, adequate turning radii and turnarounds shall be provided for emergency vehicles and trash and delivery trucks. 
5.  Parking spaces should be located within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the use which they are intended to service. 
6.  All driveways on a single-family residential site must be at least eleven (11) feet wide and lead to covered parking, or to an approved open parking space. A nine-foot wide driveway leading to an approved open parking space may be allowed for golf carts or trailers. For purposes of complying with this subsection, an "approved open parking space" is defined as an open parking space located behind the front building line of the residence and paved with nine feet in width and twenty (20) feet in depth, and screened from view to the street with solid decorative masonry walls and opaque metal gates that are six feet in height. 
I.  Surface of Parking Area. The following standards shall apply to all parking areas required by this section: 
1.  The flooring material for garages and carports in all districts shall be portland cement concrete. 
2.  All parking and loading spaces and driveways shall be paved and maintained in good and safe condition and shall be so graded and drained as to dispose of all surface water and to prevent water from running off onto adjoining property without the permission of the owner of that property. Drainage courses and swales in parking lots shall be paved with concrete. All asphalt parking lots shall receive a seal coat. 
3.  Except for single-family and two-family residences all off-street parking and loading spaces shall be marked by white stripes not less than four inches wide painted on the surfaced area, or by similar means as approved by the community development director. 
J.  Landscaping. Wherever any parking area, except for single-family dwellings, is provided, landscaping consisting of trees, shrubs, vines, ground cover, or combinations thereof, and permanent irrigation shall be installed and permanently maintained in accordance with the following standards: 
1.  Where any parking area or driveway abuts a street, there shall be a minimum setback of ten (10) feet from the public right-of-way that shall be fully landscaped and irrigated unless a greater setback is required by any other provision of this chapter. 
2.  Where any parking or driveway areas that are intended to serve a commercial or industrial use abut a residential district a minimum ten-foot wide landscaped planter containing evergreen trees spaced not more than thirty (30) feet apart shall be provided and approved by the planning department. In addition, a masonry wall a minimum of six feet in height shall also be constructed along the property line adjacent to the residential district. 
3.  Where any parking or driveway abuts a residential or commercial district, a landscaped planter a minimum of five feet in width shall separate the parking area or driveway from the property line, unless a greater setback is required by any other provisions of this chapter. 
4.  Internal landscaping in addition to subsections (1), (2), and (3) of this section, and equal to a minimum of five percent of the parking and driveway areas, is required and shall be distributed throughout the parking area. 
5.  All landscape planter beds in interior parking areas shall be not less than five feet in width and bordered by a concrete curb not less than six inches nor more than eight inches in height adjacent to the parking surface. 
6.  Parking and driveway areas in commercial and residential zones shall be separated from buildings by a landscaped planter. 
7.  Where a drive aisle abuts the side of a parking space, a landscaped planter shall separate the parking space from the drive aisle. 
8.  At least one fifteen (15) gallon tree shall be provided within the parking area for every ten (10) parking spaces, with size, height and species acceptable to staff. 
9.  All internal landscape planters shall have permanent and automatic sprinkler or drip irrigation systems. 
10.  Any unused space resulting from the design of the parking area shall be used for landscape purposes. 
11.  The height of boundary or interior landscaping shall be limited to a height not to exceed three feet, or in the case of trees, no branch shall be below six feet when within fifteen (15) feet of the point of intersection of: 
a.  A vehicular traffic way or driveway and a street; 
b.  A vehicular traffic way or driveway or sidewalk; and 
c.  Two or more vehicular traffic ways or driveways or streets. 
12.  Review and Approval. For any site that requires architectural review of a new development, the landscape plan is subject to review and approval of the planning commission in accordance with Section 17.72.010 of this title. No landscaping shall be installed until the conceptual landscape plan has been approved by the planning commission and the final landscape plan has been approved by the planning commission or community development director, at the discretion of the planning commission. 
13.  Maintenance. Required landscaping shall be maintained in a neat, clean and healthy condition. This includes pruning, mowing of lawns, weeding, removal of litter, fertilizing, replacement of plants where necessary, and the regular watering of all plant material. 
K.  Lighting. Parking area lighting is not always required; however, if lighted parking areas are required parking areas, such lighting fixtures shall be located, with hoods provided and adjusted, so as to preclude the direct glare of the light from shining onto property or streets. 
L.  Parking Lot Permit Required. Prior to the occupancy of any building or property except a single-family residence, an approval of a parking lot plan shall be obtained from the planning division. The parking lot plan shall be required to contain the following information, which may be provided on separate or multiple sheets: 
1.  Name, address and location of the development; 
2.  Scale, north arrow, and vicinity map showing closest major streets and distances to cross streets on each side; 
3.  Property lines and lot dimensions; 
4.  Location and width of all easements; 
5.  Footprint of all structures and any overhangs or projections; 
6.  Location of all entrances and loading doors; 
7.  Location of all curbs and wheel stops; 
8.  Location, typical dimensions, and type of surfacing for all driveways, parking arid loading spaces, and thickness of the paving; 
9.  Location of all trash enclosures, transformers, and any equipment outside a buildings, 
10.  Striping plan; 
11.  Location and type of any lighting fixtures; 
12.  Location and types of any signs; 
13.  Grading and drainage plan; 
14.  Landscaping and irrigation plan, and list of type and size of plants to be used; and 
15.  Statistical summary of the project including total gross square feet of each building and the total square feet, the number of covered, standard and compact parking spaces, and the total number of parking and loading spaces. 
M.  Parking and Storage of Commercial Vehicles. 
1.  Definition. For the purpose of this section, "commercial vehicle" means a self-propelled vehicle used or maintained for the transportation of persons for hire, compensation or profit, or used and maintained primarily for the transportation of property including, but not limited to, tractors, vans, trailers, panel trucks, dump trucks, but excluding vans and pickups with wheel bases less than one hundred fifty (150) inches. 
2.  Restrictions. 
a.  Parking or storing of commercial vehicles in residential districts for any length of time is prohibited, except that commercial vehicles may park for the purpose of making pickups and deliveries of materials and merchandise from or to any building or site. 
b.  Commercial vehicles shall not be parked on vacant or undeveloped property in any district. 
N.  Parking and Storage in Residential Zones. 
1.  Except as provided in Section 17.54.020 below, when a garage is specifically required, entry doors shall remain operable at all times, and no structural alteration or permanent obstruction shall be permitted within the required parking area. Use of garages shall be for vehicular and general storage purposes only, and shall not conflict with any applicable building, housing and fire code. 
2.  Motor vehicles, trailers, boats and similar equipment may be parked within the required front yard setback only in a driveway or parking space which conforms to city standards. They shall not otherwise be parked in the required front yard setback. They may be parked behind the required front yard setback or in a side or rear yard only if they are screened from adjacent properties and the public right-of-way by a solid fence, wall or a gate at minimum of six feet in height. 
3.  No habitation of a trailer, camper or recreational vehicle shall be allowed except in duly approved camping areas. 
(Prior code § 070.03) 
(Ord. No. 1075, § 9, 6-10-15; Ord. No. 1081, § 1, 1-13-16)  
17.54.020 - Permitting of certain garage conversions to residential living space ("garage conversions"). 
Notwithstanding any provision of this title to the contrary, the development services director, or designee, may, under the following circumstances, approve garage conversions and, if approved, they shall be deemed legal residential living space within a dwelling. 
A.  All permitted garage conversions must meet the following criteria: 
1.  The garage conversion is associated with a primary residence in the R-S and R-O zoning districts, and on the same lot with an original construction date on or before January 1, 1990. 
2.  The garage conversion may have no toilets, baths, showers, sinks, kitchens, kitchenettes, wetbars, washers or dryers. 
3.  The garage conversion must be attached to the primary residence and be constructed to be a part of the same adjoining room with internal access between the two. There may be no wall, space or partition between the primary residence and the garage conversion that prevents internal access, nor may there be any wall, space or partition erected internally to the garage conversion (garage conversion must be a single open room). 
4.  The primary residence is less than one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet. 
5.  The primary residence is located on a lot with an area that is seven thousand two hundred (7,200) square feet or less, and which has inadequate space to provide a new conforming two-car garage. 
6.  The garage conversion was originally built as a garage or carport for one or two vehicles (three-car and larger garages and carports are not eligible). 
7.  The garage conversion is not being separately leased or rented from the primary residence. 
8.  For each vehicular parking space that has been converted to living space by the garage conversion, the property owner must provide replacement parking space on the lot at a one-to-one ratio, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Replacement parking spaces may be located on the existing driveway that served the garage conversion when it was originally used as a vehicle garage or carport, or on an "approved open parking space" as allowed under Section 17.54.010(H)(6) of this chapter. Notwithstanding the restrictions contained in Section 17.54.010(H)(6) that driveways must lead to covered parking, a driveway leading to a garage conversion may be considered an "approved open parking space" for purposes of satisfying this subsection. 
b.  Any replacement parking spaces within a side yard setback shall maintain at least three feet of clear space for fire and emergency personnel access, unless the opposite side yard setback provides equivalent access. 
c.  No portion of any replacement parking space shall be located in a sidewalk, parkway, or other public right-of-way, nor shall it interfere with existing easements and rights of access to public utilities (e.g., water and sewer lines). 
d.  Replacement parking spaces may only be located on a fully-paved driveway or on another parking surface which conforms to city standards as set forth in Section 17.54.010(I) of this chapter. 
9.  The garage door must be removed and fully replaced with a framed structural wall, which conforms with the requirements for separation of bottom plate to grade, and the total garage conversion structure must meet applicable building, housing and other uniform codes. The garage conversion may not have any doors or any other means of ingress/egress from the garage conversion to the outside, except for windows allowed under this section. 
10.  The garage conversion must have at least one window facing the front yard, at least nine square feet in size, with trim and finish matching the front side of the primary residence. All windows must be installed in compliance with applicable building, housing and other uniform codes. 
11.  Equipment for heating and air conditioning, and related equipment (including water heaters) shall be installed in compliance with applicable building, housing and other uniform codes. No such equipment may be located in the garage conversion. 
B.  Garage Conversion Permit Application Procedure. 
1.  An applicant seeking a permit to have a garage conversion shall file an application with the development services director and pay an application fee, as may be set by resolution of the city council. The application shall be in a form approved by the development services director and city attorney's office, intended to gather sufficient applicant and property information to allow the development services director to make an informed decision regarding whether a garage conversion meets the criteria of this section. 
2.  Upon receipt of a completed application, the development services director shall review all relevant material. The development services director shall render such a decision not later than sixty (60) days after receipt of a completed application. The development services director and the applicant may, by mutual written agreement, extend this deadline. 
3.  The written decision shall indicate whether the garage conversion meets or does not meet the criteria of this section. If it does, the development services director shall issue a certificate of compliance for the garage conversion to the applicant, subject to the condition that the garage conversion and related property remain in compliance with the standards set forth in this section. The certificate shall be in a form approved by the development services director and the city attorney's office, and shall be in recordable form. At the applicant's cost, the city shall record a copy of the certificate with the Riverside County Recorder's office not later than thirty (30) days after its issuance, and shall thereafter provide a conformed copy of the recorded document to the applicant. If a garage conversion does not meet the standards, the written decision shall indicate what modifications or corrections, if any, must be accomplished for the garage conversion to comply with this subsection. 
4.  The decision of the development services director may be appealed to the planning commission pursuant to Section 17.70.080 of this title. 
C.  The development services director may issue administrative regulations consistent with this section, in order to fairly apply or interpret the standards contained herein. 
(Ord. No. 1081, § 2, 1-13-16)  
Chapter 17.56 - SIGNS 
 
17.56.010 - Signs. 
A.  Short Title. This section may be referred to as the sign regulations of the city. 
B.  Purpose. Recognizing that Coachella is a growing and dynamic city, the city council finds that proper sign control is necessary to create and maintain aesthetic values which will benefit both residents and merchants who operate in the city. A sign ordinance provides equitable standards for all businesses to identify the location of goods and services. 
One main identification sign shall be allowed in conjunction with accessory/convenience signs as necessary. Therefore the purpose of this chapter is to provide standards to safeguard life, health, property and the public welfare and to provide the means for adequate identification of businesses and other sign users by regulating and controlling the design, location, and maintenance of all signs in the city. 
All signs and sign programs shall be subject to review and approval pursuant to this section unless exempted by this chapter. Review and approval shall include but not be limited to the following: 
1.  Sign placement; 
2.  Color; 
3.  Architectural integrity; 
4.  Legibility; 
5.  Size and scale; and 
6.  Illumination. 
C.  Definitions. The following definitions shall apply to this section unless another meaning is clearly apparent from the context. Definitions in Section 17.06.020 of the city zoning ordinance shall also apply. 
"Abandoned sign" means a sign, along with its supports, which no longer directs, advertises or identifies a legal business establishment, product or activity on the premises where such sign is displayed. 
"Abatement" means elimination and removal of any sign in violation of Coachella Sign Ordinance. 
"Affixed" means to be attached in any manner, including, but not limited to, adhesive substances or suction, or to be touching in any way, especially leaning against. 
"Amortization" as pertaining to the city sign ordinance, amortization means the gradual extinction of nonconforming signs. 
"Animated sign" means any sign which is designed to give a message through a sequence of progressive changes of parts or lights or degree of lighting. 
"Attraction board" means any sign which provides for changeable letters, numbers or symbols. 
"Banners" means A sign composed of lightweight material either enclosed or not enclosed in a rigid frame. 
"Billboard." Please refer to of this code. 
"Building frontage" means the linear length of a building facing a public street, pedestrian mall, or parking lot. 
"Canopy" means a permanent roof-like shelter extending from part or all of a building face and constructed of some durable material which may or may not project over a public right-of-way. 
"Center identification sign" means a sign identifying a center or complex. For purposes of this section a center or complex shall be defined as a group of two or more major retail, wholesale, industrial or professional uses utilizing common facilities including off-street parking, access, and landscaping, not necessarily under single ownership. 
"Directory" means a sign identifying and locating residential, business or industrial uses within a building, subdivision, planned development, center or complex. 
"Entertainment board" means any assemblage of verbiage, designed to advertise current or coming entertainment scheduled to occur on the premises. Also attraction board. 
"Freestanding sign" means any sign supported by a structure other than a building or wall. 
"Highway/freeway oriented uses" means any facility or group of facilities which as their primary purpose cater to the nonresident, traveling public, on Interstate 10 Freeway or Highway 111 and 86. 
"Home occupations" means those occupations which may be conducted in a residential zone in such a manner as to be compatible with, and not disruptive in residential neighborhoods. (See Section 17.58.010 of the zoning ordinance) 
"Main sign" means the largest single permitted sign on a property. 
"Marquee" means any permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond a building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of the building, generally designed and constructed to provide protection from the weather. 
"Marquee sign" means any sign attached to, in any manner, or made a part of a marquee. 
"Mobile sign" means any permanent or temporary painted sign or marquee sign mounted on a trailer or on portable supports. 
"Monument sign" means a low-profile free-standing sign incorporating the design and materials accenting the architectural theme of the buildings on the same property. All such signs shall be subject to architectural and site plan review by the planning commission. 
"Multi-tenanted building" means a building containing more than one individual business within a shopping, professional or industrial complex. 
"Nightclub" means a place of entertainment serving food and beverages having a floor show and/or providing music for dancing. For the purposes of this section, cabarets and discotheques shall be considered night clubs. 
"Nonconforming sign" means a sign lawfully erected and legally existing at the time of the effective date of an ordinance, but which does not conform to the new provisions of said code. 
"Off-site sign" is also known as off-premises billboards and poster panels. Any sign which advertises goods, products, services or facilities not necessarily sold on the premises on which the sign is located. 
"Political sign" means any sign whose content addresses a government issue or the name of a person seeking a government office. (Please refer to Section 2.08.060, Political sign regulations, of this code.) 
"Portable sign" means any sign not permanently attached to the ground or other permanent structure, or a sign designed to be transported, including, but not limited to, signs designed to be transported by means of wheels; signs converted to A-or T-frames; menu and sandwich board signs; balloons or umbrellas used as signs; signs attached to or painted on vehicles parked and visible from the public right-of-way, unless the vehicle is used in the normal day-to-day operation of the business. 
"Projecting sign" means an on-site sign other than a wall sign suspended from or supported by a building or structure and projecting out at any angle to the plane of the wall or structure. 
"Real estate sign" means a temporary on-site sign placed upon property for the purpose of advertising to the public the sale, lease or rent of said property. 
"Readerboard" means a sign having changeable copy used to announce a coming event or attraction or used to convey a specific message related to the building or use of the property on which the readerboard sign is located. Also see attraction board, entertainment board. 
"Restricted/limited access residential complex" means any residential complex that controls vehicular/pedestrian entry to the complex by virtue of wall and/or gate design. 
"Roof sign" means An on-site sign erected upon or above the roof or parapet of a building or structure. 
"Sandwich, "A" frame signs" means a sign comprised of two sign panels joined at the top to form a freestanding temporary sign. 
"Sign" means any identification, description, illustration or device illuminated or non-illuminated, which is visible from any public place or is located on private property and exposed to the public and which directs attention to a product, place, activity, person, institution, business, or solicitation with the exception of window display. Any emblem, painting, banner, pennant, placard, lighting or other item, designed to advertise, identify, or convey information shall be considered a sign. National flags and flags of political subdivisions shall not be construed as signs. An interior unlit sign or graphic, other than sale sign, with letters or numbers less than two inches high per foot of distance from the street front glass shall be exempt from provisions of the chapter. This chapter does not apply to signs located further than three feet from the street front glass. 
This definition shall not include official notices issued by any court or public body or officer or directional warning or information sign or structures required by or authorized by law or by federal, state, county or city authority. 
"Sign, sale" means any sign, graphic or collage that indicates a sale, by virtue of a special reduction, or percentage reduction, in price of merchandise, including, but not limited to, a dose-out of merchandise, quitting business sale, lost-lease sale, moving sale or overstocked sale. 
"Sign area" means the area of a sign without a border placed on the wall of a building shall be computed by enclosing the entire sign within sets of parallel lines touching the outer limits of the sign message and computing the area thus enclosed. Where two faces of a sign are parallel to each other, the sign area shall be one side only, unless otherwise specified. 
"Sign program" means design criteria established to guide the design of all signs on a building or complex. Sign programs can, but need not mandate specific elements such as material, color, size, location, lighting, and uniformity. A sign program is intended to coordinate the design of all signs within a project. 
"Special event sign" means signs used to promote events granted a temporary special permit by the city council, such as civic, patriotic, or special events of general public interest which take place within the city. 
"Temporary sign" means any sign that is used only temporarily and is not permanently mounted. 
"Wall sign" means an on-site sign attached to, erected against, or painted onto a wall or a building with the exposed face of the sign in a plane parallel to said wall. 
"Window sign" means any sign, pictures, symbol, or combination thereof, designed to communicate information about an activity, business, commodity, event, sale or service, that is placed inside a window or upon the window, so as to be visible from the outside. 
D.  Exempt Signs. 
1.  The following signs shall be exempt from review requirements and shall be permitted subject to the limitations contained in this chapter. A greater number of signs or signs of larger size than specified below shall be prohibited, unless elsewhere specifically permitted subject to the provisions of this section. 
a.  Change of copy within an approved comprehensive sign program. 
b.  Temporary holiday decorations. 
c.  Official and legal notices. 
d.  Public utility signs. 
e.  Safety signs. 
f.  Interior signs. 
g.  Directional, warning, or informational signs as required or authorized by law or by any federal, state, county, special district or city authority. 
2.  Reserved. 
E.  Prohibited Signs. Any sign not specifically authorized by this chapter shall be prohibited unless required by law or utilized by a proper governmental agency. The following signs are expressly prohibited: 
1.  Reflecting, Prismatic. Signs which reflect or appear to do any of the foregoing shall be prohibited. Exceptions: flags, banners, pennants, inflatable objects, balloon and time temperature modules are permitted subject to provisions in, subsection I of this section for temporary signs. Exceptions: electronic message board signs (reader boards) may be permitted in the CG zone, on properties with a minimum street frontage of 200 feet, as long as all messages are of a sufficient size and duration so as to be easily readable by the general public traveling by the site. Electronic message board signs shall not include flashing, blinking or scrolling images or messages. Electronic message board signs shall not be placed within 1,000 feet of any other existing electronic message board sign. 
2.  Signs on Public Property or Right-of-Way or Attached to Any Public Property. Signs on public property or right-of-way, or attached to any utility pole, tree, traffic sign post, traffic signal, or any other official traffic control device in accordance with Section 21464 of the California Vehicle Code, and within or on any public structure, building or facility whether city hail, park, library, fire or police station or otherwise, except for any city-owned sign, shall be prohibited unless otherwise authorized in this chapter. 
3.  Off-Premises Commercial Signs. Any sign which advertises a use not conducted on the premises, or which identifies a product, interest, shall be prohibited unless otherwise authorized herein. (See Chapter 5.48) 
4.  Businesses Without Street Frontage. Signs other than those authorized on the multiple tenant identification sign or an approved sign program shall be prohibited for any business without street frontage. 
5.  Signs Affixed to Windows or Doors. Any sign, merchandise, or graphic, otherwise affixed to windows or doors, interior or exterior, other than those permitted by this chapter shall be prohibited. Allowable signs affixed to windows shall in no case exceed 20% of the occupancy frontage window area. 
6.  Imitation of Traffic Signal. No person shall place, maintain or display in view of any street or highway, any sign, signal, or device, which resembles an official traffic sign or signal. Visual obstruction of any official traffic sign or signal is prohibited. 
7.  Home Occupation Signs. Signs in residential zones identifying home occupations. 
8.  Obscene or Unlawful Signs. Signs displaying obscene, indecent, immoral or unlawful matter are not permitted. 
9.  Exterior Merchandise Signs. Signs attached, affixed to or from the interior or exterior of any merchandise or products displayed outside of permanent buildings. 
10.  Vehicular Signs. Vehicles of any type or trailers displaying advertising for a business, services, merchandise or products may not be parked adjacent to or along a public right-of-way in such a way as to be used for advertising purposes. 
11.  Roof Signs. Signs painted or mounted on a roof, including a mansard roof, are prohibited. Signs that extend above the peak of the roof or the parapet are prohibited. Signs that are mounted on a mansard or other roof type and are not integrated into the design of the building are also prohibited. 
12.  Light Bulb Strings. External displays, other than temporary decorative holiday lighting or holiday displays, which consist of unshielded light bulbs, festoons, and/or strings of open light bulbs are prohibited. 
13.  Sandwich or "A" Frame Signs. The use of sandwich or "A" frame type signs shall be prohibited. 
14.  Residential Signs. Signs for residential uses, such as home occupations and garage sales, in a commercial zone are prohibited. 
F.  Permitted Signs. Commercial and industrial business. 
1.  Main Signs. The number and area of signs as outlined in this section are intended to be maximum standards and do not necessarily insure architectural compatibility. In addition to the enumerated standards, consideration shall be given to a signs relationship to the overall design of the subject property and the surrounding community. 
a.  Sign Area. Each separate business shall have a united sign area. The total sign area shall not exceed two square feet for every linear foot of building frontage on any one side of the business. Frontage may be considered as any one side facing a street or parking lot. As an alternative, the total sign area shall not exceed one square foot for each linear foot of lot frontage facing one street. The sign area of the main sign and all secondary signs shall not exceed the total allowable sign area. The area of accessory and convenience signs identified in subsection (F)(2) of this section is not counted toward the total sign area. 
b.  Number of Signs. Any business with less than one hundred (100) feet of building frontage shall be permitted to have only one sign larger than thirty-two (32) square feet; this sign shall be called the main sign. Other secondary signs may be on the front, sides, or rear of the building so long as no signs are closer than ten (10) feet from each other, with the exception of accessory and convenience signs identified in subsection (F)(2) of this section. 
c.  Size of Main Building Signs for Individual Commercial and Industrial Uses. Except as otherwise provided in this section, each separate business shall be limited to one main building sign. Relative thereto, the following provisions shall apply: 
i.  Buildings Within One Hundred (100) Feet of Right-of-Way. The maximum area of a main building sign for any business in a building located within one hundred (100) feet of the right-of-way upon which it faces shall be one and one-half square foot of sign area per lineal foot of frontage which the business has facing on a right-of-way, plaza, promenade, arcade, or parking lot (in the case of shopping centers). Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, such signs shall have a surface area not greater than fifty (50) square feet. No such sign shall be closer than ten (10) feet from any other sign permitted herewith. The main sign must be located on the building facing the right-of-way or parking lot from which its maximum allowable size is determined. 
ii.  Buildings One Hundred (100) Feet or More From the Right-of-Way. The total aggregate area for a main building sign for any business in a building located one hundred (100) feet or more from any right-of-way upon which it faces shall be the equivalent of one and one-half square feet of sign area per lineal foot of frontage which the building has facing on a right-of-way or parking lot. Except as provided herein, such signs shall have a surface area no greater than seventy-five (75) square feet. No main sign shall be closer than ten (10) feet from any other sign permitted hereunder. The main sign must be located adjacent to the right-of-way or on the building or parking lot from which its maximum allowable size is determined. 
iii.  Additional Sign Area For a Single Business in a Building Having Over Fifty (50) Feet of Frontage. A single business having a lineal frontage on any right-of-way in excess of fifty (50) feet shall be entitled to in addition to subsection (F)(1)(c)(i) and (F)(1)(c)(ii) of this section, an additional one square foot of sign area for each four feet of frontage in excess of fifty (50) feet. 
iv.  Businesses Not On the Ground Floor. Businesses fronting on a main thoroughfare maintained exclusively on the second floor of a multiple story building shall be entitled to forty (40) percent of the sign area authorized for businesses conducted on the ground floor of the building. 
d.  Sign Program for Multi-Tenant Buildings, Parks and Centers. Sign programs, established and approved by the planning commission through the architectural review process, shall be required for all buildings with more than one tenant and for all multi-tenant commercial or industrial parcels, parks or centers. Sign programs shall remain in force until a new program is submitted and approved by the planning commission. Signs within approved sign programs shall be required to obtain permits, submit applicable fees and shall be in conformance with the approved sign program. Sign programs shall integrate with the architecture of the building complex, including such elements as size, color, location, and construction material. 
e.  Identification Signs for a Building, Business, or Complex Less Than One Acre. In addition to main building signs allowed under this chapter for individual businesses, a separate sign identifying a building, business, or complex of businesses on less than two and one-half acres of land shall be allowed as part of an approved sign program. This sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet unless no individual tenant signs are included in the sign, in which case the sign area may be based on the frontage formula. Such a sign may be a monument sign or as approved by the planning commission. Such a sign shall not extend beyond the property line, shall not exceed a maximum height of six feet for a monument sign or twelve (12) feet for a freestanding sign, and shall be subject to architectural review and approval by the planning commission. 
f.  Main Signs for Commercial and Industrial Centers (More Than One Acre). In addition to the main identification signs allowed under this chapter for individual businesses, shopping centers in excess of two and one-half acres of land shall be allowed one identification sign on each street frontage as part of an approved sign program. Such signs shall not extend beyond the property line or into the right-of-way and shall be used solely to identify the commercial or industrial center. The allowable sign area shall be based on ten (10) square feet of sign per acre to a maximum area of seventy-five (75) square feet per face. Signs shall not exceed a maximum height of six feet for a monument sign or twenty-five (25) feet for a free-standing sign subject to architectural review and planning commission approval. 
g.  Major Stores not Having Street Frontage. Retail establishments which have a floor area in excess of forty thousand (40,000) square feet and are so located within a shopping complex that they are not afforded street frontage shall be allowed signs as follows: 
(A)  One single face sign per major or secondary street frontage, not to exceed thirty-six (36) square feet in area per store affected. Such sign shall be allowed for no more than two street frontages. 
(B)  The location of said signs shall be determined by the planning commission and shall be located in an area which is in accordance with the provisions and intent of this chapter and, in the opinion of the planning commission, in keeping with the architectural design of the shopping center and consistent with the approved sign program for the project. 
2.  Accesssory and Convenience Signs for Commercial and Industrial Uses. 
a.  Sign for Pedestrian Traffic. Where the principal sign for a business is located so that it cannot be seen by pedestrian traffic, a sign in addition to that otherwise allowed in this section shall be permitted. Such a sign shall be no larger than three square feet and it shall be designed and located so as to not distract from the appearance of the building or violate the intent of this chapter. Signs may be divided on either side of fascia or architectural element. 
i.  Tenant spaces on commercial sites located within the boundaries of the Pueblo Viejo Revitalization Plan, may install a 3 square foot accessory projecting sign on a non-occupancy building frontage adjoining a street, subject to an administrative architectural review by the planning director and written approval by the city engineer. A maximum of three (3) projecting signs per site may be allowed on a non-occupancy building frontage. Projecting signs shall have a minimum vertical clearance of ten (10) feet above finished grade at the sidewalk, unless otherwise approved by the planning director and city engineer provided that in no case shall a projecting sign be less than eight (8) feet above sidewalk grade. Accessory projecting signs shall not be internally illuminated. A minimum distance of eight (8) feet shall be required between an accessory projecting sign and any other accessory or main projecting sign. 
b.  Customer Convenience Signs. Each individual business shall be permitted the following signs on the entry door, on the building adjacent to the entry door, or inside the glass window nearest to the entry. No permits are required. 
i.  Open/Closed Sign. One square foot sign per street entrance. For buildings with multiple entrances on one street, two signs may be permitted if the entrances are no closer than thirty-five (35) linear feet apart. 
ii.  Menu/Services, Etc. One sign not more than two square feet in size shall be allowed. Menu boards up to five square feet may be allowed in outdoor: seating area. Drive through menu boards are subject to planning commission approval. 
iii.  Hours/Days. Two-inch letter/number height per line. 
iv.  Credit Cards/Service Decals. Credit card and other service decals may be displayed in a contiguous one square foot area located behind the glass line. 
c.  Pedestrian Sign Directory for Shops within Arcades or Malls. Where a pedestrian arcade or mall has been developed with shops, a sign directory may be allowed which will identify the arcade or mail and each of the shops which do not have frontage on the public right-of-way. The sign complex may be attached to the building or may be free standing. The arcade or mall identification sign shall not be larger than six square feet per side, and the sign for the individual tenants shall be no larger than one and one-half square foot per side. 
d.  Listing of Business Associates and/or Sublessees. In addition to the other sign usage authorized herein, each separate business shall be allowed lettering on or behind windows facing the public view indicating the owners, operators or business associates exercising the use, provided that such lettering shall be enclosed within a single area and shall not exceed a total of three square feet. Not more than one such sign shall be permitted per entrance. 
e.  Interior Real Estate Office Signs. In addition to the other sign usage authorized in this chapter, real estate offices may use internal display boards not to exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the window area and not to exceed six feet in height above the sidewalk. 
f.  Use of Attraction Boards by Theaters and Entertainment Centers. In addition to the other sign usage authorized in this chapter, businesses which offer entertainment to the public shall be allowed one attraction board to advertise such entertainment. The maximum allowable size for an attraction board shall be twenty-five (25) square feet if it faces the street; and fifteen (15) square feet per face if the sign is at right angles to the street. Multiple theaters may have multiple attraction boards, if the design is compatible with the overall design of the building and/or complex. Showcases may be allowed in addition to an attraction board, if approved as part of the overall design. 
3.  Special Provisions. 
a.  Freeway and Expressway Signs for Commercial and Industrial Uses. Any commercial or industrial property which is located within one thousand (1,000) feet of the centerline of a freeway or expressway right-of-way may, as part of an approved sign program for the property, erect one freeway-oriented freestanding sign on the property in addition to those signs allowed under subsection F(1) and (2) of this section, under the following conditions: 
i.  A freestanding advertising sign is permitted with a maximum height of twenty-five (25) feet and a maximum size of one hundred seventy-five (175) square feet. (For freeway-oriented businesses, defined as those selling food, lodging, and automobile services, and for auto sales businesses, the maximum height is fifty-five (55) feet.) 
ii.  A larger or higher freestanding sign is permitted for freeway-oriented businesses based on a flag test and the following conditions: 
(A)  The minimum size letter in the test of a sign shall be one foot in vertical or horizontal dimension, and the maximum size letter shall be three feet vertical or horizontal in dimension. 
(B)  The text of the sign shall be limited to the name of the owner, name of the business, type of business, and hours and days of operation. 
(C)  Signs shall be visible a minimum of three-tenths mile from the point where the off-ramp leaves the freeway to serve the business concerned. 
iii.  No signs shall be erected that will obscure another sign when viewed from the freeway; 
iv.  No freeway-oriented sign shall be erected that will be closer than one hundred (100) feet from another freeway-oriented sign. 
v.  All freestanding signs shall have underground utility service. 
vi.  The flag test shall be observed by a member of the community development department and the required fee shall be paid prior to the test. 
b.  Gasoline Service Stations. 
i.  Gasoline service stations shall be limited to one double-faced sign of an area not to exceed seventy (70) square feet on each side face. A freestanding sign, if approved, shall not exceed twelve (12) feet in height. In addition, one ten-square foot sign fixed flat on the surface of the building shall be allowed. The height of this sign shall not exceed twelve (12) feet. 
(A)  Service stations with freeway visibility, refer to subsection (F)(3) of this section. 
(B)  Reserved. 
ii.  In addition to the signs for public safety and convenience authorized by subsection (F)(2)(b) of this section, the director of community development may authorize and approve instructional or directional signs not to exceed two square feet or directional signs not to exceed two square feet per face when deemed necessary for the convenience of patrons of gasoline service stations. 
c.  Gasoline Price Signs. 
i.  Nothing in subsection F of this section or in any other provision of this sign chapter relating to rates or prices shall be construed as prohibiting compliance with Section 13531 of the Business and Professions Code of the state of California which relates to the posting of gasoline prices. Any sign, statement or other advertising medium posted or displayed shall conform to all of the requirements of this section. The maximum height of price numerals shall be fourteen (14) inches, except for freeway signs, which may be twenty-four (24) inches. If the height of the price numerals exceeds eight inches, the total area of price information shall be no greater than the business identification on the same sign. 
ii.  Reserved. 
d.  Special Sign Districts. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the city council from adopting special sign districts as part of a specific plan, redevelopment plan, planned development district or the like when special sign provisions are necessary or appropriate to implement general plan provisions and goals. 
G.  Permitted Signs—Apartments, Residential Mobilehome Parks and Other Allowable Uses in Residential Zones. This section shall be applicable to apartments, and residential mobilehome parks in residential zones. 
1.  Main Signs. 
a.  Single-Family Subdivision. Identification monument sign not exceeding twenty (20) square feet (four feet x five feet maximum) with a five-foot maximum height shall be permitted at the entry way to a single-family subdivision. Such signs shall be subject to all other applicable restrictions of this section. 
b.  Apartments and Residential Mobilehome Parks. Identification monument sign of twenty (20) square feet (four feet x five feet maximum) with a five-foot maximum height. Such signs shall be subject to all other applicable restrictions of this section. 
c.  Other Uses Allowed in a Residential Zone. Identification monument sign not exceeding twenty (20) square feet in area and five feet in height shall be permitted for an authorized use (such as schools, public buildings, parks and playgrounds, licensed commercial day care centers, hospitals, and boarding houses), except that no signs or advertising shall be allowed for home occupations in a residential zone. Such signs shall be subject to all other applicable restrictions of this section. 
2.  Special Provisions. 
a.  Garage/Yard Sale Signs. All garage/yard sale signs shall conform to the requirements of Chapter 3 of the Coachella Municipal Code. 
b.  Reserved. 
3.  Prohibited Signs. 
a.  Home Occupations in a Residential Zone. No signs or advertising devices shall be displayed on the premises. 
No merchandise or articles shall be displayed for advertising purpose, and no merchandise or articles shall be stored other than in the dwelling. 
H.  Permitted Signs—Real Estate. 
1.  Main Signs. 
a.  Sale, Lease or Exchange Signs for a Single-Family Property One Acre or Less in Size. During the period of time when realty is offered for sale, lease, or exchange, and until the close of escrow, one sign so indicating may be located on the property by the owner or his or her authorized agent, subject to the following provisions: 
i.  The size of the sign shall not exceed six square feet. 
ii.  The overall height of the installed sign shall not exceed four feet from the ground. 
iii.  The information displayed on the sign shall include only the following: 
(A)  That the property is for sale, lease, or exchange by the owner or his or her agent; 
(B)  The owner's or agent's name; 
(C)  The owners or agent's address and telephone number; 
(D)  Description of the property, including zoning and uses permitted. 
b.  Sale, Lease or Exchange Signs. All Properties Except Single-Family Property of One Acre or Less. During the period of time when realty is offered for sale, lease, or exchange, and until the close of escrow, one sign so indicating may be located on the property by the owner or his or her authorized agent, subject to the following provisions: 
i.  For properties up to one acre in size one single-or double-faced sign shall be allowed. The sign shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet including riders, and a maximum height of six feet. 
ii.  For properties in excess of one acre in size one single-or double-faced sign shall be allowed. The sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet including riders, and a maximum height of eight feet. 
iii.  Properties which front on more than one public right-of-way, and are more than four acres in size, shall be allowed no more than one double-faced sign, not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet per side and eight feet in height, per right-of-way frontage, as described in subsection (b)(ii) of this section. In no case shall the total number of sale, lease or exchange signs on a single property exceed four double-faced signs. 
iv.  When the property abuts a freeway, the height of the sign shall not exceed sixteen (16) feet above the freeway elevation, and the size of the sign shall not exceed one hundred twenty-eight (128) square feet. 
v.  Placement of signs larger than thirty-two (32) square feet under this section shall be approved by the community development director or his or her designee. 
vi.  Such signs shall not be illuminated. 
vii.  The information displayed on the sign shall include only the following: 
(A)  That the property is for sale, lease, or exchange by the owner or his or her agent; 
(B)  The owner's or agent's name; 
(C)  The owner's or agent's address and telephone number; 
(D)  Description of the property, including zoning and uses permitted. 
c.  Multi-Tenanted Buildings. In addition to the signage allowed under subsection (G)(1)(b) of this section, one sale, lease, or exchange sign shall be permitted for each space or unit in a multi-tenanted building subject to the following provisions: 
i.  Such sign shall be placed in a window of the space or if there is no window, adjacent to the door. The sign shall not exceed four square feet. 
ii.  The information displayed on the sign shall include only the following: 
(A)  That the property is for sale, lease, or exchange by the owner or his or her agent; 
(B)  The owner's or agent's name; 
(C)  The owner's or address and telephone number; and 
(D)  Description of the property, including zoning and uses permitted. 
d.  Open House Signs. In addition to the above real estate sale/exchange signs in subsections (H)(1)(a) and (b) of this section, one "open house" sign may be permitted only during the time an owner or owner's agent is on the premises, subject to the following provisions: 
i.  Such signs shall be permitted only during the hours from eight a.m. until sunset. 
ii.  The size of the sign shall not exceed four square feet. 
iii.  The overall height of the installed sign shall not exceed four feet from the ground. 
iv.  In addition to the sign on the premises, one additional sign may be placed off-site, with the same size and height restrictions. 
e.  Land Subdivision Signs. In lieu of, but not in addition to any other sale, lease, or exchange sign permitted under this chapter, signs advertising land subdivisions shall be permitted upon recordation of the final subdivision map subject to the following provisions: 
i.  One double-faced sign as follows: 
(A)  The size of the sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet per side and eight feet in height. 
(B)  Reserved. 
ii.  Two single-faced signs as follows: 
(A)  The size of each sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet and eight feet in height, and the signs shall be parallel to the street. 
(B)  Such signs shall be a minimum of two hundred (200) feet apart and no closer than fifty (50) feet from any street intersection. 
iii.  Properties which front on more than one public right-of-way, and are more than four acres in size, shall be allowed no more than one double-faced sign, not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet per side and eight feet in height, per right-of-way frontage, as described in subsection (e)(i) of this section. In no case shall the total number of land subdivision signs on a single property exceed four double-faced signs. 
iv.  When the property abuts a freeway, the height of the sign shall not exceed sixteen (16) feet, and the size of the sign shall not exceed one hundred twenty-eight (128) square feet. 
v.  Placement of signs under this section shall be approved by the community development director. 
vi.  Such signs shall not be illuminated. 
vii.  Such signs shall be removed when ninety-eight (98) percent of the subdivision is sold. 
2.  Special Provisions. 
a.  Off-Site Subdivision Sales Signs. Only off-site directional signs which are in conformance with this section may be erected or maintained within the city. Off-site directional signs shall only be permitted for residential subdivisions, public and quasipublic uses or facilities. The following standards shall apply to the construction and installation of off-site directional signs: 
i.  The city shall designate an organization for administration of the terms of this section except that the organization shall have no enforcement powers hereunder. The duties of the organization under this section include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(A)  Timely, equitable and nondiscriminatory processing of applications to install a directional sign on a kiosk; 
(B)  Obtaining sites and approvals for kiosk locations; 
(C)  Timely construction and installation of kiosks and directional signs; and 
(D)  Maintenance of kiosks, kiosk sites and directional signs in a neat, clean and orderly condition. 
ii.  The duties imposed upon the organization pursuant to this section may be exercised by a third party, subject to prior approval of such third party by the planning commission. 
iii.  The design of kiosks and directional signs shall be prepared by the organization and submitted to the city for written approval by the planning commission. 
iv.  Kiosks and directional signs shall conform to the following general standards: 
(A)  Kiosks shall contain no more than eight directional signs per face; 
(B)  No kiosk shall have more than one face, except that additional faces, not to exceed three in number, shall be approved for specific locations by the planning commission; 
(C)  No kiosk shall exceed six feet in height or four feet in width; 
(D)  Directional signs may contain the following information: name of development; applicant logo; and a directional arrow; and 
(E)  No tag sign, streamer, device, display board, or other appurtenance shall be added to or placed upon any kiosk. All such additions shall be prohibited. 
(F)  Kiosks will be permitted in all land use districts and on private or public property subject in each case to written permission of the owner of such property and subject to written approval of the city. Permission of the property owner for each kiosk site shall be filed with the sign permit application. Approval of the city may be obtained in the following manner: 
(1)  By designation as an approved site by the director of planning; 
(2)  For kiosks of one face, by the director of planning; 
(3)  For kiosks of two or more faces, by the planning commission; and 
(4)  For each kiosk location an application for a sign permit shall be submitted along with a site plan showing the proposed location. The kiosk may be installed only following approval of the location, payment of fees, and issuance of a permit. 
(G)  All liabilities, costs and expenses arising out of the siting, installation and construction of kiosks and directional signs, and out of administering the provisions of this section, other than enforcement expenses related to violations of this section, shall be borne by the organization. The organization shall enter into an agreement with the city, under which it indemnifies, defends and holds harmless the city, in such form as approved by the director of community development and city attorney, and shall provide public liability insurance in the minimum amount of three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) naming the city as additional insured and in such form and with a company or companies approved by the director of community development and city attorney; and the city . shall have no liability therefore. 
(H)  In addition to other penalties provided by law, including those set forth in this section, any directional sign erected, constructed, installed or maintained in violation of this section shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be summarily abated as such by the city. 
b.  Bus Stops. Any bus stop established by the regional transit authority may have advertising on the bus stop shelters under an agreement approval by the city council. 
I.  Permitted Signs—Temporary. 
1.  Construction Signs for Future Buildings. 
a.  Projects that have been approved by planning commission but have not been issued building permits, may erect one sign per street frontage advertising their project. The maximum size of the sign is thirty-two (32) square feet. These signs shall be continually maintained in a neat and orderly fashion. 
b.  In-lieu of, but not in addition to any other sale, lease or exchange sign permitted under this chapter, sign(s) advertising future buildings may be erected only after a building permit has been issued and shall be subject to the following provisions: 
i.  The size of the sign shall not exceed a maximum of thirty-two (32) square feet per street frontage. 
ii.  Sign(s) shall be located within subject property lines and shall be parallel to the street. 
iii.  All construction or lease potential signs shall be removed at the end of one year from the date of the certificate of occupancy, or when ninety (90) percent of the development is leased, whichever occurs first. 
2.  Identification Signs. A temporary identification sign may be permitted for a period of up to thirty (30) days if an application for a permanent sign has been submitted. An extension of time may be granted for an additional thirty (30) days. The size of the sign shall be consistent with the limitations for permanent signs. 
3.  Sale Signs. While a sale of goods or services is being conducted, one sale sign is permitted per street frontage. Said sign shall not exceed five square feet per sign per street front. Sale signs shall not require a permit. Notwithstanding the regulations in this subsection, the planning director may allow one temporary promotional sign, attached flat against a building wall, up to twenty (20) square feet in size, subject to obtaining a temporary sign permit, for seasonal sales, promotional sales/service events, and similar advertisements, for a duration not to exceed forty-five (45) consecutive days per quarter, between the period from October 1, 2013 to October 1, 2015. 
4.  Grand Opening Signs. A grand opening sign shall be permitted for a new or relocated business within the city. Such signs shall be permitted for twenty-one (21) consecutive days, and shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet in size. A permit for such signs shall be required. A banner, balloons, or a paper sign affixed to the inside of the window, may be allowed for this purpose. Notwithstanding the regulations in this section, the planning director may allow one grand opening banner affixed flat against a building wall up to twenty (20) square feet in size, subject to obtaining a temporary sign permit, for up to forty-five (45) days between the period from October 1, 2013 to October 1, 2015. 
5.  Balloons and Flags. Balloons and flags are permitted on a temporary basis not to exceed any of the following time limits. 
a.  Not more than twenty-one (21) consecutive days (e.g., for grand openings and sales). 
b.  Not more than one hundred four (104) days per year (e.g., on Saturdays and Sundays). 
c.  Not more than four periods per year that exceed three consecutive days (e.g., sales events). 
d.  Portable Signs in Commercial Districts. Notwithstanding the regulations in this subsection, the planning director may allow one feather sign, A-frame sign, single-pole metal sign, or other portable sign per business, up to twenty (20) square feet in size and no more than twelve (12) feet in height. All portable signs shall be designed by a sign professional or contractor and shall provide adequate wind load resistance to the satisfaction of the director. The director reserves the right to consider the total number of signs for any given center. Portable signs are prohibited in the public right-of-way unless an encroachment permit is obtained. All portable signs allowed pursuant to this subsection may be permitted only between the period from October 1, 2013 to October 1, 2015. 
6.  Interim Outdoor Display of Merchandise. The planning director may allow one outdoor display of merchandise per business up to ten (10) days per quarter, subject to a written authorization by the director. Outdoor displays shall be limited to an area equal to three feet by twenty-five (25) percent of the business occupancy frontage, or a maximum of fifteen (15) square feet, whichever is less. Outdoor displays shall be no more than five feet in height, and must be removed whenever the business offering the merchandise is closed for business. Outdoor displays shall not obstruct required American Disabilities Act path-of-travel areas. The director reserves the right to restrict outdoor displays in any given center. Outdoor displays proposed in the public right-of-way require an encroachment permit. All outdoor displays allowed pursuant to this subsection may be permitted only between the period from October 1, 2013 to October 1, 2015. 
J.  General Provisions. The following general sign usage provisions and regulations shall apply. The additional sign usage authorized hereunder shall be strictly construed in its application. 
1.  Procedures. 
a.  Compliance with Section—Nuisance—Abatement. The city council hereby determines that the public peace, safety, morals, health, and welfare, require that all signs and advertising structures heretofore constructed or erected in violation of any ordinance of the city in effect at the time such sign was constructed or erected, be and are made subject to the provisions of this section. Such signs shall be made to conform and comply with this chapter as soon as reasonably possible after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. All signs and advertising structures which are not made to conform and comply within a reasonable time shall be and are hereby declared to be public nuisances and may be abate in the manner provided. 
b.  Removal and Amortization Schedule. Any sign which is nonconforming to the requirements of this chapter, either by variance previously granted or by conformance to the existing sign regulations at the time the initial permit for said sign was issued, shall either be removed or brought up to code requirements within the period of time prescribed herein dating from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. Such nonconforming signs shall be abated according to the following schedule. Value of signs shall be determined by the building official after consultation with the sign owner and/or sign manufacturer. Sign valuation and period for removal and/or compliance shall be determined as the effective date of Ordinance 723 (October 1, 1993), or such later date that said sign did or does become nonconforming. Such nonconforming signs shall be abated according to the following schedule: 
Abatement Schedule 
Permit Value of Sign 	Abatement Schedule 
$10.00 or less 	Immediately 
$10.01 to $100.00 	90 Days 
$100.01 to $200.00 	6 Months 
$200.01 to $400.00 	1 Year 
$400.01 to $750.00 	2 Years 
$750.01 to $1,000.00 	3 Years 
$1,000.01 to $2,500.00 	5 Years 
$2,500.01 to $5,000.00 	7 Years 
$5,000.01 to $10,000.00 	10 Years 
$10,000.01 to $15,000.00 	13 Years 
Over $15,000.01 	16 Years 
 
If an owner believes that additional time is necessary to fairly amortize a sign, the owner may apply to the planning commission for a conditional use permit to extend the life of a sign in accordance with the procedures of Section 17.74.010 of this title. 
c.  Notification. Any owner of a sign that is illegal, abandoned, nonmaintained, or is not in compliance with the requirements of this chapter shall be notified by the director of community development. Such notification must be by registered or certified mail and list the specific areas of noncompliance. 
d.  Appeal. Any applicant or aggrieved person denied approval of a sign by the director of community development shall be advised that said application may be placed on the planning commission agenda for reconsideration of denial. The decision of the planning commission may be further appealed to the city council pursuant to Section 17.82.040 of this title. 
e.  Special Permits. Nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent the city council from granting a temporary special permit or otherwise permitting, on such terms as it may deem proper, signs advertising or pertaining to any civic, patriotic or special events of general public interest which takes place within the city when it can be found that such signs will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare, interest or safety, nor injurious to adjacent property. 
f.  Approval and Permits Required. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to authorize, erect, construct, maintain, move, alter, change, place, suspend, or attach any sign within the city without first obtaining the necessary permits. Review and approval by the planning commission shall be required for the design and location of signs in excess of twenty (20) square feet, except temporary signs described in subsection (I) of this section. All other signs shall be approved by the director of planning, except that either the applicant or the director of planning may request review by the planning commission. Sign permit fees shall be established by resolution of the city council. A double permit fee shall be assessed if the installation of a sign is commenced before obtaining a permit. Permits shall be required for the installation of all signs except real estate signs of twelve (12) square feet or less, sale signs and political signs. 
g.  Variances. The provisions of this chapter shall apply. The planning commission may grant a sign variance based on findings which establish unusual or unique architectural or site plan features which are present and limit the applicability of the provisions of this section to a particular property, building, or store and where the intent of this section is fulfilled. 
2.  Safety. 
a.  Signs for Public Safety and Convenience. When deemed necessary, the director of community development may authorize and approve signs not to exceed five square feet per face to serve the public safety or convenience, such as "entrance" signs, "exit" signs, and "parking" signs. 
b.  Proper Maintenance of Signs. The user, owner or lessee of a sign authorized hereunder shall maintain it as approved in a safe, neat, attractive condition and in adequate repair. 
c.  Obstruction of Passage. Signs shall not be constructed so as to obstruct any door, window, or fire escape of any building. 
d.  "No Trespassing" Signs. A "no trespassing" or "no dumping" sign not exceeding four square feet shall be authorized for each parcel of property in addition to . other authorized signs and shall be designed and located thereon in a manner satisfactory to the director of community development. 
e.  Glare From Signs. Illuminated signs shall be designed in such a manner as to avoid undue glare or reflection of light onto private property in the surrounding area or right-of-way and shall be erected and located in a manner satisfactory to the director of community development. The intensity of lighting of sign may be reviewed in the field by the director of community development who may require the reduction of intensity. 
f.  Location of Right Angle Signs. Right angle signs on faces of buildings shall not extend over eighteen (18) inches beyond the face of the building where located unless supported on a marquee. Right angle signs shall be seven feet or higher above the sidewalk or the right-of-way. Right angle signs supported by posts or standards shall not extend beyond the property line or into the public right-of-way. 
g.  Location of Other Signs. Sign shall not be located in such a way as to present hazards to drivers of trucks or motor vehicles or pedestrians. Freestanding signs shall be surrounded by a landscaped planter with a curb for safety and aesthetic purposes. 
h.  Street Address Numbers/Letters. A street address is required and shall conform to the requirements of Sections 15.44.010—15.44.040 of this code. When address or other numbers are used as an identification name, they shall conform to all applicable provisions of this section. Street address numbers in excess of eight inches in height shall be considered a sign. 
i.  Exceptions. Nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent the erection, construction or maintenance of official traffic, fire and police signs, signals, devices and markings of the California Transportation Department, the city council or of other competent public authorities, or the posting of the notices required by law. All signs located in any public right-of-way shall require approval by the director of planning. 
3.  Other: 
a.  Signs for Public and Quasipublic Uses. Directional and public convenience signs for public and quasipublic uses may be permitted on public property. The design must conform to standard directional sign specifications promulgated by the director of planning and approved by the planning commission. The total number of signs allowed shall be based on the minimum number necessary for adequate public identification as determined by the director of planning. 
b.  Color of Signs. All signs regulated by this section shall contain no more than four colors. Black and white shall not be considered as colors. 
c.  Signs on Awnings, Etc. Painted, nonilluminated or indirectly lighted signs may be permitted on the borders of marquees, canopies, awnings, umbrellas or similar structures or attachments if located and erected in a manner satisfactory to the director of planning. Such signs shall be included in the total authorized sign area. 
d.  Signs on Vehicles. No person shall drive, operate, move in and along, or park on any street or on public or private property, any truck, trailer, carriage, wagon, sled or other vehicle on which is attached or maintained any sign displaying any commercial or noncommercial advertising matter for the sole or primary purpose of displaying said advertising matter, which is declared to be a nuisance and a violation of this section, except for the following: 
i.  The driving, operation and movement of vehicles displaying political campaign advertisements for candidates for public office and ballot measures, provided the same is not otherwise prohibited by this section. 
ii.  The identification of a business enterprise upon a vehicle used primarily for the purpose of and in the usual business of the owner for transporting or servicing goods or persons for commercial or other business purposes, provided that the identification is painted on or otherwise affixed so as not to project from the usual profile of the vehicle. 
iii.  The incidental display of noncommercial stickers, plates, license plate brackets, and the like; or of customary small identifications on license plate brackets or elsewhere, of vehicle manufacturers, models or types of vehicles, or dealers or entities from whom vehicles bearing the same where purchased or otherwise obtained. 
iv.  A single isolated movement of a sign or sign equipment or materials from one place to another within the city. 
(Prior code § 070.04) 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 1, 9-25-13)  
Chapter 17.58 - HOME OCCUPATIONS 
 
17.58.010 - Home occupations. 
A.  Intent and Purpose. The purpose of these regulations is to provide for the conduct of home occupations in residential zones, in such a manner as to be compatible with, and not disrupt residential neighborhoods. 
B.  Home Occupations May be Permitted. As specified in this chapter subject to the following conditions: 
1.  Employment shall be limited to members of the resident family only. 
2.  There shall be no alteration in the residential character of the premises in connection with such home occupation. 
3.  All such operations shall be carried on within the dwelling, and not more than twenty-five (25) percent of the ground floor area of the dwelling shall be so used. 
4.  Equipment used in connection with such home occupations shall be limited to that normally found in a dwelling, and under no circumstances shall motors other than electric motors be used. The total horsepower, of such motors shall not exceed three horsepower, or one horsepower for any single motor. 
5.  No merchandise or articles shall be displayed for advertising purposes, and no merchandise or articles shall be stored other than in the dwelling. 
6.  No signs or advertising devices shall be displayed on the premises. 
7.  The use shall not involve the use of commercial vehicles for delivery of materials to or from the premises. 
8.  All operations in connection with such home occupations shall be conducted so as to prevent the emanation of any dust, gas, smoke, noise, fumes, odors, vibrations, or electrical disturbances which are or may be detrimental to the welfare of the occupants of surrounding properties. 
C.  Cottage Food Operations. A cottage food operation, as defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 113758, shall be a permitted home based business provided it complies with all applicable provisions of Chapter 17.89 and the California Health and Safety Code, as it may be amended. 
(Prior code § 070.06) 
(Ord. No. 1058, § 1, 12-11-13)  
Chapter 17.60 - DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 
 
17.60.010 - Property development standards. 
A.  Intent and Purpose. The following general development standards are set forth in order to assure that property in the various zones of the city will be developed in a uniform and orderly manner which will promote the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, and general welfare. These development requirements shall be in addition to the property development standards set forth in each zone. 
B.  Responsibility for Measurements. In measuring lot dimensions and other requirements, it shall be the responsibility of the property owner or his or her authorized agent to provide accurate dimensions and calculations. The submission of inaccurate dimensions or calculations which result in a lot or structure not complying with the requirements set forth in this chapter shall constitute a violation of this chapter, and any permits or approvals granted thereunder shall be void. 
C.  Lot Widths. Lot widths in residential zones shall vary according to the size of the lot, and shall be determined as provided in the following table: 
Minimum Lot Width Requirements in Residential Zones 
Lot Size in Square Feet 	Interior Lot 	Corner Lot 
6,000 to 6,999 	60 feet 	Not permitted 
7,000 to 7,999 	65 feet 	70 feet 
8,000 to 8,999 	70 feet 	75 feet 
9,000 to 9,999 	80 feet 	85 feet 
10,000 & above 	85 feet 	85 feet 
 
D.  Yards. 
1.  Encroachments. Where yards are required in this chapter, they shall not be less in depth or width than the minimum dimensions specified in any part, and they shall be at every point open and unobstructed from the ground to the sky, except as follows: 
a.  Outside stairways, porches, or landing places, if unroofed and unenclosed, may extend into a required side yard for a distance of not to exceed three feet or into the required rear yard a distance not to exceed five feet. 
b.  Awnings, cornice trims, eaves, decks, railings, stoops, and landings, and similar architectural features may encroach two feet into a required front, side, or rear yard. 
2.  Through Lot Regulations. On through lots either separating such lot from a public thoroughfare may be designated as the front lot line. In such cases the minimum rear yard shall be the average of the yards required on lots next adjoining. 
3.  Fences, Walls in Yards. Fences or walls not exceeding six feet in height may occupy any portion of a side or rear yard. In a residential single-family zone, where any such fence or wall projects beyond the front yard line or setback toward the front property line it shall not be more than six feet in height if it is of wrought iron, or other such material; provided that such material does not obscure the view to the front lawn through the fence. 
a.  Walls and low silhouette plants such as hedges, and other flora along front yard property lines must be approved by city staff and shall not be more than thirty (30) inches in height. 
b.  Fences and walls shall not extend beyond the property line. 
c.  There shall be no visual obstructions which would interfere with intersection visibility from a corner setback area. In the corner property radius area any fence shall not be more than six feet in height provided it does not cause visual obstruction. In the corner property radius area, visual obstructions are hereby defined as any wall, obstacle mature landscaping or thing allowed, installed, set out or maintained which obscures intersection visibility. 
d.  Notwithstanding the above provisions, existing walls and fences shall be permitted to remain unless and until the property owner applies for a building permit to reconstruct, remodel or otherwise perform any construction activity upon the property; at such time any walls or fences shall be brought into compliance with subsections (D)(3)(a) through (c) of this section, as a condition of obtaining such building permit. 
e.  In residential districts the use of razor, chain-link, or barbed wire is prohibited. Precision concrete block shall not be used unless exterior surfaces visible from the outside of the property are covered by stucco, paint, or texture coating as approved by the community development director. 
f.  Maintenance. All walls and fences shall be continuously maintained in good repair. The property owner shall be provided thirty (30) days after receiving notice from the city to repair a wall or fence. The building official may grant an extension for the repair of the wall or fence. 
4.  Landscaping. 
a.  Except where otherwise provided, required yards and setback areas shall be landscaped with lawn, trees, shrubs, or other plant materials and shall be permanently maintained in a neat and orderly manner as a condition to use. Decorative rock may be used for landscaping in a manner incidental and accessory to the required lawn, trees, shrubs, or other plant materials. Fountains, ponds, sculpture, planters, walkways, flagpoles for display of national, state, city or company ensigns only, light standards, and decorative screen-type walls, forty-two (42) inches or less in height, where an integral part of a landscaping scheme comprised primarily of plant materials are permitted. Entrance and exit drives and walks may be provided into parking areas. Said drives shall not exceed thirty (30) feet in width for each curb opening. 
b.  Where walls are required between nonresidential and residential zones, no landscaping zones, no landscaping shall be required. 
5.  Measurement. The depth of all required yards which abut a street or highway shall be measured from the planned highway right-of-way line, as specified in Section 17.66.010 of this title. 
E.  Distance Between Buildings. Encroachment into required distances between buildings are permitted as specified for encroachments into yards in subsection D of this section. 
F.  Accessory Structures. The following regulations shall apply to accessory structures in residential zones: 
1.  Accessory structures detached from the main dwelling, may not occupy a required front yard, side yard, or corner side yard, except as provided herein. 
2.  An accessory structure may occupy a required rear yard provided it is at least five feet from any interior property line, and a minimum of ten (10) feet from any street property line. 
3.  An accessory structure may be a maximum of fifteen (15) feet in height and no more than one story in height. 
4.  An accessory structure in the rear yard is limited to a maximum size of four hundred (400) square feet or thirty (30) percent of the size of the main dwelling, whichever is greater. Interior partitions are not allowed within accessory structures. Kitchens and full bathrooms are not allowed inside of any accessory structure, except as allowed in Section 17.16.020.C. for secondary housing units. 
5.  Except for side loaded garages, the wall planes or sides of an accessory structure must be a minimum of ten (10) feet from the sides or wall planes of any other structure, measured at right angles from the wall plane or sides of the accessory structure. The corner of an accessory structure may be no closer than five feet from the corner of any other structure, provided the wall planes or sides of both structures comply with the distance requirements specified in this subsection. 
6.  Accessory structures on a site may not cover more than fifty (50) percent of the required rear yard setback area. 
7.  Pools and spas may encroach into any required side or rear yard provided they are at least five feet from any property line. Pools and spas may not occupy a required front yard. 
8.  Mechanical and pool equipment may not occupy a required front yard. 
9.  Mechanical and pool equipment may occupy a required side yard or corner side yard provided a minimum setback of three feet is provided from any property line. 
10.  Mechanical and pool equipment may occupy a required rear yard provided a minimum setback of twelve (12) inches is provided from any property line and provided a minimum distance of three feet is provided from any other structure. 
11.  On lots under seven thousand two hundred (7,200) square feet, an attached patio cover may encroach into a required rear yard provided a minimum setback of ten (10) feet is provided. On lots under six thousand five hundred (6,500) square feet, an attached patio cover may encroach into a required side yard or corner side yard provided a minimum setback of five feet is provided. 
12.  One freestanding arbor or trellis, up to twelve (12) feet in height and open on all sides, may encroach into a required front yard, provided no more than five percent of the required yard area is covered with the arbor or trellis. 
13.  Carports may be allowed in a required rear yard of any single family residential site provided they are accessible through an approved driveway that is at least eleven (11) feet clear in width. All vehicles parked in a carport must be architecturally screened from view to the street, and located behind an opaque metal gate at least six feet in height. 
14.  A detached garage or carport must be a minimum of twenty (20) feet from any street property line if front loading. Side-loaded garages may be twelve (12) feet from the street line. Carports must provide a minimum of ten (10) feet from any corner street line. 
15.  An attached carport accessed from the corner street must be at least fifteen (15) feet from the rear property line. 
G.  Trailers Outside Camps. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain, or to permit to be placed, kept or maintained, any trailer coach being presently used or being intended for present use for human habitation upon any lot, piece or parcel of land within the city, except in a trailer camp or when all of the following regulations and conditions have been complied with: 
1.  Such trailer coach shall be kept or maintained at the rear of a private residential building, other than an apartment house or hotel. 
2.  Such trailer coach shall not be placed closer than ten (10) feet to any building or closer than five feet to any property line other than a public street or alley line. 
3.  Such trailer coach shall be used only for sleeping quarters, and none of the sanitary and cooking facilities in such trailer coach shall be used. 
4.  Such trailer coach shall not be kept or maintained for sleeping purposes as permitted herein for more than three successive nights in any successive ninety (90) days. 
(Ord. 984 § 1, 2007; prior code § 070.07) 
(Ord. No. 1075, §§ 10, 11, 6-10-15)  
Chapter 17.62 - SITE PLANS 
 
17.62.010 - Site plan. 
A.  Intent and Purpose. These regulations are intended to provide for the development of property in accordance with the general purposes of this chapter, as well as determine compliance with the property development standards stated in the chapter. It is further intended to provide for the review of those development qualities which are not subject to precise statement. 
B.  Limitation. No action taken under this section shall have the effect of granting a variance from the requirements of this code as specified in Section 17.76.010. 
C.  Procedure. Prior to or concurrent with an application for building permit, a site plan shall be filed with the planning director. This plan shall indicate the following: 
1.  Name and address of the applicant and of all persons owning any or all of the property proposed to be used; 
2.  Evidence that the applicant: 
a.  Is the owner of the premises involved; or, has written permission of the owner or owners to make such application; 
b.  Is or will be the plaintiff in an action in eminent domain to acquire the premises involved, or any portion thereof; or 
c.  In the case of a public agency, is negotiating to acquire a portion of the property involved; 
3.  Location of property involved (address or vicinity); 
4.  Legal description of property; 
5.  Proposed facility or use; 
6.  The lot dimensions; 
7.  Topography, if property is in a hillside area; 
8.  All buildings and structures and their location, elevations, size, height and proposed uses; 
9.  Location and design of recreation areas; 
10.  Yards and spaces between buildings; 
11.  Walls and fences and their location, height and materials; 
12.  Landscaping and sprinkling system, including location, type, and plant names and proposed disposition of existing trees; 
13.  Off-street parking, including the location, number of stalls, dimensions of the parking facility, and internal circulation system; 
14.  Access, pedestrian, vehicular, and service, points of ingress and egress, and driveway locations and dimensions; 
15.  Signs and their location, size and height; 
16.  Loading, including the location, dimensions, number of berths, internal circulation, and means of accessibility to structure or use served; 
17.  Lighting, including the location, general nature, and hooding devices, if any; 
18.  Street dedications and improvements; 
19.  Location of utilities and trash collection areas; 
20.  An appropriate description legend and north point; 
21.  Site plan shall be drawn to an appropriate scale; 
22.  Such other data or information as may be required by the planning director; 
23.  The review of such site plan by the planning director shall consider the following factors: 
a.  Compliance with all applicable requirements of this title, 
b.  Siting of buildings and structures, 
c.  Location of parking, loading, and access ways, 
d.  Overall site design and architectural quality insofar as it relates to the intent and purpose of this chapter, and to the general nature of the area in the development is to be located; 
24.  The issuance of a building permit shall be in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 17.02 of this chapter. 
D.  Site Plan Review. Where a variance or conditional use permit has been granted, a site plan review shall be for the purpose of determining compliance with conditions of said variance or conditional use permit in addition to those otherwise required by this chapter. 
(Prior code § 070.08) 
(Ord. No. 1026, § 3, 1-12-11)  
17.62.020 - Revocation and appeal. 
A.  Revocation. An approved site plan may be revoked by the planning director if one or more conditions of the site plan are not complied with. Prior to revoking an approved site plan, the planning director shall send written notice of the director's proposed decision to the applicant, or the applicant's successor in interest, not less than ten (10) days prior to taking final action. The notice shall be mailed by first class mail, postage prepaid. The applicant, or the applicant's successor in interest, may submit information to the planning director contesting the planning director's findings. The planning director may, but shall not be obligated to, continue his or her decision for a period of time to allow the applicant, or the applicant's successor in interest, to submit further information or to schedule meetings to discuss the matter with the applicant, or the applicant's successor in interest. The planning director shall mail his or her decision to the applicant, or the applicant's successor in interest, by first class mail, postage prepaid. 
B.  Appeal. 
1.  Any decision of the planning director may be appealed to the planning commission by the original applicant or the applicant's successor in interest, by any person aggrieved, or by any officer, board, department or bureau of the city. An appeal shall be requested in writing, setting forth the basis for the appeal, and filed not later than fifteen (15) days following the date on which the planning director's determination was mailed, except that when the final day for filing an appeal falls on a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, the time for filing such appeal shall be extended to the close of business on the next succeeding working day. Upon receipt of a valid written appeal, with an appeal fee as set by council resolution, a hearing shall be set before the planning commission and all required notice shall be provided as set forth in Section 17.70.050 of this code. 
2.  The decision of the planning commission may be appealed to the city council by filing an appeal in compliance with the procedures set forth above. Upon receipt of a valid written appeal, with an appeal fee as set by council resolution, a hearing shall be set before the city council and all required notice shall be provided as set forth in Sections 17.70.050 and 17.74.040 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 1026, § 3, 1-12-11)  
Chapter 17.64 - SERVICE STATIONS 
 
17.64.010 - Service stations. 
A.  Intent and Purpose. The following general development standards are set forth in order to assure that service stations in the various zones of the city will be developed in a uniform and orderly manner which will promote the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. These development requirements shall be in addition to the property development standards set forth in each zone and in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.60.010. 
B.  Off-Street Parking and Storage. 
1.  Parking. One space for each employee on the maximum working shift plus one space for each, but no less than five. 
2.  Storage. Two spaces for each stall, but no less than six. Any amount of vehicles in excess of this total or any vehicles inoperative for more than ten (10) days shall be stored in an approved off-site area. The exterior of any such vehicle shall be kept in a clean, or deny, intact condition. No storage facility shall occupy any portion of a required front yard. Off-street storage facilities shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.54.010. 
C.  Landscaping. A minimum of five percent of the lot area shall be landscaped with suitable plants, etc. Said landscaping shall include a minimum four foot wide planter along the street side frontages, excluding driveways. All plantings shall be enclosed by a minimum six inch high concrete curb or masonry planter. All street side planting, excepting street trees, shall be of such type and maintained to provide clear visibility from thirty-six (36) inches above the top of the curb. 
D.  Trash Enclosure. An enclosure shall be provided for the storage of refuse bins, etc. 
E.  Vending Machines. Location of vending machines, not within an enclosed building, shall be subject to architectural review. 
(Prior code § 070.09)  
Chapter 17.66 - PLANNED HIGHWAY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINES 
 
17.66.010 - Planned highway right-of-way lines. 
A.  Intent and Purpose. The establishment and protection of planned highway right-of-way lines is essential to insure that there will be adequate amounts of light and air, to provide adequate visibility when entering or leaving streets, to provide for adequate highway rights-of-way in accordance with the general plan for the city to provide a proper setting for buildings away from the noise and fumes of traffic, and to provide space for landscaping and community appearance features both now and in the future, when all streets and highways have been widened to their planned ultimate width. 
B.  Establishment. The city council may, pursuant to state law, designate planned highway right-of-way lines, and upon the establishment of such lines the provisions of this section shall apply. 
C.  All Yards, Setbacks, and other Measurements. They shall be from the planned highway right-of-way line, except as otherwise specified in this title. 
D.  Use of Land within the Planned Highway Right-of-Way Line. 
1.  No structure or building or any portion thereof shall be erected on any property within the planned highway right-of-way lines. 
2.  Agricultural or landscaping use may be made of such area, provided that no trees or other permanent landscape architectural features are installed. 
(Prior code § 070.10)  
Chapter 17.68 - ANTENNAS 
 
17.68.010 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
A.  "Antenna" means a direct broadcast satellite (DBS) antenna, small DBS antenna or amateur radio/TV antenna. 
B.  "Direct Broadcast Satellite (DBS) Antenna" means any equipment providing services such as radio, television and high-speed Internet to residential and business customers by means of a dish, parabolic or other antenna designed for receiving satellite transmission and which is specifically located on the site that directly receives such service. 
C.  "Small DBS Antenna" means any DBS antenna that is: 
(i)  Fixed (non-telescoping), 
(ii)  Mounted to the roof, top or side of an existing building or structure, and 
(iii)  Not greater than one meter in diameter at its widest point. 
D.  "Amateur Radio/TV Antenna" means any equipment designed for the transmission and/or reception of radio or television signals to and from a site served by it, as part of an amateur system by means of a dipole, whip, mast or similar antenna, including, but not limited to, "ham" radio antennas. 
(Ord. No. 1026, § 2, 1-12-11)  
17.68.020 - Approval requirements. 
Antennas shall be subject to the following approvals: 
A.  Small DBS antennas which are otherwise in compliance with this chapter are a permitted use and no site plan review shall be required. 
B.  All other antennas shall be subject to site plan review by the planning director in accordance with Chapter 17.62 of this code. 
C.  Every antenna, whether temporary or permanent, shall be subject to the review and approval of the building official where required by the building code. 
(Ord. No. 1026, § 2, 1-12-11)  
17.68.030 - Development standards. 
Every antenna shall be located, designed, constructed, treated and maintained in accordance with the standards set forth in this chapter. Antenna systems may be installed, erected and maintained within all land use zones of the city, but only in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. This chapter shall not apply to wireless communication facilities, which are instead subject to the regulations set forth in Chapter 17.86 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 1026, § 2, 1-12-11)  
17.68.040 - Installation, size and safety requirements. 
A.  Every antenna shall be installed and maintained in compliance with applicable requirements of the building code. 
B.  Whenever it is necessary to install an antenna near power lines, or where damage would be caused by its falling, a separate safety wire must be attached to the antenna mast or tower, and secured in a direction away from the hazard. Antenna transmission lines must be kept at least twenty-four (24) inches clear of utility lines. 
C.  Every antenna shall be adequately grounded for protection against a direct strike of lightning, with an adequate ground wire of the type approved by the latest edition of the electrical code. 
D.  The maximum diameter of any antenna shall be six feet at its widest point (including all dishes, arms, panels and appurtenances) unless the planning director determines that a larger diameter is required for the proper functioning and purpose of the antenna. 
(Ord. No. 1026, § 2, 1-12-11)  
17.68.050 - Location. 
A.  No portion of any antenna shall extend beyond any lot lines of the subject site. 
B.  No portion of any antenna (including mounting equipment and guy wires) shall be located in any front yard of any lot or in any side yard on the street side of a corner lot, except for small DBS antennas. 
C.  No portion of any antenna shall extend into any parking or driveway areas, except for small DBS antennas. 
D.  All ground-mounted antennas and those mounted to accessory structures shall be set back from the nearest property line a distance equal to the height of the ground-mounted antenna (1:1 ratio). 
E.  Roof-, top- or side-mounted antennas may not be located in any residential zone. Any roof-, top- or side-mounted antenna located in a commercial, industrial or special zone shall be located within the middle one-third of the building upon which it is mounted, unless said antenna is otherwise completely screened from view from grade from the adjoining properties and adjoining public rights-of-way. The restrictions of this subsection (E) shall not apply to small DBS antennas, which may be mounted at any location on a building in any zone. 
(Ord. No. 1026, § 2, 1-12-11)  
17.68.060 - Height. 
A.  In all zones, DBS antennas mounted to the ground or on accessory structures, shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height above the grade. 
B.  In commercial, industrial and special zones, roof- or top-mounted DBS antennas shall not exceed the height allowed for mechanical equipment on said building. Side-mounted DBS antennas shall not exceed the height of the building to which they are mounted. 
C.  In all zones, amateur radio/TV antennas mounted to the ground or on accessory structures may not exceed forty (40) feet in height above the grade. 
D.  In commercial, industrial and special zones, roof-, top- or side-mounted amateur radio/TV antennas shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet above the roof or top of the building to which they are mounted. 
(Ord. No. 1026, § 2, 1-12-11)  
17.68.070 - Screening. 
A.  Antennas shall not be composed of materials that are excessively bright, shiny, garish or reflective. 
B.  Antennas shall be screened to the maximum extent practicable through the addition of architectural features and/or landscaping that harmonize with the elements and characteristics of the site upon which they are located. All ground-mounted antennas within residential zoned property shall be screened by walls, fences or landscaping at least five feet in height obscuring visibility of the antenna from grade, from the adjoining property and from adjoining public rights-of-way. Notwithstanding the above, the requirements of this subsection (B) shall not apply to small DBS antennas. 
(Ord. No. 1026, § 2, 1-12-11)  
17.68.080 - Maintenance. 
A.  Every antenna shall be maintained in good condition and in accordance with all requirements of this section. 
B.  The antenna shall meet all manufacturers' specifications, and shall be of noncombustible and corrosive-resistant material. The miscellaneous hardware, such as brackets, turnbuckles, clips or similar type equipment subject to rust or corrosion shall be protected with a suitable coating to guard against rust and corrosion. 
C.  Every antenna shall be subject to periodic reinspection. No additions, changes or modifications shall be made to an antenna, unless the addition, change or modification is in conformity with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1026, § 2, 1-12-11)  
17.68.090 - Nonconforming use of antennas. 
A.  Antennas constructed prior to the effective date of this chapter, and which do not conform to all of the requirements of this chapter shall constitute a nonconforming use. 
B.  No person shall maintain or operate any antenna not fully in conformity with the provisions of this chapter after two years from the effective date of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1026, § 2, 1-12-11)  
Chapter 17.70 - ADMINISTRATION GENERALLY 
 
17.70.010 - Public agencies. 
There are various agencies and public officers concerned with the administration and implementation of this chapter. Their powers, duties and procedural rules are described more fully in this code and in the policy statements of the respective departments themselves. To lessen the public's need to search all these sources, the following sections relate to the principal statements and functions of those agencies and persons, with respect to this chapter. 
(Prior code § 080.01)  
17.70.020 - City planning commission. 
A.  Authority—General. The city planning commission shall advise and recommend to the city council, planning director, municipal departments and agencies with respect to city planning and related activities and legislation. On matters of policy, it shall direct and supervise the planning director in the execution of his or her various powers and duties. It shall perform such other functions as are set forth elsewhere in Chapters 2.32 through 2.40 and Chapter 2.48 of this code, or as specified by ordinance. 
B.  The planning commission shall have and exercise the following powers: 
1.  To review and determine appeals where it is alleged there is error or abuse of discretion in any order, requirement, decision, interpretation or other determination made by the zoning administrator. 
2.  To review and determine such other appeals as may be delegated to it by ordinance. 
C.  Authority—Specific. The planning commission has original jurisdiction over the following procedures: 
1.  Amendment to change the text of the ordinance. 
2.  Change or establishment of zones. 
3.  Zone boundary adjustments. 
4.  Change or establishment of combination districts. 
5.  Change or establishment of planned street lines and building lines. 
6.  Uses and structures permitted subject to conditional use permit by the planning commission. 
7.  Referrals—Land for public use or disposal. 
8.  General plan approval or amendments to the general plan. 
9.  Attachment or removal of temporary classifications, (e.g. "T", Tentative Improvement.) 
10.  Review of plans subject to architectural review, except as provided in Section 17.16.020, 17.16.030, and 17.56.010(J)f regarding director reviews. 
D.  Reserved. 
(Prior code § 080.02) 
(Ord. No. 1075, § 12, 6-10-15)  
17.70.030 - Planning director. 
The planning director under the direction of the city manager, shall have the following powers and duties, subject to supervision and direction by the city council and planning commission as to matters of policy: 
A.  He or she shall prepare the general plan of the city and any extensions and modifications thereto. 
B.  He or she shall prepare all proposed zoning regulations and requirements, including the necessary districts or zones in connection therewith, and he shall prepare all maps, charts and diagrams which may be necessary or advisable in the making of such zoning regulations. 
C.  He or she shall make investigations and report on the design and improvements of all proposed divisions of land. 
D.  He or she shall investigate and make recommendations upon applications for those conditional use permits specified by ordinance for their jurisdiction or any similar administrative determination required by this chapter. 
E.  Subject to the provisions of this chapter, he or she shall investigate and make a recommendation upon applications for variances from the regulations and requirements of the chapter. 
F.  He or she shall determine, pursuant to procedures and limitations provided in this chapter, the proper classification of those uses not specifically listed in such ordinance. 
G.  He or she may adopt such rules as deemed necessary to carry out this Title and which are not in conflict or inconsistent therewith. 
H.  He or she may determine by interpretation the status and conditions of nonconformities, or may permit minor extensions under site plan approval or under certain conditions and limitations. 
I.  He or she shall have such additional powers and duties as may be imposed upon him by ordinance, or as may be assigned by the city manager. 
(Prior code § 080.03) 
(Ord. No. 1087, § 1, 5-25-16)  
17.70.040 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1087, § 2, adopted May 25, 2016, repealed former § 17.70.040 in its entirety which pertained to the office of zoning administration and derived from prior code, § 080.04.  
17.70.050 - General rules for processing applications. 
A.  Initiation. Applications to initiate consideration of planning and zoning matters may be made by a variety of persons or agencies, such as owners, bona fide lessees, the city planning commission or the city council. The specific types of are listed under the applicable procedures. 
B.  Applications—Form and Content. 
1.  Applications shall be made on a form prepared by the agency having jurisdiction. Additional verified information may also be required in accordance with provisions of this chapter and rules established by the authorized agency. 
2.  Applications shall be filed in person at the public counter of the department and must include payment of required filing fees. 
C.  Applications—Required Plan or Maps. 
1.  Applications may require inclusion of a zoning and land use map plus a verified list of property owners that are shown upon the records of the county assessor to be within the area of required notification. Specific requirements shall be as shown on the application and the requirements of notification. 
2.  Sets of plot plans of the property and tentative plans for any proposed building construction or structural changes may also be required. Photographs and other descriptive material are generally recommended. 
D.  Withdrawal of Application. Any applicant may withdraw an application at any time, provided the withdrawal is in writing and notification of public hearing has not been mailed. Any public hearing for which notification has been given shall be held, after which the withdrawal in writing of the application may be approved. If the withdrawal is accepted, the application shall be deemed null and void. 
E.  Public Hearings. 
1.  A public hearing is a session to receive original evidence or testimony on applications regulated by this chapter. These, when required, are held by the planning commission or city council, depending on the type of case involved. 
2.  The planning commission and city council meet in regularly scheduled sessions to discuss and rule on planning and zoning matters. At these public meetings, they may hear original evidence or testimony on applications where permitted or not prohibited by this chapter. In such cases, the meeting is also a public hearing. 
3.  Public hearings on matters under planning commission jurisdiction are generally conducted by a member of the planning department staff who shall investigate and prepare a report for the commission. The commission may conduct the public hearing if it so elects. 
F.  Notification of Public Hearing. A public hearing shall require notification of the time, place and purpose of the hearing in one or more of the following ways and as noted by reference under the specific procedure: 
1.  Newspaper. by at least one publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city not less than ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing. 
2.  Written Notice to Applicant and Surrounding Owners. By mailing written notice not less than twelve (12) days prior to the date of such hearing to the applicant and owners of all property within a three hundred-foot radius from the subject property. However, in the case of wireless communication facility applications under Chapter 17.86, the radius shall be five hundred (500) feet. Where seventy-five (75) percent or more of the property within the three hundred-foot or five hundred-foot radius is owned by the applicant, or is in public ownership, notification shall include all adjacent property owners. 
3.  Written Notice to Applicant and Adjacent Property Owners. By mailing written notice not less than twelve (12) days prior to the date of such hearing to the applicant and adjacent property owners or other persons on request. 
4.  Written Notice for Applications Governing Public Facilities. By written notice to the applicant not less than twelve (12) days prior to the date of such hearing. Additional notice to adjacent or surrounding residents is at the option of the agency having jurisdiction. 
5.  Posting. Posting of notification may be required for building line and planned street line procedures or for other cases at the discretion of the responsible agency. Upon written request of the agency having jurisdiction, an agent of the superintendent of public works shall post notices of public hearings not less than twelve (12) days before the event. At least three notices, not more than three hundred (300) feet apart, shall be posted in front of each block or part of a block affected by the public hearing. 
6.  Notification of Subsequent Hearings. Notice of subsequent public hearings may be given at each preceding meeting, but additional written notice is not required. 
G.  Combined Procedures. The planning commission may hear or consider simultaneously multiple proposals for any matter under its jurisdiction if the procedural questions refer to the same property or to adjoining property under the same ownership. 
1.  If in such cases, only one notification of public hearing need be given concerning the proposals and all matters may be considered at one public hearing. 
2.  The property owners to be notified shall be the same ones that would be notified if each procedure was handled separately. Where time limits differ, the longer time periods shall govern. 
3.  If the planning commission approves either or all of the proposals under consideration, a recommendation or ordinance in conformity therewith shall be presented to the city council for required action or adoption concurrently. 
4.  The city council may also hear or consider simultaneously multiple proposals for any matter under its jurisdiction, if the procedural questions refer to the same property or to adjoining property under the same ownership. It is subject to rules of notification similar to those of the planning commission, where applicable. 
H.  Procedure for Conduct and Recordation of Public Hearing. Whenever a public hearing is conducted to receive original evidence or testimony, a written report and summary of the pertinent points presented at the hearing or a written determination, where applicable, shall be prepared by the person conducting the hearing. 
1.  Oaths. All testimony and statements of fact received at public hearings may be under oath. 
(Prior code § 080.20) 
(Ord. No. 1026, § 4, 1-12-11)  
17.70.060 - Recommendations and determinations. 
A.  Findings. Each recommendation or determination shall be supported by written findings showing specifically how the recommendation or determination meets the criteria and requirements set forth in this chapter. 
B.  Record and Notice of Determination. The written findings and determination shall be attached to the file. A copy of the determination shall be mailed or delivered to the applicant, and where applicable to the building department. Additional copies may be sent to other interested parties on request. 
(Prior code § 080.21)  
17.70.070 - Failure to act—Definition. 
Failure to act by the planning commission within the specified time periods shall include a tie vote, inability to obtain a quorum, inability to obtain three concurring votes, nonperformance, or refusal to take action. 
(Prior code § 080.22)  
17.70.080 - Appeals. 
A.  Procedure—Appeal. 
1.  An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, pending its determination. 
2.  Before granting an appeal in whole or in part, the appeal body shall make written findings. First, setting forth specifically wherein there was error or abuse of discretion in the original determination; and secondly, making those findings required to support any new or revised determination of the matter. A determination on appeal shall be a de novo hearing based upon the evidence and testimony introduced at any previous hearing or hearings and the subsequent record, findings and recommendations or determinations. 
3.  If the appeal body fails to render a decision, the prior decision made at the lower level shall be the final decision. 
B.  Time Limit—Applicant's Filing of Appeal. Any valid appeal shall be filed by the applicant within fifteen (15) days after the date on which notice of the determination was mailed, except that when the final day for filing an appeal falls on a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, the time for filing such appeal shall be extended to the close of business on the next succeeding working day. Mailing of notice shall be as expeditious as practicable. 
C.  "Call-Up Appeal Procedure. Not later than fifteen (15) days after the date on which notice of the determination was mailed, the City Council or Planning Commission may "call-up" an action and decide to hear it on appeal, if it is the next direct level of appeal for a particular matter. "Calling-up" an action for appeal shall not require an application from the applicant, but shall require the written direction of at least two members of the city council or planning commission, whichever is applicable. Upon receipt of such written direction, staff shall process the appeal in the same way as an applicant-filed appeal. 
(Prior code § 080.23) 
(Ord. No. 1087, § 3, 5-25-16)  
17.70.090 - Calculation of time limit periods. 
For the purpose of determining time limits applicable to procedures for appeal or transfers of jurisdiction, the last day of the prescribed period for filing the appeal or request shall be considered to be the first day of the proceedings. 
(Prior code § 080.24)  
17.70.100 - Conformance to general plan. 
A.  All matters governed by this chapter shall substantially conform to the purposes, intent or provisions of the general plan. If any action of the planning commission or city council does not conform to the general plan, the recommendations and findings of the commission or council must contain valid reasons based upon sound planning and zoning principles and practices, for not conforming therewith. 
B.  Proposed zone changes have considerable potential influence on the effectuation of the general plan. Any recommendations for such changes if found to be not in conformance with the general plan and its phasing, should not be permitted unless it is also found in writing wherein the general plan is in error or in need of change. 
C.  Long-Term Zone Districts—Conservation. To ensure the effectuation of the general plan, the city council may designate by ordinance, following recommendations by the planning commission, specific areas of the city where changes of zone from one classification to another classification of greater intensity shall not be permitted for a period of at least twenty (20) years. Such districts shall be subject to review at the call of the city council, every five years. 
(Prior code § 080.25)  
17.70.110 - Zoning of annexed or unzoned areas. 
A.  All land or territory annexed to the city after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be immediately classified in the A-T zone unless the city council specifically determines otherwise by ordinance. The council may establish specific zoning by ordinance for land or territory to be annexed. Such an ordinance may be adopted concurrently with the annexation. Unless such specific zoning is established by ordinance, the zoning map shall be amended so as to indicate what land or territory is annexed as A-T, without additional proceedings. 
B.  Any land or territory in the city which is not indicated on the zoning map as being in any zone, shall be construed as being classified in the same zone as that existing on the side of the street opposite said land or territory, and the zoning map is amended to indicate said zone without additional procedure. 
C.  Where uncertainty exists as to the zone indicated on the map, such zone shall be determined by the planning commission by written decision. 
(Prior code § 080.26)  
17.70.120 - Minor modifications. 
A.  Notwithstanding any provision of this Chapter 17.70 or Chapter 17.76 to the contrary, when the strict application of the zoning code results in practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships with respect to a particular piece of property which is not enjoying the privileges commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same vicinity and zone, where there are unique circumstances applicable to the site that merit some relief from zoning development standards and the deviation does not create an adverse impact on the surrounding neighborhood, and when it is in the public interest, the planning director may consider and render decisions on minor modifications in the provisions of this title, limited to the items listed below. No publishing, posting or mailing of notice is required, nor is a public hearing required. 
1.  Reduction of minimum lot area and/or lot dimensions, by not more than twelve (12) percent for up to twenty (20) percent of the lots in a subdivision. However, such modifications are not permitted for lot area in the R-O 6000 zone, and the dwelling unit on such a lot shall meet all setback and coverage requirements. 
2.  Reduction in front, side or rear yard setback by not greater than ten percent of code-required minimum. 
3.  Increase in fence height not greater than ten percent above code-required maximum. 
4.  Reduction in required off-street parking, by not greater than five percent of code-required minimum. 
5.  Increase in building height not greater than five percent above code-required maximum. 
6.  Modification of allowable sign area not greater than ten percent above Code-required maximum. 
7.  Modification of allowable paving and hardscape in the front yard of residential zones not greater than ten percent above code-required maximum. 
8.  Modification of allowable size of accessory structure not greater than ten percent above code-required maximum, and minimum distance between accessory structures and other buildings not greater than ten percent of code-required minimum, in the residential zones. 
The director shall, not later than sixty (60) days from receipt of a complete application, render a decision and prepare written findings as to whether the minor modification meets the criteria of this section and notify the applicant by first class mail. The director may deny, approve or approve the minor modification with conditions to protect the surrounding area. 
(Prior code § 080.65) 
(Ord. No. 1087, § 4, 5-25-16)  
Chapter 17.72 - ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW 
 
17.72.010 - Architectural review. 
A.  Intent and Purpose. To provide flexibility in the placement and interrelationship of structures and uses subject to architectural review; to provide for the implementation of sound site plan design concepts while maintaining the overall intensity of land use and density of population; to review the site plan of those uses which are not intrinsically objectionable to the predominant use category of the district, but which have inherent characteristics which, if not properly handled, have potentials for becoming detrimental to the health, safety, or general welfare of the public, or to neighboring land uses; to determine whether or not a proposed development will properly comply with the architectural guidelines of the city and the provisions and development standards required by this chapter or as prescribed by the planning director, or other authorized agent; to improve the quality of development and to provide a mechanism whereby the city can insure well-designed development. 
B.  Submission of Site Plan. Any use, development of land, structure, building or modification of standards requiring the submission of a site plan for architectural review shall not be established, modified or otherwise altered. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until all of the requirements of this section have been met. Continued conformance with such a plan and such requirements shall be a condition of any certificate of occupancy. 
C.  Required Plans or Documents. 
1.  A site plan for any use, development of land, structure, building or modification of standards that involves architectural review. 
2.  Such other forms or documents as are necessary to determine compliance with the provisions of this chapter or any conditions that the planning director or planning commission may impose in granting an approval of the requested use, development or modification. 
D.  Application Forms. 
1.  The planning director shall prescribe the form for applications and site plans, and the information to be included in the required site plan for architectural review. 
E.  Required Information. Applications involving architectural review shall contain site plans as set forth in Section 17.62.010. 
1.  Projects Subject to Pre-Application Review. All projects subject to pre-application review, pursuant to Section 17.77.020, shall complete the pre-application review process prior to submitting a formal development application. A copy of the pre-application review written report shall be submitted along with the application for architectural review. 
F.  Approving Authority and Basis for Approval of Architectural Review. 
1.  For Architectural Review involving (i) Not more than three single family residences pursuant to Section 17.16.030(C) and new one-family and two-family dwelling units pursuant to Section 17.18.030F1 (ii) five hundred (500) square feet of new multifamily residential square footage or less or (iii) two thousand (2,000) square feet of new commercial/industrial square footage or less, the planning director shall be the reviewing and approval authority. For all other architectural review, the planning commission shall be the approving authority. 
2.  Development to comply with provisions of this chapter. Every use, development of land and application of development standards shall take place in compliance with all applicable provisions of this chapter. 
3.  Compatibility with neighboring property. Every use, development of land and application of architectural guidelines and development standards shall be considered on the basis of the suitability of the site for a particular use or development intended, and the total development, including the prescribed development standards, shall be so arranged as to avoid traffic congestion, insure the protection of public health, safety and general welfare, prevent adverse effects on neighboring property and shall be in accord with all elements of the general plan. 
G.  Reserved. 
H.  Action Upon Site Plans. The planning director or planning commission, whichever is applicable, acting upon any site plans offered for review as provided in this chapter, shall either: 
1.  Approve; or, 
2.  Approve with modification and conditions; or, 
3.  Disapprove the proposed site plan, development or modification as requested in the application. 
I.  Notice of Action on a Site Plan. 
1.  Notification to the Applicant. The planning director shall notify the applicant by mail of the action taken on the application. 
2.  Appeal. In the event the applicant does not agree with the action taken on a site plan by the planning director or planning commission, he may appeal such decision (to the planning commission if a decision of the planning director, and to the city council if a decision of the planning commission). Such appeal shall be filed within fifteen (15) days after the date on which the determination was mailed. The decision of the city council shall be final. 
J.  Expiration of Architectural Approval. 
1.  Architectural approval shall expire three hundred sixty-five (365) days from approval unless the applicant has: obtained a building permit; paid all applicable fees; commenced construction; and is diligently pursuing completion. A cessation of construction for a period of more than thirty (30) consecutive days shall be presumed to be nondiligent. 
2.  The architectural review approval that has been granted, but not been exercised within one year, may be renewed for three one year time extensions only if an application stating reasons for renewal is filed with the planning director at least ten (10) days prior to one year after the effective date of the architectural review approval. The original approving authority for the architectural review (planning director or planning commission) shall render a decision regarding an extension. If an applicant requests a time extension after the architectural review approval has expired, a retroactive time extension may be approved; however the application fees are double. In the event that the planning director or planning commission acts to renew an architectural approval, the planning director or planning commission may impose any additional conditions on the architectural approval as a condition of its renewal. In the event that such additional conditions are not acceptable to the applicant and/or owner, the planning director or planning commission shall deny the renewal. 
3.  The criteria for granting a three hundred sixty-five (365) day extension are: 
a.  No significant change has occurred in the surrounding neighborhood; 
b.  The project conforms to existing and any new building and zone requirements; 
c.  A request for the extension is properly filed with the planning director ten (10) days or more prior to expiration; and 
d.  The applicant states upon affidavit the reasons requiring an extension and such other criteria as the planning department shall set forth in the application. 
4.  The planning director or planning commission shall grant the extension if good cause is set forth in the application. 
(Ord. 1004-(2) § 3, 2008; prior code § 080.10) 
(Ord. No. 1087, § 5, 5-25-16)  
Chapter 17.74 - CONDITIONAL USES 
 
17.74.010 - Conditional uses. 
A.  Intent and Purpose. To provide for the proper location of certain uses which, because of unusual effects or characteristics, including large land area, potential intensity or public concern, cannot be automatically permitted in, nor absolutely prohibited from, some or all zone classifications without imposition of specific conditions; to ensure that the location of these uses will be in accordance with the objectives of the general plan and the intent and purpose of the applicable zoning district; to provide sufficient and adequate safeguards and conditions to ensure that the conditional use will be operated and maintained in a manner not detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare, or harmful to neighboring property and improvements. 
B.  Definition—Conditional Use. A conditional use which requires a special degree of control because of characteristics peculiar to it, or because of size, technological processes or type of equipment used, or because of the exact location with reference to surroundings, streets and existing improvements or demands upon public facilities. Such control is to ensure that the particular use at the particular site on which such use is proposed to be located, is compatible with the other existing or permitted uses surrounding the site. 
C.  Authority of the Commission. Subject to the provisions of this chapter, the commission may grant permits for those conditional users which are designated in the district regulations. 
D.  Uses Permitted in any Zone by Conditional Use Permit. 
1.  Airports and heliports; 
2.  Municipal buildings, public utilities, or utilities by mutual agencies, consisting of water wells, electrical substations, gas metering stations, power boosters, or conversion plants with the necessary buildings, apparatus, or appurtenances customary to such establishments. 
3.  Churches, temples, and places used exclusively for religious worship; and 
4.  Public and private elementary, junior high, and senior high schools; public and private colleges and universities. 
E.  Uses permitted in any commercial zone by conditional use permit. 
1.  Liquor sales, subject to Section 17.74.015. 
F.  Initiation . application for a conditional use permit may be initiated by owners or bona fide lessees of the affected property. 
G.  Notification of public hearing for a conditional use permit application shall be by: 
1.  Newspaper; and 
2.  Written notice to applicant and surrounding property owners within a three hundred-foot radius. However, in the case of wireless communication facility applications under Chapter 17.86, the radius shall be five hundred (500) feet. Where seventy-five (75) percent or more of the property within the three hundred-foot or five hundred-foot radius is owned by the applicant, or is in public ownership, notification shall include all adjacent property owners. 
(Prior code § 080.50) 
(Ord. No. 1026, § 5, 1-12-11; Ord. No. 1088, § 4, 12-14-16)  
17.74.015 - Conditional use permits for liquor, on-sale and off-sale. 
A.  This section applies to: 
1.  Establishments that do not currently but propose to sell liquor; 
2.  Establishments that currently sell liquor but which propose to change the type of liquor to be sold by changing the type of retail liquor license within a license classification; 
3.  All establishments that currently sell liquor, if the establishment substantially changes its mode or character of operation, which includes, but is not limited to: 
a.  An increase in floor area used for the display of liquor; or 
b.  A ten-percent increase in facing/shelving used for the display of liquor; and 
B.  Prior to approving a conditional use permit for either (i) on-sale liquor sales in conjunction with a bona fide eating establishment located anywhere in the city, or (ii) on-sale or off-sale liquor sales located in the "Pueblo Viejo" area of the city (as identified in the City's General Plan), the planning commission must make the findings set forth in Section 17.74.020. For purposes of this section, "bona fide eating establishment" means an establishment engaged in the following: 
1.  The sale of food and non-alcoholic beverages for consumption on or off the premises; and 
2.  the sale of liquor/alcoholic beverages for consumption on premises only; and 
3.  Where at least twenty (20) percent of the gross floor area of the building is designed, equipped and used exclusively for the storage and preparation of food and non-alcoholic beverages for consumption; and 
4.  Where at least fifty (50) percent of the gross floor area of the building is designed, equipped and used exclusively for seating of patrons for the purpose of serving meals. "Meals" shall mean the usual assortment of foods commonly ordered at various hours of the day for breakfast, lunch or dinner, and not merely appetizers or snacks. "Patrons" shall mean persons who come to a bona fide public eating establishment for the purpose of actually ordering and obtaining a meal therein; and 
5.  Where not more than twenty (20) percent of the gross floor area, or one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet, whichever is less, is dedicated to a bar or the storage, sales and display of liquor/alcoholic beverages and said area is separated by physical barriers from the main seating area for serving meals. 
C.  Prior to approving a conditional permit for any other type of liquor sales use, the planning commission must make the findings set forth in Section 17.74.020, plus the following additional findings: 
1.  With respect to liquor, on-sale establishments: 
a.  The establishment does not fall within seven hundred (700) feet, measured from property line to property line, of a use for religious worship, school (public or private), park, playground, residential or any similar sensitive use; and 
b.  The establishment does not fall within seven hundred (700) feet, measured from property line to property line, of an existing liquor, on-sale use; and 
i.  The planning commission may find that the public benefit outweighs the distance restrictions of subsections (a) and/or (b) above, upon additional findings that: 
(A)  The establishment provides a substantial benefit to the immediate neighborhood not provided by another existing establishment within the restricted distance; and 
(B)  Not greater than five percent of the sales floor area or 1,000 square feet, whichever is less, shall be used for the display or sale of alcoholic beverages; 
c.  That the requested establishment at the proposed location will not adversely affect the economic welfare of the nearby community; and 
d.  That the exterior appearance of the structure of the proposed establishment will not be inconsistent with the exterior appearance of commercial structures already constructed or under construction within the immediate neighborhood as to cause blight, deterioration, or substantially diminish or impair the property values within the neighborhood. 
2.  With respect to liquor, off-sale establishments: 
a.  The establishment does not fall within seven hundred (700) feet, measured from property line to property line, of a use for religious worship, school (public or private), park, playground, residential or any similar sensitive use; and 
b.  The establishment does not fall within seven hundred (700) feet, measured from property line to property line, of an existing liquor, off-sale use; and 
i.  The planning commission may find that the public benefit outweighs the distance restrictions of subsections (a) and/or (b) above, upon additional findings that: 
(A)  The establishment provides a substantial benefit to the immediate neighborhood not provided by another existing establishment within the restricted distance; and 
(B)  Not greater than five percent of the sales floor area or one thousand (1,000) square feet, whichever is less, shall be used for the display or sale of alcoholic beverages; 
c.  That the requested establishment at the proposed location will not adversely affect the economic welfare of the nearby community; and 
d.  That the exterior appearance of the structure of the proposed establishment will not be inconsistent with the exterior appearance of commercial structures already constructed or under construction within the immediate neighborhood so as to cause blight or deterioration, or substantially diminish or impair the property values within the neighborhood. 
D.  Additionally, if the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control (ABC) notifies the City that the proposed establishment is either (1) subject to the State law moratorium/limit on the number of liquor licenses that may be issued within the city under California Business and Professions Code Section 23817.7 or, (2) is in an area of "undue concentration" of liquor licenses, as defined in California Business and Professions Code Section 23958.4; the planning commission must additionally find that the public convenience or necessity nonetheless justifies the issuance of the liquor license to the establishment. 
(Ord. No. 1088, § 5, 12-14-16)  
17.74.020 - Determinations—Conditional use permit. 
A.  Types of Determinations. The planning commission shall consider the reports, recommendations, and evidence presented, and any determinations may take the following forms: 
1.  Approval of the application as filed. 
2.  Modification of the Application. Determination may include granting of a change other than that requested, but any such change must be of equal or lesser intensity than that originally requested. 
3.  Disapproval of the application. 
4.  Action postponed. 
5.  Failure to act. 
B.  Findings. Each determination granting a conditional use shall be supported by written findings of fact showing specifically how the determination meets the following criteria and requirements: 
1.  The proposed use will not be in conflict with, but will be in harmony with and in accordance with the objectives of the general plan. 
2.  The proposed use will be located, designed, constructed, operated and maintained so as to be compatible with the existing or intended character of the general vicinity and shall not change the essential character of the same area. 
3.  Consideration is to be given to harmony in scale, bulk, coverage and density, to the availability of public facilities and utilities, to harmful effect, if any, upon desirable neighborhood character, to the generation of traffic and the capacity of surrounding streets, and to any other relevant impact of the development. 
4.  Where the proposed use may be potentially hazardous or disturbing to existing or reasonably expected neighboring uses, it must be justified by the common public interest as a benefit to the community as a whole. 
5.  The proposed use will include vehicular approaches to the property designed for reasonable minimal interference with traffic on surrounding public streets or roads. 
C.  Conditions. In granting any conditional use, the planning commission may attach such additional conditional conditions and safeguards as 'e deemed necessary to protect the surrounding area, including but not limited to the following: 
1.  Requirement of yards other than the minimum size required by this chapter. 
2.  Requirement of screening of parking, recreation or storage areas or other portions of the subject property from adjoining premises or from any street by walls, fences, planting or other devices. 
3.  Modification of the exterior features or appearance of any structure where necessary to preserve property values. 
4.  Limitation of size and extent of facilities, machine capacity, number of employees or occupants, and method or times of operation. 
5.  Regulation of number, design and location of access drives or other traffic features. 
6.  Requirement of off-street parking or other special features other than the minimum required by this chapter or applicable codes or regulations. (Note: Allows less than minimum as well as greater than.) 
7.  Utilities. 
8.  Control of location, number, color, size, height, lighting and landscaping of signs and structures as related to creation of traffic hazards and appearance in harmony with surrounding development and community objectives. 
9.  Maintenance of the grounds, landscaping and irrigating system. 
10.  Regulation of noise, vibration, odors and other similar performance standards. 
11.  A time period within which the proposed use shall be developed, plus any specified period for the life of the conditional use. 
12.  Phasing of the development plan. 
13.  A bond or deposit of money for the completion of street improvements and other facilities or to guarantee the change or removal of any designated use or structure within a specified period of time to assure faithful performance on the part of the applicant. 
14.  A tract map or parcel map. 
15.  Approval of development plans. 
D.  Time Limits—Determination. The planning commission shall make such determination within sixty (60) days of the filing date, or such longer period up to an additional sixty (60) days as may be mutually agreed upon between the agency and the applicant. 
E.  Effective Date—No Appeal Filed. If no appeal is filed, the determination of the authorized agency shall become effective upon the close of the appeal filing period (fifteen (15) days). An appeal from a decision of the commission shall be taken to the council. If an appeal is filed, see Section 17.74.030. If the planning commission fails to act on the matter, see Section 17.70.070. 
(Prior code § 080.51)  
17.74.030 - Transfer of jurisdiction. 
A.  Commission Fails to Act. If the planning commission fails to act on an application within the prescribed time period or after an authorized extension, the applicant may file a request for transfer of jurisdiction. The commission shall forward the request with the file to the council for determination of the original application by majority vote. The request of jurisdiction shall be filed by mail or at one of the public counters of the department within ten (10) days from the expiration of the authorized time period. If the applicant fails to file for transfer of jurisdiction, the original application shall be deemed denied and is not subject to appeal. 
B.  Procedure—Transfer of Jurisdiction. 
1.  When a matter is transferred, the council shall be governed by the same procedural and time requirements as apply to an original proceeding. 
2.  When the council assumes jurisdiction, the commission shall lose jurisdiction in the matter. The commission shall make such investigations and furnish such reports as the council may request. 
3.  The mater may be remanded by the council in which case the commission shall regain jurisdiction. If the file is remanded, the time period shall not exceed that allowed to the council on transfer. If after a remand and expiration of the time specified, the commission still fails to act, the original application shall be deemed denied and is not subject to appeal. 
C.  Council Fails to Act. If the council fails to act on any matter transferred to it, the original application shall be deemed denied and no appeal may be taken. 
D.  Effective Date—Transfer of Jurisdiction. 
1.  If the case was determined by the commission on remand and there was no appeal, decision on the expiration of the appeal filing period (fifteen (15) days) shall be effective. 
2.  If the case was determined by the council, its decision is final on the date of mailing of its determination and findings to the applicant. 
(Prior code § 080.052)  
17.74.040 - Appeals to the council. 
A.  Appellants. An appeal to the council from a determination by the commission of a conditional use may be filed by the original applicant, by any person aggrieved, or by any two city council members under Section 17.70.080(C). 
B.  Procedure—Appeal. 
1.  When an appeal is filed, the commission shall transmit its record of the matter to the council. 
2.  The council shall base its determination on appeals only upon the evidence and testimony introduced at any hearing or hearings held by the commission and upon the commission's record, findings and determination. 
3.  If the original applicant or the appellant wishes to offer into the proceedings any new evidence or testimony, a written summary stating why such evidence or testimony could not have been presented during the original consideration shall be filed. If the council determines that such evidence could not reasonably have been presented earlier and is of such nature as might reasonably have led to a different determination, the matter shall be remanded to the commission. The commission shall reopen the matter and make a determination before expiration of the time period allotted to the council. 
4.  If the commission fails to act on remand after appeal, the matter is deemed denied and is not subject to further appeal. 
C.  Time Limit—Council Action. Council shall act on appeal matters concerning conditional uses within sixty (60) days or within such extended period of time up to an additional sixty (60) days as may be mutually agreed upon by the applicant or appellant and the council. 
D.  Council Vote. The council may approve, deny or impose additional conditions on a permit under appeal by majority vote. 
E.  Council Fails to Act on Appeal. If the council fails to act upon an appeal concerning conditional uses within the specified time period, it shall be deemed a denial of the appeal. 
F.  Effective Date—Council Action. A determination by the council on appeals concerning conditional uses shall become final on the date of mailing of the council decision, or on expiration of the specified time limit if it fails to act. 
(Prior code § 080.53) 
(Ord. No. 1087, § 6, 5-25-16)  
17.74.050 - Post-determination procedures. 
A.  Expiration of Conditional Use. 
1.  A conditional use shall expire and shall become void one year following the date on which the conditional use became effective, unless prior to the expiration of one year a building permit is issued and construction is commenced and diligently pursued toward completion, or a certificate of occupancy is issued. 
2.  A conditional use that has been granted, but not been exercised within one year may be renewed for three one-year time extensions only if an application stating reasons for renewal is filed prior to one year after the effective date of the conditional use approval by the planning commission. If an applicant requests a time extension after the conditional use permit approval has expired, a retroactive time extension may be approved; however the application fees are double. In the event that the planning commission acts to renew a conditional use permit, the planning commission may impose any additional conditions on the conditional use permit as a condition of is renewal. In the event that such additional conditions are not acceptable to the applicant and/or owner, the planning commission shall deny the renewal. 
3.  Conditional uses for public utilities, public health facilities, or governmental enterprises, including but not united to elementary or high schools, libraries, museums, fire or police stations are exempt from the expiration provision provided acquisition or legal proceeding for acquisition of the site is commenced within one year. 
B.  Revocation of Conditional Use. 
1.  A conditional use that has been exercised may be revoked by the commission if one or more conditions are not complied with. 
2.  An appeal from the commission's decision to revoke a conditional use may be taken to the council. Upon the filing of an appeal, the council shall review the decision in accordance with the procedure prescribed in Section 17.74.040. 
C.  Permits—Building Department. Upon the effective date of any conditional use authorization and subject to all conditions thereof, the building department may issue permits. 
D.  Expansion of Uses and New Structures. On any premises or portion thereof on which a conditional use is permitted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, new structures may be erected, enlargements may be made to existing structures and existing uses may be extended to an approved site if not part of the previously approved plans, provided the relevant plans are submitted to and approved by the planning commission, according to the procedures prescribed herein for the establishment of the conditional use. 
E.  Continuance of Use. While the conditional use is continued, the approved site shall be retained for such conditional use or dedicated public uses, and no portion thereof shall be severed therefrom or utilized for other purposes unless the plans for the reduced site are first submitted to and approved by the planning commission. If a conditional use is abandoned or is discontinued for a continuous period of one year, it may not thereafter be reestablished unless authorized in accordance with the procedure prescribed herein for the establishment of conditional use. 
F.  Change of Use. No conditional use may be changed to a substantially different type of conditional use unless the new use is authorized in accordance with the procedure prescribed herein for the establishment of a conditional use. 
G.  Change of Conditions and Minor Extensions. A subsequent change in the conditions of a conditional use which has been granted may be authorized by the planning director, provided the change does not increase the density, nor decrease the number of parking stalls, nor substantially alter the intensity of operation beyond what was originally approved. The planning director may also approve minor changes in any required phasing plan provided the cumulative effect of such changes does not increase any scheduled time periods by more than six months. 
H.  Existing Conditional Uses. 
1.  Where a use is classified as a conditional use under this chapter and has been determined to have existed as a conditional or permitted use at the date of the adoption of this chapter, it shall then be considered to be a legal conditional use. 
2.  Where a use is not allowed as a conditional or permitted use at the date of the adoption of this chapter, it shall be considered to be a nonconformity and shall be subject to the provisions of Section 17.78.020. 
I.  Reapplication—Conditional Use. At least one year shall have elapsed since the effective date of disapproval of the application or revocation of any conditional use permit before a new application may be filed seeking substantially the same conditional use for any of the same or substantially the same property. 
(Prior code § 080.54)  
Chapter 17.76 - VARIANCES 
 
17.76.010 - Variances. 
A.  Intent and Purpose. To prevent or to lessen practical difficulties and unnecessary physical hardships; to remedy disparity of privilege, nor to permit a use substantially inconsistent with the limitation upon other properties in the same zone and vicinity, nor to grant relief from self-imposed hardships. 
B.  Definition—Variances. "Variances" are adjustments in the application of this chapter to avoid practical difficulties and unnecessary hardships with respect to a particular piece of property which is not enjoying the privileges commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same vicinity and zone. A practical difficulty or unnecessary physical hardship may result from the size, shape or dimensions of a site, or because of the location of existing structures on the site, or from setbacks or building lines, or from geographic, topographic or other physical conditions on the site or in the immediate vicinity. 
C.  Authority of the Director. Subject to the provisions of this chapter, the planning director shall investigate and either make a recommendation or render a decision supported by findings on applications for variances as follows: 
1.  Major Variances from Development Standards. The planning director may recommend to the planning commission variances from the following development standards: fences and walls, site area, width, frontage, depth, coverage, floor area ratio, yards, height of structures, distance between structures and off-street parking and loading facilities, signs and enclosures or screening. 
2.  Variances from industrial performance standards not permitted. 
3.  Minor Variances/Modifications from Land Use Standards. The planning director may grant minor variances/modifications from certain land use standards pursuant to Section 17.70.120 of this title. 
4.  Use Variances. A variance which could essentially permit a change to a use not permitted by the district regulations controlling the applicant's property shall not be permitted. 
D.  Initiation. Owners or bona fide lessees of the affected property. 
E.  Public Hearing—Notification. Public hearings for major variances (those not subject to Subsection (C)(3)) are required. Notification shall be given in accordance with Section 17.70.050(F). 
(Prior code § 080.60) 
(Ord. No. 1087, § 7, 5-25-16)  
17.76.020 - Determinations. 
A.  Types of Determinations. The planning commission shall consider the reports, recommendations, and any evidence presented, and its determination may take the following forms: 
1.  Approval of the application as filed or amended. 
2.  Modification of the Application. Determination may include granting of a change other than that requested, but any such change must be of equal or lesser intensity than that originally requested. 
3.  Disapproval of the application. 
4.  Action postponed. (Time extension agreed to if necessary.) 
5.  Failure to act. 
B.  Findings. Each determination granting a variance shall be supported by written findings of fact showing specifically how the determination meets the following criteria and requirements: 
1.  That the strict application of the provisions of this chapter would result in practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships inconsistent with the general purpose and intent of the chapter; 
2.  That there are special circumstances applicable to the subject property such as size, shape, topography, location or surroundings, that do not apply generally to other property in the same zone and vicinity; 
3.  That such variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right or use generally possessed by other property in the. same zone and vicinity, but which, because of such special circumstances and practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships is denied to the property in question; 
4.  That the granting of such variance will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to the property or improvements in the same zone or vicinity in which the property is located, and; 
5.  That the granting of the variance will not adversely effect any element of the general plan. 
C.  Conditions. In granting the permissible variance, the commission may attach such additional conditions and safeguards as are deemed necessary to protect the surrounding area including, but not limited to the following: 
1.  Requirement of yards greater than the minimum required by this chapter. 
2.  Requirement of screening of parking, recreation or storage areas or other portions of the subject property from adjoining premises or from any street by walls, fences, plantings or other devices. 
3.  Modification of the exterior features or appearance of any structure where necessary to preserve property values. 
4.  Limitation of size and extent of facilities, machine capacity, number of employees or occupants, and method or times of operation. 
5.  Regulation of number, design and location of access drives or other traffic features. 
6.  Requirement of off-street parking or other special features beyond the minimum required by this chapter or applicable codes or regulations. 
7.  Utilities. 
8.  Control of location, number, color, size, height, lighting and landscaping of signs and structures as related to traffic hazards and appearance in harmony with surrounding development and community. 
9.  Maintenance of the grounds, landscaping and irrigation system. 
10.  Regulation of noise, vibration, odors and other similar performance standards. 
11.  A time period within which the proposed variance shall be utilized plus any specified period for the life of the variance. 
12.  A bond or deposit of money for completion of street improvements and other facilities or to guarantee the change or removal of any designated use or structure within a specified period of time, to assure faithful performance on the part of the applicant. 
13.  Regulation of fences and/or walls shall pertain to the height thereof, materials used and visibility through and around said fence and walls. 
D.  Time Limits—Determination. The commission shall make determination within sixty (60) days of the filing date or such longer period up to an additional sixty (60) days as may be mutually agreed upon in writing between the commission and the applicant. 
E.  Effective Date—No Appeal Filed. 
1.  If no appeal is filed, the determination of the commission shall become effective upon the close of the appeal filing period (fifteen (15) days). 
2.  If an appeal is filed, see Section 17.70.070. 
3.  If the commission fails to act on the matter, see Section 17.70.070. 
(Prior code § 080.61)  
17.76.030 - Transfer of jurisdiction. 
A.  Commission Fails to Act. If the commission fails to act within the sixty-day prescribed time period or after any authorized extension period, the applicant may file a request for transfer of jurisdiction. The request shall be filed by mail, or at the public counter of the department within ten (10) days from the expiration of the authorized time period. The commission shall forward the application, with the file and any relevant information to the council for determination of the original application. If the applicant fails to file a request for transfer of jurisdiction, the original application shall be deemed denied and is not subject to appeal. 
B.  Procedure—Transfer of Jurisdiction. When a matter is transferred the council shall be governed by the same procedural and time requirements as apply to an original proceeding. When the council assumes jurisdiction, the commission shall lose jurisdiction in the matter. The director shall make such investigations and furnish such reports as the council may request. However, the matter may be remanded by the council in which case the commission shall regain jurisdiction. If the file is remanded, the time period shall not exceed that allowed to the council on transfer. If after a remand and expiration of the time specified, the commission still fails to act, the original application shall be deemed denied and is not subject to appeal. 
C.  Council Fails to Act. If the council fails to act on a variance application transferred to it, the original application shall be deemed denied and no appeal may be taken. 
D.  Effective Date—Transfer of Jurisdiction. 
1.  If the case was determined by the commission on remand and there was no appeal, decision is effective on the expiration of the appeal filing period (fifteen (15) days). 
2.  If the case was determined by the council, its decision is final on the date of mailing of its determination and findings to the applicant. 
(Prior code § 080.62)  
17.76.040 - Appeals to the council. 
A.  Appellants. An appeal may be filed by the applicant, by any person aggrieved, or by any officer, board, department or bureau of the city. 
B.  Procedure—Appeal. 
1.  When an appeal is filed, the commission shall transmit its record of the mater to the council. 
2.  If the original applicant or the appellant wishes to offer into the proceedings any new evidence or testimony, a written summary stating why such evidence or testimony could not have been presented during the original consideration shall be filed. If the council determines that such evidence could not reasonably have been presented earlier and is of such nature as might reasonably have led to a different determination, the matter shall be remanded to the commission. The commission shall reopen the matter and make a determination before expiration of the time period allotted to the council. 
3.  If the planning commission fails to act on remand after appeal, the matter is deemed denied and is not subject to further appeal. 
C.  Time Limit—Council Action. The council shall act on appeals concerning variances within sixty (60) days or within such extended period of time up to an additional sixty (60) days, as may be mutually agreed upon by the applicant or the appellant and the council. 
D.  Council Failure to Act on Appeal. If the council fails to act on an appeal concerning variances within the time limit specified, the action of the planning commission on the matter shall be final. 
E.  Effective Date—Appeal. 
1.  A determination by the council on appeals concerning variances shall become effective on the date of mailing of the council's determination. 
2.  A determination by the commission on remand is not subject to appeal and shall become effective on the date of mailing of the determination. 
(Prior code § 080.63)  
17.76.050 - Post-determination procedures. 
A.  Expiration of Variance. 
1.  A variance shall expire and shall become void one year following the date on which the variance became effective, unless prior to the expiration of one year, a building permit is filed and construction is commenced and diligently pursued toward completion, or a certificate of occupancy is issued. 
2.  A variance that has not been exercised may be renewed for an additional period of one year if an application stating reasons for renewal is made prior to one year after the effective date of the variance. 
B.  Revocation of Variance. A variance that has been exercised may be revoked by the commission if one or more conditions are not complied with. An appeal from the commission's decision to revoke a variance may be taken to the council, subject to provisions of Section 17.76.030. The council's decision is final. 
C.  Permits—Building Department. Upon the effective date of any variance authorization and subject to all conditions thereof, the building department may issue permits. 
D.  Variances Granted Prior to Effective Date. 
1.  All use variances granted and exercised prior to the effective date of this chapter, plus subsequent amendments, may be continued provided no new structure is erected, no existing structure is enlarged and no existing use is extended. 
2.  If any use variance granted prior to the effective date of this chapter has never been exercised or if once exercised and the use or development authorized has been discontinued or removed from the premises for a period of at least six months, such variance shall no longer be of any force and effect, and, the respective ordinance granting such variance is repealed. 
E.  Change of Conditions and Minor Extensions. A subsequent change in the conditions of a variance which has been granted by the commission may be authorized by the planning director without a hearing, provided the change does not increase the density, nor decrease the number of parking stalls, nor substantially alter the intensity of operation beyond what was originally approved by the commission. 
F.  Reapplication—Variance. At least one year shall have elapsed since the effective date of disapproval of the application or revocation of variance before filing a new application seeking substantially the same variance for any of the same property. 
(Prior code § 080.64) 
(Ord. No. 1087, § 8, 5-25-16)  
Chapter 17.77 - PRE-APPLICATION REVIEW 
 
17.77.010 - Intent and purpose. 
The purpose of a pre-application review includes the following: 
A.  To achieve better projects through early consultation between city staff and project proponents; 
B.  To notify the city's executive staff of major projects that have significant impacts on the community; 
C.  To coordinate reviews of projects among city staff, city departments, and outside agencies; 
D.  To familiarize project proponents with the regulations and procedures that apply to the project; 
E.  To provide project proponents with an early indication of whether a proposed development will be recommended for approval by staff; 
F.  To avoid significant investment in the design of a project without preliminary directions from city staff; and to identify issues that may arise during review of the projects (e.g., conformance with applicable design guidelines, conformance with goals, policies, and objectives of the general plan, environmental requirements and possible recommended mitigation measures, possible recommended conditions of approval, and requirements for public improvements). 
(Ord. 1004-(2) § 4 (part), 2008)  
17.77.020 - Applicability. 
A.  Pre-application review shall be required for projects subject to one or more of the following approvals: 
1.  Projects involving a specific plan adoption, specific plan amendment, or planned development overlay; 
2.  Projects involving a general plan amendment, or change of zone; 
3.  Projects involving new construction of more than five thousand (5,000) square feet of commercial or institutional building area if not within the boundaries of an adopted specific plan; 
4.  Projects involving four or more dwelling units; 
5.  New construction of more than five hundred (500) square feet of building area within the boundaries of the Pueblo Viejo Master Plan; 
6.  New construction located within the boundaries of an adopted specific plan, if the review is required by the director; 
7.  Projects involving service stations, auto repair facilities, car washes, drive-thru businesses, auto dismantling, salvage yards, and outdoor storage uses; 
8.  New construction of more than ten thousand (10,000) square feet of industrial building area; 
9.  Land uses involving a conditional use permit in the industrial zones; 
10.  Street vacations; 
11.  Water reservoirs and wastewater treatment plants; 
12.  Subdivisions of land involving five or more lots. 
B.  Optional Review. A project proponent may voluntarily submit a request for a pre-application review for any project involving a discretionary land use entitlement, change of zone request, or a tentative map. 
C.  Director-Required Review. The director reserves the right to require pre-application review for any project involving multiple-agency coordination and discretionary land use entitlements, where the proposed land uses have the potential to cause adverse impacts upon surrounding property owners. The director shall issue findings in writing requiring pre-application review, pursuant to this subsection. 
(Ord. 1004-(2) § 4 (part), 2008)  
17.77.030 - Procedure. 
A.  Procedure. Once the director determines that a request for pre-application review is complete, the director or designee shall process the request in the following manner. 
1.  Submittal Requirements. All requests for pre-application review shall be accompanied by a form to be provided by the community development department, twelve (12) copies of a site plan as specified in Chapter 17.62 of this title, and the required processing fee. Additional graphic materials may be requested by the director as part of the initial review of the pre-application submittal. 
2.  Notice. The director or designee shall send a written notice, with a project description and copy of site plan, to all affected city departments, outside agencies and special districts, informing of the time and place of the scheduled pre-application review. 
3.  Meeting. The pre-application review shall be conducted at a meeting in which the applicant for a project is invited and city departments and outside agencies are in attendance. 
4.  Scheduling. The director shall set the time and place of the pre-application review meeting, to be conducted within three weeks of receipt of a complete application. 
5.  Responsible Staff. The city manager, or designee, shall determine which city departments and outside agencies shall participate in the pre-application meeting. The director shall designate the staff person(s) responsible for scheduling and conducting the pre-application meeting. 
6.  Written Report. A written report from the director outlining the results of the pre-application review shall be provided to the applicant within thirty (30) days of the meeting. The written report shall be distributed to the city manager and executive staff, and shall be attached to the formal development application. 
(Ord. 1004-(2) § 4 (part), 2008)  
17.77.040 - Pre-application review meeting. 
A.  Case Manager. The city manager shall appoint a case manager for the project, which shall be the primary liaison responsible for overseeing the project through the city's review and approval process. The case manager may be from the planning staff, economic development staff, public works staff, or redevelopment/housing staff, depending on the major entitlements needed and/or areas of expertise required for processing of the project. 
B.  Coordination. The staff person assigned to conduct the meeting shall provide an overview of procedures, introduce the case manager assigned to the project, engage the applicant and agencies in discussion, and conclude the meeting. At the initiation of the meeting, the applicant shall present a brief overview of the development proposal. All staff and agencies shall be prepared to discuss the proposal in detail and identify any major issues that may arise if the proposal is processed. 
C.  Duration. The meeting shall be limited to one hour in duration. If additional time is required, this can be arranged at an additional cost to the applicant. If, at the end of the session, the status of certain issues remains unresolved, staff shall identify those issues and/or include any additional recommendations or study requests specified in the written report. 
D.  Disclaimer. Neither the pre-application meeting, the written report, nor information or pertinent policies provided by the city departments shall be construed as a city recommendation for approval or disapproval of the application/project. 
(Ord. 1004-(2) § 4 (part), 2008)  
17.77.050 - Contents of written report. 
A.  Report Contents. The written report required under Section 17.77.030(A)(6) shall contain a letter from the director and copies of all staff and agency comments on the development proposal that were received as part of the pre-application review. Although the contents of the written report will depend on the type of proposal, its proposed location, the background information provided by the applicant, and other factors, the report shall generally provide the applicant with the following types of information: 
1.  Any applications which must be filed to process the proposal as well as any timing requirements associated with filing such applications. Applications which may be required include but are not limited to the following: general plan amendments, specific plans, changes of zone, and tentative maps. 
2.  Any special studies which must be filed to process the proposal as well as any timing requirements associated with filing such special studies. Special studies which may be required include but are not limited to the following: fiscal impact, private debt burden, biological, archeological, paleontological, geological, flood, traffic, air quality study and noise studies. 
3.  Any special plans which must be filed to process the proposal. Special plans which may be required include but are not limited to the following: conceptual grading plans, parks improvement plans, construction staging plans, dust control plans, and streetscape elevation renderings. 
4.  Current fees including but not limited to the following: application fees, mitigation fees (e.g., signal mitigation fees or area drainage fees), and special district fees administered by the city (e.g., MSHCP fees, TUMF fees). 
5.  Any major environmental issues associated with the proposal, including the possible need for an EIR subject to the anticipated environmental assessment. 
6.  Any major design considerations associated with the proposal (e.g., grading and drainage design, ingress/egress designs, limitations on density, requirements for public parks). 
7.  The availability of water, sewer, and fire flow rate. 
8.  The concerns remaining for the proposal, if any. 
9.  The changes that staff will require before making an approval recommendation, or a statement that an approval recommendation will not be made given the proposal's present configuration. 
10.  Findings required for the necessary permit or approval. 
(Ord. 1004-(2) § 4 (part), 2008)  
17.77.060 - Validity of agency comments. 
A.  Agency Comments. No issues other than those identified in the written report shall be raised by staff during processing of the development proposal unless there are changed circumstances or new information identified during the processing of entitlement applications. The written report shall be valid for two years from the date thereof, unless a shorter period is specified in the written report. 
B.  Changed Circumstances. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, where the director, department head, or agency representative subsequently determine that conditions have changed or that the existing information does not fully address all significant concerns, staff may require an additional study or studies not specified in the pre-application written report. Similarly, city and special district policies may change during the report's two year life, and policy recommendations, which were valid when the written report was issued, may or may not be valid when the development proposal is filed and processed. In such cases, the development application will be subject to City and special district policies in effect at the time of filing or hearing, whichever is appropriate. State and federal policies and laws unknown or not effective at the time of pre- application review may also affect the subsequent application. 
C.  Amended Recommendations. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, the written report shall not in any manner whatsoever bind any city hearing body and shall not preclude such hearing body from requiring additional information or studies or from making additional recommendations in the course of the decision making process. 
(Ord. 1004-(2) § 4 (part), 2008)  
17.77.070 - Revisions. 
A.  Revisions. The pre-application written report shall apply to the development proposal described in the request for pre-application and discussed at the pre-application review meeting. Substantial revisions to the proposal after issuance of the written report which do not conform to the agency comments shall invalidate the written report. 
B.  New Project. To process a substantially revised proposal, a new request for pre-application review and new fee will be required of the applicant. For purposes of this section, the director shall determine whether or not revisions made are substantial and constitute a new project. 
(Ord. 1004-(2) § 4 (part), 2008)  
Chapter 17.78 - NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES 
 
17.78.010 - Nonconforming uses, lots, structures, and characteristics of use. 
A.  Purpose and Intent. Within the zones established by this chapter or amendments that may later be adopted there may exist: 
1.  Lots; 
2.  Structures; 
3.  Uses of land and structures; and 
4.  Characteristics of use, which were lawful before this chapter was passed or amended, but which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of this chapter to permit these nonconformities to continue until they are removed, but not to encourage their survival. It is the further intent of this chapter that nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same zone. 
Nonconforming uses are declared by this chapter to be incompatible with permitted uses in the zones involved. A nonconforming use of a structure, a nonconforming use of land, or a nonconforming use of a structure and land in combination, shall not be extended or enlarged after passage of the Ordinance by attachment on a building or premises of additional signs intended to be seen from off the premises, or by the addition of other uses, of a nature which would be prohibited generally in the district involved. 
B.  Buildings Under Construction. To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction, or designated use of any building on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter and upon which actual building construction has been carried on diligently. Actual construction is defined to include the placing of construction materials in permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner. Where excavation or demolition or removal of an existing building has been substantially begun preparatory to rebuilding, such excavation or demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction, provided that work shall be carried on diligently. 
C.  Nonconforming Lots of Record. In any zone in which single-family dwellings are permitted, a single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be erected on any single lot of record at the effective date of adoption of Ordinance No. 71 (October 7, 1953), notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this chapter. This provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, that are generally applicable in the district, provided that yard dimensions and requirements other than those applying to area or width, or both, of the lot shall conform to the regulations for the district in which such lot is located. Variance of yard requirements shall be obtained only through action of the planning commission. 
D.  Nonconforming Uses of Land (or Land with Minor Structures Only). Where, at the time of passage of this chapter, lawful use of the land exists which would not be permitted by the regulations imposed by this chapter, and where such use involves no individual structure with a replacement cost exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), the use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, provided: 
1.  No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased, nor extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter; 
2.  No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any portion of the lot or parcel other than that occupied by such use at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter; 
3.  If any such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of more than thirty (30) days, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations specified by this chapter for the zone in which such land is located; 
4.  No additional structure not conforming to the requirements of this chapter shall be erected in connection with such nonconforming use of land. 
E.  Nonconforming Structures. Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter that could not be built under the terms of this chapter by reasons of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, its location on the lot, or other requirements concerning the structure, such structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
1.  No such nonconforming structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases its nonconformity, but any structure or portions thereof may be altered to decrease its nonconformity. 
2.  Should such nonconforming structure or nonconforming portion of a structure be destroyed by any means to an extent of more than fifty (50) percent of its replacement cost at time of destruction, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
3.  Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the zone in which it is located after it is removed. 
F.  Nonconforming Uses of Structures or of Structures and Premises in Combination. If lawful use involving individual structures with a replacement cost of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more, or of structure and premises in combination, exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter, that would not be allowed in the zone under the terms of this chapter, the lawful use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
1.  No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this chapter in the zone in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered except in changing the use permitted in the zone in which it is located. 
2.  Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the time of adoption or amendment of this chapter, but no such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building. 
3.  If no structural alterations are made, any nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises, may. under conditional use permit, be changed to another nonconforming use provided that the planning commission either by general rule or by making findings in the specific case, shall find that the proposed use is equally appropriate or more appropriate to the zone than the existing nonconforming use. In permitting such change, the planning commission may require appropriate conditions and safeguards in accord with the provisions of this chapter. 
4.  Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which a nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the zone and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed. 
5.  When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises in combination, is discontinued or abandoned for six consecutive months, or for eighteen (18) months during any three-year period (except when government action impedes access to the premises), the structure or structure and premises in combination, shall not thereafter be used except in conformity with . the regulations of the zone in which it is located. 
6.  Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and premises in combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the land. Destruction for the purpose of this subsection is defined as damage to an extent of more than fifty (50) percent of replacement cost at the time of destruction. 
G.  Repairs and Maintenance. On any nonconforming structure or portion of a structure containing a nonconforming use, work may be done in any period of twelve (12) consecutive months on ordinary repairs, or on repair or replacement of nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring, or plumbing, to an extent not exceeding ten (10) percent of the current replacement cost of the nonconforming structure or nonconforming portion of the structure, as the case may be, provided that the cubic content existing when it became nonconforming shall not be increased. 
If a nonconforming structure or portion of a structure containing a nonconforming use becomes physically unsafe or unlawful due to lack of repairs and maintenance and is declared by any duly authorized official to be unsafe or unlawful by reason of physical condition, it shall not thereafter be restored, repaired or rebuilt except in conformity with the regulations of the zone in which it is located. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of such official. 
H.  Uses Under Conditional Use Permit, Provision not Nonconforming Uses. Any use which is permitted as a conditional use in a zone under the terms of this chapter (other than a change through planning commission action from a nonconforming use to another use not generally permitted in the zone) shall not be deemed a nonconforming use in such zone, but shall without further action be considered a conforming use. 
(Prior code § 070.05)  
17.78.020 - Nonconformities. 
A.  Intent and Purpose. 
1.  To provide for the regulation of nonconforming uses and nonconforming development standards or performance standards. 
2.  To specify the circumstances and conditions under which nonconformities may continue to exist. 
3.  To limit the number and extent of nonconformities by prohibiting or limiting their enlargement or extension; their reestablishment after abandonment; and their alteration or restoration after partial destruction. 
4.  To discourage the survival of nonconformities where they adversely affect the intent and purpose of this chapter and the general plan or the maintenance, development, use, enjoyment or economic values of other property in the vicinity. 
5.  To set time limits on the continuance of nonconformities based upon the nature of the use, the character, age and value of the development, and the degree of friction or objectionableness. 
B.  Definitions. 
1.  Nonconformities. Nonconformities shall consist of three major classifications either singly or in combination: 
a.  Nonconforming uses, 
b.  Nonconforming development standards, and 
c.  Nonconforming performance standards. 
2.  Nonconforming Use. The use of land or structures, which use was previously lawful but which no longer complies with the applicable district regulations where the use or structure is located, either as of the effective date of this chapter or as a result of subsequent applicable amendments. 
3.  Nonconforming Use of Land. A type of nonconforming use where no structures or only minor structures are on the land. 
4.  Nonconforming Development Standards and Performance Standards. Land, activities and structures are subject to numerous standards, most of which are defined in physical terms and subject to measurement. A nonconforming standard of use occurs when a use or structure which was previously lawful no longer complies with certain standards, either as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, or as a result of subsequent applicable amendments. 
The applicable standards are: 
Development standards 
a.  Project area, minimum; 
b.  Project width, minimum; 
c.  Project building coverage, maximum; 
d.  Lot area, minimum; 
e.  Lot area per dwelling unit, minimum; 
f.  Lot width, minimum; 
g.  Lot coverage, maximum; 
h.  Location of structures; 
i.  Separation between buildings, minimum; 
j.  Setback, minimum; 
k.  Front yard, minimum; 
l.  Side yard (s), minimum; 
m.  Rear yard, minimum; 
n.  Height limits, maximum; 
o.  Gross floor area, maximum; 
p.  Open space; 
q.  Passageway; 
r.  Enclosures or screening; 
s.  Parking and loading requirements; and 
t.  Sign regulations. 
Industrial performances standards, minimum. 
5.  Nonconforming Lot. A specific type of nonconformity where the lot does not conform with the district regulations with respect to lot area or lot width or both. 
(Prior code § 080.70)  
17.78.030 - Nonconformities—General provisions. 
A.  Calculation of Time Periods. Unless otherwise excepted, all time periods affecting nonconformities shall begin on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, or subsequent amendments thereto, or changes in the zoning map, whichever is the cause of such nonconformity. Exceptions to the time period calculation are those periods affecting types of nonconformities which are slated for termination by age and type of structure rather than by the date of this chapter. 
B.  Contamination. Nonconformities may be continuously maintained provided there is no alteration or addition to any structure, nor any enlargement of area, space or volume occupied by such nonconformity, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
C.  Maintenance. Ordinary repairs and maintenance may be made to a nonconformity, subject to the following provisions: 
1.  Maintenance shall not include structural alterations except those required by law, or except those to make the structure and use conform to the standards and use regulations of the district in which it is located. 
2.  In any period of twelve (12) consecutive months, work may be done on any structure which is subject to nonconformity regulations, on ordinary repairs, or on repairs or replacement of nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing, to an extent not exceeding the latest assessed valuation of the structure. In no case, however, shall the cubic content of the structure as it existed when it became subject to nonconformity be increased. 
3.  Nothing contained in these provisions shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoration to a safe condition of any structure or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any officer of the city charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of such officer. 
D.  Enlargement, Extension or Relocation. A nonconformity shall not be enlarged in volume or extended or relocated beyond the area it occupies unless its enlargement or extension are all made to conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located or unless specifically excepted, and subject to the following provisions: 
1.  Any exceptions to enlargement, extension or relocation shall not be construed to extend the termination date, if any, of the subject nonconformity; 
2.  Where parking and loading requirements are the cause for nonconformity, the structure or use subject to nonconformity may not be enlarged or altered to create additional dwelling units, guest rooms, seating capacity or floor area, unless additional parking and loading requirements are supplied and maintained to meet the requirements of the enlargement or expansion, subject to Section 17.54.010. 
E.  Change of Use. A nonconforming use shall not be changed to another use except to a use permitted in the district in which the use is located, or to another nonconforming use of the same nature, or to a more restricted nonconforming use; provided that the planning commission either by general rule or by written findings in a specific case, shall find that the proposed use is equally appropriate or more appropriate to the district than the existing nonconformity. Such changes may be subject to conditions imposed by the commission through Section 17.72.010. A change to another nonconforming use shall riot be construed to extend the termination date, if any, of the original nonconformity. 
F.  Nonconforming Lot. 
1.  In the R-S or R-M zones a single-family dwelling and customary accessory structures may be erected on any lot which is only nonconforming with respect to lot area and lot width standards. 
2.  In the R-M zones, where the nonconformity is only by lot area or lot width, in no case shall more than one dwelling unit be permitted on a lot with an area of less than six thousand (6,000) square feet, nor more than two dwelling units on a lot greater than six thousand (6,000) square feet, but less than seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet. 
G.  Nonconformities Connected With Public Acquisitions. 
1.  Where a structure is located upon a lot, a portion of which is acquired for any public use (by condemnation, purchase, dedication, or otherwise) by any governmental entity, such structure may be maintained upon the remaining portion of said lot, and may thereafter be used, maintained or repaired without relocating or altering the same to comply with the development standards of this chapter. Further, if such structure is partially located upon the site being acquired for public use, it may be relocated upon the same lot or premises without observing the required yard space adjacent to the new lot line created by such acquisition, and without reducing the number of dwelling units to conform to the development standards of the district in which it is located. If only a portion of an existing structure, is acquired for public use, the repair, remodeling or reconstruction of the remainder of such structure which was made necessary by such acquisition, shall conform to the provisions of the building code. Any portion of the structure which is not required to be repaired, remodeled or reconstructed by reason of said acquisition, shall not be required to be made to conform to the provisions of the building code, unless it would otherwise be required to conform thereto independently of, and in the absence of said acquisition of only a portion of the structure. 
2.  If a lot does not comply with the development standards of the district due to an acquisition of a portion thereof for public use, or if a legally existing nonconforming lot is reduced in size due to an acquisition of a portion thereof for public use, the remainder of said lot not acquired for public use, so long as said remainder is not smaller in area or width than one-half of the minimum area or width required for the zone in which it is situated, may be utilized for the purposes in the same manner as though it lawfully exist. ed at the time the regulations with which it does not conform became effective; provided that this paragraph shall not affect any structure previously and legally existing on said remainder. 
H.  Structures Under Construction. Any structure under construction, for which a valid building permit has been issued prior to the date of this chapter, may be completed and used in accordance with the provisions of this chapter or any amendment thereto, provided: 
1.  That construction or proposed use of such structure is not at said operative date in violation of any other ordinance or law; 
2.  That such structure is completed within one year from said operative date; 
3.  That such structure is completed in accordance with the plans and specifications on which such building permit was issued. 
I.  Treatment of Nonconformities Caused by Prior Ordinances. (Note: To avoid granting longer life to existing nonconformities, many of which are due to expire, the city attorney should assist in drafting the provision dealing specifically with these.) 
J.  Restoration of Damaged Nonconformities. 
1.  A nonconformity which is damaged or partially destroyed by fire, explosion or natural disaster to the extent of not more than twice the latest assessed valuation prior to the damage, may be restored and the occupancy or use of such structure or part thereof, existing at the time of such partial destruction, may be continued or resumed, provided the following special requirements: 
a.  Such restoration is of equal or lesser degree of nonconformity; 
b.  The total cost of such restoration does not exceed twice the assessed valuation of the structure at the time of such damage; 
c.  Such restoration is started within a period of one year and is diligently prosecuted to completion. 
2.  In the event such damage or destruction exceeds twice the assessed valuation of such nonconforming structure, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with all use and area regulations for new structures in the zone in which it is located. 
3.  The zoning administrator, in cooperation with the fire department (where appropriate), shall establish the proper application of these provisions. 
(Prior code § 080.72)  
17.78.040 - Termination of nonconformities. 
A.  Termination by Violation of Chapter. Any of the following violations of this chapter shall immediately terminate the right to operate a nonconformity: 
1.  Changing a nonconforming use to a use not permitted in the district. 
2.  Increasing or enlarging the area, space or volume occupied by or devoted to such nonconforming use. 
B.  Termination by Discontinuance. Discontinuance of a nonconforming use as follows shall immediately terminate the right to operate such nonconforming use: 
1.  By changing a nonconforming use to a conforming use. 
2.  By discontinuance of a nonconforming use for a consecutive period or for an intermittent period over a longer time span (thirty (30) days). 
C.  Termination by Law. See Section 17.56.010. 
D.  Certificate of Nonconformity. 
1.  Within one year of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter and subject to extensions as authorized by the planning commission, the building department shall issue a. "certificate of nonconformity" to all known owners of uses or structures subject to the nonconformity provisions. 
2.  Nonconformities created by subsequent amendments to this chapter shall also receive such certificates and be subject to similar procedures. No use of land or structures shall be made other than that specified on the certificate of nonconformity unless such use shall be in conformance with the district regulations in which the property is located. 
3.  A copy of each certificate of nonconformity shall be filed in the building department. 
4.  The certificate of nonconformity shall contain the legal description of the property, the street address and a description of the nonconformity and expiration date, if any, plus any other information as found necessary. 
5.  Uses or structures subject to nonconformity and not issued a certificate of nonconformity, but later discovered to be a nonconformity shall be issued a certificate without prejudice except that time limits, if any, will still be calculated from the effective date of this chapter or applicable subsequent amendment, or if a prior nonconformity, from the date established by prior regulations. 
E.  Revocation of Nonconformity: 
1.  A certificate of nonconformity may be revoked by the planning commission following a public meeting and subsequent notice of revocation, plus written findings for revocation. 
2.  An appeal from the commission's decision may be taken to the council, whose decision is final. 
(Prior code § 080.72)  
Chapter 17.80 - AMENDMENTS TO ZONING CODE 
 
17.80.010 - Amendments to change or repeal the ordinance text provisions. 
A.  Intent and Purpose. To accommodate changing conditions over time, the provisions of this chapter may be amended or changed, in the manner prescribed by law if justified by the purposes, intent or provisions of the general plan and by public necessity, convenience, general welfare, and good zoning practice. 
B.  Authority of the Commission. Subject to the provisions of this chapter, the planning commission shall report and recommend on any proposed amendment, change or repeal of the provisions of this chapter, prior to adoption by the city council. 
C.  Initiation of Proposed Amendment. 
1.  An amendment to change or repeal the provisions of this chapter may be initiated by commission or council, by motion or by resolution. 
2.  Such amendment may be proposed by other public or private organizations or persons through written communication filed with the commission or council. The commission or council shall then recommend by motion or resolution whether the proposed changes require further study by the department or whether an amendment shall be initiated. 
D.  Public Hearings. The planning commission may hold a public hearing to receive evidence or testimony on proposed ordinance text amendments, if it finds that the proposed amendment will be of considerable city-wide interest and impact. Otherwise, such amendments shall be considered during the public meetings of the commission. 
E.  Notification of Public Hearing. Notification of the time, place and purpose of public hearings to receive evidence or testimony on proposed amendments shall be by at least one publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city not less than ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing. 
F.  Time Limits. If the proposed amendment is initiated by the city council, the commission shall file its report and recommendation within such reasonable period as the council may specify. Otherwise, the commission may set its own time limits. 
G.  Council Vote. The city council may adopt an ordinance substantially modifying or reversing the commission's recommendation concerning changes to text only upon a four-fifths vote of the whole council. 
H.  Effective Date. An ordinance conforming to council action shall be prepared and submitted to the city attorney for approval as to form and legality. Unless otherwise expected, the ordinance shall become effective thirty (30) days after publication of such ordinance. 
(Prior code § 080.30)  
Chapter 17.82 - AMENDMENTS TO ZONING MAP 
 
17.82.010 - Amendments to change the zoning map. 
A.  Intent and Purpose. To accommodate changing conditions over time, the "zoning map" may be amended or changed in the manner prescribed by law if justified by the purposes, intent or provisions of the general plan and by public necessity, convenience, general welfare, and good zoning practice. 
B.  Definitions. 
1.  Numerical Qualifier. A number attached to the R-S and R-M District classifications and representing the minimum lot area per dwelling unit permitted in that district as expressed in square feet. 
2.  Zoning Map. The location and boundaries of the districts established by this chapter shall be shown on designated official maps which are herein referred to as the zoning map and which are hereby incorporated as a part of this chapter. The zoning map and all amendments thereto, shall be as much a part of this chapter as if fully set forth and described in this chapter. 
3.  Building Line. A line, established by law or agreement usually parallel to the property line, beyond which a structure may not extend. 
4.  Planned Street Line. The proposed boundary of a street or highway as shown on the planned street line map or as otherwise designated in this chapter. 
C.  Authority of the Commission. Subject to the provisions of this chapter, the planning commission may recommend the change or establishment of zones, zone boundaries, temporary classifications, building lines, planned street lines, or any combination thereof. 
D.  Initiation. 
1.  An amendment to change the zoning map may be initiated by: 
a.  Commission or council, by motion or resolution. 
b.  Owners or bona fide lessees of property within the area proposed to be changed. 
2.  Application for zone change amendments shall not be accepted unless the lot area involved is at least ten thousand (10,000) square feet and the frontage is at least one hundred (100) feet, unless the applicant wishes a minor extension of existing zone. 
E.  Notification. See Section 17.70.050(F) and application form for particular procedure. 
(Prior code § 080.40)  
17.82.020 - Recommendations. 
A.  Types of Recommendations. The planning commission shall consider the reports, recommendations and evidence presented and it may make the following recommendations: 
1.  Approval of the application as filed. 
2.  Modification of the application. Recommendation may include granting of a change other than that requested, but any such change must be of equal or lesser intensity than that originally requested. Slight zone boundary adjustments and additions are also permitted. 
3.  Disapproval of the application. 
4.  Action postponed. Time extension agreed to if necessary. 
5.  Action postponed pending general plan study. 
6.  Failure to act. See Section 17.70.070. 
B.  Findings. Each recommendation shall be supported by written findings showing specifically how the recommendation meets the criteria and requirements set forth in this chapter, including conformance with the intent and purposes of the general plan and the regulations of the applicable district. 
C.  Conditions—Tentative Zone Change. When the planning commission or city council finds that an application for a zone change is consistent with the objectives of this chapter, provided certain dedications of land, waivers of access, or installations of improvements in a public right-of-way or on private property are completed or security for improvements is offered and accepted within a specified time period, it shall recommend or adopt the zone change subject to compliance with specified conditions. In such cases, the ordinance changing the zone of the property concerned shall, instead of immediately and finally rezoning the property, place it in the (T) tentative zone change classification. The property shall remain in such temporary classification until such time as the rezoning proceedings either terminate or are completed in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 17.42. 
D.  Time Limit—Recommendation. 
1.  When a proceeding is initiated by other than the planning commission or city council, all required proceedings shall be completed and the commission shall file its report and recommendation within sixty (60) days of the filing date, or such longer period up to an additional sixty (60) days as may be mutually agreed upon in writing between the commission and the applicant. The commission may unilaterally extend the time limit beyond the first or second period for up to an additional one hundred eighty (180) days when it determines and justifies in writing that a valid reason exists for delay in order to obtain legal opinion or to conduct special research which is essential to determining the matter involved. No appeal from this commission extension is allowed. 
2.  If the proceeding is initiated by the city council, the commission shall file its report and recommendation within sixty (60) days of the council's request, plus any extension up to an additional one hundred eighty (180) days as the council may specify. 
3.  If the proceeding is initiated by the commission, the commission shall make it recommendation within sixty (60) days, plus any extension up to an additional one hundred eighty (180) days. 
E.  Effective Date—No Appeal Filed. When the commission disapproves an application and no appeal is filed, its recommendation on any portion which is disapproved shall become effective upon the close of the appeal filing period (fifteen (15) days) . If the commission fails to act on the matter, see Section 17.70.070. All other recommendations by the commission on zoning map changes are subject to council approval before becoming effective. An ordinance in conformity with the commission's recommendation shall be prepared and presented with the file to the council. The council shall act on the proposed ordinance within a time period up to one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of transmittal to the council. 
F.  Council Fails to Act. If the council fails to act within the prescribed time limits, the action of the commission shall be deemed approved. 
(Prior code § 080.41)  
17.82.030 - Transfer of jurisdiction. 
A.  Commission Fails to Act. If the commission fails to act on an application within the prescribed time or after an authorized extension, the commission shall prepare an ordinance in conformity with the application and submit it to the council as expeditiously as possible, for determination by majority vote. 
B.  Procedure—Transfer of Jurisdiction. 
1.  When a matter is transferred, the city council shall be governed by the same procedural and time requirements as apply to an original proceeding. 
2.  When the city council assumes jurisdiction, the planning commission shall lose jurisdiction in the matter. The commission shall make such investigations and furnish such reports as the city council may request. The commission shall transmit the relevant files to the council and may file a statement of facts pertaining to the matter. 
3.  The matter may be remanded by the council in which case the commission shall regain jurisdiction. If the file is remanded, the time period shall not exceed that allowed to the council on transfer. If after a remand and expiration of the time specified, the commission still fails to act, the original application shall be deemed denied and is not subject to appeal. 
C.  Council Fails to Act. If the council fails to act within the prescribed time limit, on any matter transferred to it, the original application shall be deemed denied and no appeal may be taken. 
D.  Effective Date—Transfer of Jurisdiction. 
1.  If the council approves an application after transfer of jurisdiction, an ordinance conforming to council action shall be prepared and submitted to the city attorney for approval as to form and legality. 
2.  The action shall become effective thirty (30) days after publication of the ordinance in conformity with the council action. 
(Prior code § 080.42)  
17.82.040 - Appeals to the council. 
A.  Appellants. An appeal to the council from a disapproval by the commission of an application may be filed by the original applicant. 
B.  Procedure—Appeal. 
1.  When an appeal is filed, the commission shall transmit its record of the matter to the council. 
2.  The council shall base its determination on appeals only upon. the evidence and testimony introduced at any hearing or hearings held by the commission and upon the commission's record, findings and recommendation. 
3.  If the original applicant or the appellant who wishes to offer into the proceedings any new evidence or testimony, a written summary stating why such evidence or testimony could not have been presented during the original consideration, shall be filed. If the council determines that such evidence could not reasonably have been presented earlier and is of such nature as might reasonably have led to a different determination, the matter shall be remanded to the commission. The commission shall reopen the matter and make a determination before expiration of the time period allotted to the council. 
4.  If the planning commission fails to act on remand after appeal, the matter is deemed denied and is not subject to further appeal. 
C.  Time Limit—Council Action. Council shall act on appeal matters concerning zoning map changes within one hundred eighty (180) days from the close of the appeal filing period. 
D.  Council Vote. Council may adopt an ordinance substantially modifying or reversing the commission only upon a four-fifths vote of the whole council. 
E.  Council Fails to Act on Appeal. If the council fails to act upon an appeal concerning zoning map changes within one hundred eighty (180) days, it shall be deemed a denial of the appeal and the action of the commission shall stand. 
F.  Effective Date—Council Action. 
1.  If an appeal is denied by council, its decision is final. 
2.  If an appeal is granted by council, an ordinance conforming to council action shall be prepared and submitted to the city attorney for approval as to form and legality as expeditiously as possible. The action shall become effective thirty (30) days after publication of said ordinance. 
(Prior code § 080.43)  
Chapter 17.84 - RETAIL CANNABIS BUSINESSES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1114, § 2, adopted Feb. 14, 2018, amended Ch. 17.84 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 17.84, §§ 17.84.010—17.84.050, pertained to medical cannabis dispensaries and derived from Ord. No. 1083, § 3, adopted Jan 27, 2016. 
 
17.84.010 - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to regulate the retail sale of medicinal cannabis and nonmedicinal cannabis for adult use (including cannabis products and edible cannabis products) within the city of Coachella. 
The regulations and prohibitions in this chapter are enacted to ensure the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the city. The regulations and prohibitions herein, which are in compliance with the Compassionate Use Act of 1996 ("CUA"), the Medical Marijuana Program Act ("MMP"), and the Medicinal and Adult-Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act ("MAUCRSA") (collectively, "state law"), do not interfere with the use and possession of cannabis as authorized under state law. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to: (1) allow persons to engage in conduct that endangers others or causes a public nuisance, or (2) allow any activity relating to the retail sale or use of cannabis that is otherwise illegal under California state law. 
(Ord. No. 1114, § 2, 2-14-18)  
17.84.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply. 
"Applicant" means an owner that applies for a development agreement or conditional use permit under this chapter. 
"Cannabis" means all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa Linnaeus, Cannabis indicia, or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. "Cannabis" also means the separated resin, whether crude or purified, obtained from cannabis. "Cannabis" does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination. For the purpose of this division, "cannabis" does not mean "industrial hemp" as defined by Section 11018.5 of the Health and Safety Code. 
"Cannabis products" means cannabis that has undergone a process whereby the plant material has been transformed into a concentrate, including, but not limited to, concentrated cannabis, or an edible or topical product containing cannabis or concentrated cannabis and other ingredients. 
"City manager" means the city manager of the city of Coachella or designee. 
"Delivery" means the commercial transfer of cannabis or cannabis products to a customer. "Delivery" also includes the use by a retailer of any technology platform. 
"Microbusiness" means a retail cannabis business that must engage in at least three of the following commercial cannabis activities: cultivation, manufacturing using nonvolatile solvents, distribution, and/or retail. 
"Non-storefront retailer" means a cannabis retailer that provides cannabis exclusively through delivery. 
"Owner" means any of the following: (1) a person with an aggregate ownership interest of twenty (20) percent or more in the person applying for the permit, unless such interest is solely a security, lien, or encumbrance; (2) the chief executive officer of a nonprofit or other entity; (3) a member of the board of directors of a nonprofit; or (4) an individual who will be participating in the direction, control, or management of the person applying for the permit. 
"Permittee" means any person holding a valid permit under this chapter. 
"Person" includes any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, limited liability company, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, and the plural as well as the singular. 
"Premises" means the designated structures and land specified in the conditional use permit application or development agreement that are in the possession of an used by the applicant or permittee to conduct the retail cannabis business. The premises must be a contiguous area and may only be occupied by one permittee. 
"Sell," "sale," and "to sell" include any transaction, whereby, for any consideration title to cannabis or cannabis products is transferred from one person to another, and includes the delivery of cannabis or cannabis products pursuant to an order placed for the purchase of the same and soliciting or receiving an order for the same, but does not include the return of cannabis or cannabis products by a permittee to the permittee from who the cannabis or cannabis product was purchased. 
"Retail cannabis business" or "retailer" means a business that sells and/or delivers cannabis or cannabis products to customers. 
"State license" means a license issued by the state of California, as listed in California Business and Professions Code Section 26050. 
(Ord. No. 1114, § 2, 2-14-18)  
17.84.030 - Development agreement or conditional use permit required. 
A.  The city may authorize a total of four retail cannabis businesses to operate in the city of Coachella. No more than one retail cannabis business may operate in Sub-Zone #2 (as described in Chapter 17.47), subject to a development agreement. If applications are submitted for a greater number of conditional use permits than are permitted by this section, selection among the applicants shall be made by a process, and subject to criteria, established by city council resolution. Conditional use permits for all other commercial cannabis businesses shall be issued in accordance with the zoning separation requirements in this chapter and Chapter 17.47. 
B.  Prior to initiating operations and as a continuing requisite to operating a retail cannabis business, including a retailer or microbusiness, the owner of the proposed retail cannabis business shall obtain (i) either an executed development agreement or a valid conditional use permit from the city as required by this code, (ii) a regulatory permit from the city manager and shall pay application fees as established by resolution adopted by the city council as amended from time to time, and (iii) a state license for each commercial cannabis activity use authorized under development agreement or conditional use permit. Unless otherwise stated in this section, the provisions found in Chapter 17.74 Conditional Uses shall apply. 
C.  Changes in state license type, business owner, or operation will require an amendment to the approved conditional use permit. 
D.  A retailer with a physical address outside of the city that wishes to deliver cannabis or cannabis products to a customer in the city is not required to obtain a conditional use permit under this chapter, but is required to obtain a city business license. 
E.  This chapter does not apply to the individual possession of cannabis for personal adult use, as allowed by state law. Personal possession and use of cannabis in compliance with state law are permitted in the city of Coachella. 
(Ord. No. 1114, § 2, 2-14-18)  
17.84.040 - Retail cannabis businesses—Permitted locations and standards. 
A.  Retail cannabis businesses may be located in the RC retail cannabis overlay zone, as described in Chapter 17.47, upon issuance of (i) a fully executed development agreement by city and owner or valid CUP, whichever is applicable, (ii) a regulatory permit as described in Chapter 5.69, and (iii) a valid state license, or as otherwise permitted in this code. 
B.  Retail cannabis businesses shall comply with all regulations set forth in this chapter, Chapter 5.69, and Chapter 17.47. 
C.  Every retail cannabis business shall submit to the city manager a copy of any and all of its state license(s) and local permits required for its operation. If any other applicable state license or local permit for a retail cannabis business is denied, suspended, modified, revoked, or expired, the permittee shall notify the city manager in writing within ten (10) calendar days. 
D.  Each applicant for a development agreement or CUP issued under this chapter must submit, along with a development agreement/CUP application, a building façade plan. Building façade plans shall include renderings of the exterior building elevations for all sides of the building. All building façades shall be tastefully done and in keeping with the high architectural quality and standards of the city of Coachella. The retail cannabis business facade and building signs shall be compatible and complimentary to surrounding businesses and shall add visual quality to the area. 
E.  Except as required in this chapter, development agreements shall be reviewed, issued, denied, suspended, revoked, and/or renewed in accordance with Chapter 17.100 entitled "Development Agreements", and CUPs shall be reviewed, issued, denied, suspended, revoked, and/or renewed in accordance with Chapter 17.74 entitled "Conditional Uses". If any provision of this chapter conflicts with any provision of Chapters 17.74 or 17.100 of this code, the provision in this chapter shall control. 
(Ord. No. 1114, § 2, 2-14-18)  
17.84.050 - Application fee and reimbursement agreement. 
At the time an applicant submits an application under this chapter, the applicant shall also supply an application fee in an amount to be determined by resolution by the city council, an executed reimbursement agreement on a form provided by the city to fully reimburse the city for all costs, expenses, and fees, including but not limited to attorney fees and consultant fees, incurred by the city related to the commercial cannabis activity, and a deposit in an amount as provided for in the reimbursement agreement terms. 
(Ord. No. 1114, § 2, 2-14-18)  
17.84.060 - Prohibited operations. 
Any retail cannabis business that does not have both (i) a development agreement or CUP, (ii) a regulatory permit required under this code, and (iii) a state license(s) is expressly prohibited in all city zones and is hereby declared a public nuisance that may be abated by the city and is subject to all available legal remedies, including, but not limited to civil injunctions. Non-storefront retailers are prohibited in all zones in the city. 
(Ord. No. 1114, § 2, 2-14-18)  
17.84.070 - Grounds for permit denial, suspension, and revocation 
Any conditional use permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may be denied, suspended, or revoked by the planning commission upon receiving satisfactory evidence that the applicant or permittee or owner, its agent(s), employee(s), or any person connected or associated with the applicant or permittee: 
A.  Has knowingly made false statements in the applicant's application or in any reports or other supporting documents furnished by the applicant; 
B.  Has failed to maintain a valid state license; 
C.  Has failed to comply with any applicable provision of the Coachella Municipal Code, including, but not limited to this chapter, the city's building, zoning, and health and public safety regulations; 
D.  Has failed to comply with any condition imposed on the conditional use permit; or 
E.  Has allowed the existence of or created a public nuisance in violation of the Coachella Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 1114, § 2, 2-14-18)  
17.84.080 - Personal cultivation. 
City residents are permitted to cultivate cannabis on private residential property for personal use and in accordance with state law, subject to the following standards: 
A.  Outdoor Cultivation. 
1.  Cultivation for personal use is only permitted on private residential property developed with at least one residential dwelling unit. No more than six cannabis plants are permitted to be cultivated at a private residence. Property owners retain the right to prohibit renters from cultivation and any renter choosing to cultivate shall first obtain written authorization from the property owner to cultivate on site. 
2.  Outdoor cultivation is limited to rear and side yard areas and only if screened by a solid block wall no less than six feet in height. 
3.  Outdoor cultivation shall not be visible from surrounding public streets or adjoining properties. As such cannabis plants may not grow above the height of the property line walls unless screened by another approved screening method. 
4.  Outdoor cultivation within six hundred (600) feet of a school, daycare center, or youth center is prohibited. 
B.  Indoor Cultivation. 
1.  Indoor cultivation must have adequate ventilation. Structural ventilation, electrical, gas, or plumbing changes to accommodate indoor cultivation are required to obtain a building permit from the city's building and safety department. 
2.  The use of volatile solvents, as defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.3(d), including, but not limited to, butane, propane, xylene, gasoline, kerosene, and other dangerous and poisonous toxins or carcinogens, are prohibited for indoor cultivation at a private residence. 
(Ord. No. 1114, § 2, 2-14-18)  
17.84.090 - Penalties for violations. 
A.  In addition to any other remedy allowed by law, any person who violates a provision of this chapter is subject to criminal sanctions, civil actions, administrative penalties, permit suspension, and permit revocation. 
B.  Violations of this chapter constitute an infraction or misdemeanor and may be enforced by any applicable law. 
C.  Violations of this chapter are hereby declared to be public nuisances. 
D.  Each person is guilty of a separate offense each day a violation is allowed to continue and every violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense and shall be subject to all remedies. 
E.  All remedies prescribed under this chapter shall be cumulative and the election of one or more remedies shall not bar the city from the pursuit of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions hereof. 
(Ord. No. 1114, § 2, 2-14-18)  
Chapter 17.85 - COMMERCIAL CANNABIS ACTIVITY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1108, § 3, adopted July 12, 2017, amended Ch. 17.85 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 17.85, §§ 17.85.010—17.85.110, pertained to medical cannabis cultivation facilities and derived from Ord. No. 1083, § 4, adopted Jan. 27, 2016. 
 
17.85.010 - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to regulate the cultivation, manufacturing, testing, distribution, and transportation of medicinal and nonmedicinal cannabis (including cannabis products and edible cannabis products) within the city of Coachella. 
The regulations in this chapter are enacted to ensure the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the city. These regulations, in compliance with the Compassionate Use Act of 1996 ("CUA"), the Medical Marijuana Program ("MMP"), the Medicinal and Adult Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act ("MAUCRSA") (collectively, "state law"), do not interfere with the use and possession of cannabis, as authorized under state law. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to: (1) allow persons to engage in conduct that endangers others or causes a public nuisance or (2) allow any activity relating to the cultivation, manufacturing, testing, distribution, transportation or consumption of cannabis that is otherwise illegal under California state law. 
(Ord. No. 1108, § 3, 7-12-17; Ord. No. 1114, § 3, 2-14-18)  
17.85.020 - Definitions. 
Unless the particular provision or context otherwise requires, the definitions and provisions contained in this section shall govern the construction, meaning, and application of words and phrases used in this chapter: 
"Adult use conditional use permit" or "adult use CUP" means a conditional use permit issued under this chapter for cannabis or cannabis products that are intended for adults twenty-one (21) years of age or over who do not possess a physician's recommendation. 
"Applicant" means a person who is applying for a CUP under this chapter. 
"Cannabis" means all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa Linnaeus, Cannabis indica, or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. "Cannabis" also means the separated resin, whether crude or purified, obtained from cannabis. "Cannabis" also means marijuana as defined by Section 11018 of the California Health and Safety Code. "Cannabis" does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination. For the purpose of this chapter, "cannabis" does not mean "industrial hemp" as defined by Section 81000 of the California Food and Agricultural Code or Section 11018.5 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
"Cannabis products" has the same meaning as marijuana products in Section 11018.1 of the California Health and Safety Code. When the term "cannabis" is used in this chapter, it shall include "cannabis products." 
"City manager" means the city manager of the city of Coachella or designee. 
"Commercial cannabis activity" includes cultivation, possession, manufacture, processing, storing, laboratory testing, labeling, transportation and distribution of cannabis, and cannabis products. For purposes of this chapter, "commercial cannabis activity" does not include delivery or retail sale of cannabis or cannabis products. Zoning restrictions on cannabis retailers and microbusinesses can be found in Chapters 17.47 and 17.84. 
"Conditional use permit" means a conditional use permit issued under this chapter and includes both an adult use conditional use permit and a medicinal use conditional use permit. "Conditional use permit" may be abbreviated as "CUP". 
"Cultivation" means any commercial activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of cannabis. 
"Delivery" means the commercial transfer of cannabis or cannabis products to a customer. 
"Distribution" means the procurement, wholesale sale, and transport of cannabis and cannabis products between entities permitted or licensed under this chapter, another local California jurisdiction, or state law. 
"Edible cannabis product" means manufactured cannabis that is intended to be used, in whole or in part, for human consumption, including, but not limited to, chewing gum, but excluding products set forth in Division 15 of the California Food and Agricultural Code. An edible cannabis product is not considered food as defined by Section 109935 of the California Health and Safety Code or a drug as defined by Section 109925 of the California Health and Safety Code. When the term "cannabis" is used in this chapter, it shall include "edible cannabis products." 
"Manufacture" means to compound, blend, extract, infuse or otherwise make or prepare a cannabis product. 
"Medicinal use conditional use permit" or "medicinal use CUP" means a CUP issued under this chapter for cannabis or cannabis products that are intended for use solely by an individual who possesses a physician's recommendation. 
"Microbusiness" means a retail cannabis business that must engage in at least three of the following commercial cannabis activities: cultivation, manufacturing using nonvolatile solvents, distribution, and/or retail. 
"Non-storefront retailer" means a cannabis retailer that provides cannabis exclusively through delivery. 
"Permittee" means any person or entity holding a CUP under this chapter, regardless of whether it is an adult use CUP or a medicinal use CUP. 
"Person" includes any individual, firm, co-partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, limited liability company, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, and the plural as well as the singular. 
"Retailer" means a person or entity that sells cannabis or cannabis products to customers. 
"Testing laboratory" means a laboratory, facility, or entity in California, that offers or performs tests of cannabis or cannabis products and that is both of the following: (1) Accredited by an accrediting body that is independent from all other persons involved in commercial cannabis activity in the state; and (2) Licensed by the California Bureau of Marijuana (or Cannabis) Control within the California Department of Consumer Affairs (when such licenses begin to be issued). 
"Transportation" means transferring cannabis and/or cannabis products from one person or entity permitted under this chapter, permitted by another local California jurisdiction, and/or licensed under state law to another person or entity permitted under this chapter, permitted by another local California jurisdiction, and/or licensed under state law. 
Words and phrases not specifically defined in this code shall have the meaning ascribed to them as defined in the following sources: 
A.  CUA (California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5); 
B.  MMP (California Health and Safety Code Sections 11362.7 through 11362.83); and 
C.  MAUCRSA (California Business and Professions Code Sections 26000 et seq.). 
(Ord. No. 1108, § 3, 7-12-17; Ord. No. 1114, § 4, 2-14-18)  
17.85.030 - Commercial cannabis activity permitted. 
Commercial cannabis activity permitted under this chapter includes cultivation, manufacture, distribution, testing, and transportation (including possession, processing, storing, and labeling incidental to such activity). Prior to engaging in any such commercial cannabis activity in the city, one must obtain either a development agreement or conditional use permit (CUP), and a regulatory permit as required by this code, subject to the provisions of the CUA, MMP, MAUCRSA, and any other state laws pertaining to cannabis. 
(Ord. No. 1108, § 3, 7-12-17; Ord. No. 1114, § 5, 2-14-18)  
17.85.040 - Conditional use permit required. 
Prior to initiating operations and as a continuing requisite to operating a commercial cannabis activity, the applicant wishing to operate the above-listed commercial cannabis activity shall obtain and maintain a validly issued adult use CUP and/or medicinal use CUP from the city pursuant to Chapter 17.74 of this code. If any provision of this chapter conflicts with any provision of Chapter 17.74 of this code, the provision in this chapter shall control. An applicant must obtain a separate CUP for each commercial cannabis activity the applicant wishes to operate. Each CUP will include a condition of approval requiring that the permittee also obtain and maintain a cultivation, manufacture, distribution, testing, and/or transportation regulatory permit required by this code. 
(Ord. No. 1108, § 3, 7-12-17)  
17.85.050 - Commercial cannabis activity—Permitted locations and standards. 
A.  Commercial cannabis activity may be located in any wrecking yard zone (M-W) or industrial park overlay zone (IP) in the city, upon issuance of a CUP and a regulatory permit. 
B.  Commercial cannabis activity in the M-W zone should be restricted to a site having a minimum of five acres in size, with a minimum paved street frontage of two hundred fifty (250) feet. Commercial cannabis activity in the IP zone is restricted to sites having a minimum project area of thirty (30) acres and a minimum lot size or grouping of lots of at least five acres. 
C.  Commercial cannabis activity must be served by municipal water and sewer services. 
D.  Commercial cannabis activity shall be located a minimum distance of six hundred (600) feet away from any residentially-zoned lot. The distance shall be measured at the nearest point between any part of the building containing the cannabis use and any lot line of the residential use. 
E.  Commercial cannabis activity may not be established in the M-W zone on a multi-tenant industrial park or business park site existing on the effective date of this ordinance. A CUP to develop a new stand-alone commercial cannabis activity facility or a multi-tenant facility within a minimum site area of five acres may be pursued. 
F.  Commercial cannabis activity shall not result in the creation of any odors detectable from anywhere off the property boundaries. The use of carbon filtration systems and other mitigation measures shall be used on all commercial cannabis activities that cause such odors. 
G.  Testing laboratories may be located in the general commercial zone (C-G) in addition to the M-W zone and IP overlay zone with a CUP, but are not required to meet the two hundred fifty-foot paved street frontage requirement in subsection (B) or the restrictions set forth in subsections (D) and (E) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1108, § 3, 7-12-17)  
17.85.060 - State law compliance. 
A.  No commercial cannabis activity shall operate unless it is in possession of all applicable state and local licenses or permits, except as otherwise permitted by state and/or local law. 
B.  Every commercial cannabis activity shall submit to the city manager a copy of any and all of its state and local licenses and permits required for its operation. 
C.  If any other applicable state or local license or permit for a commercial cannabis activity is denied, suspended, modified, revoked, or expired, the permittee shall notify the city manager in writing within ten (10) calendar days. 
(Ord. No. 1108, § 3, 7-12-17)  
17.85.070 - Payment of taxes. 
All commercial cannabis activity is required to pay all applicable taxes, including a cannabis business tax pursuant to Chapter 4.31. 
(Ord. No. 1108, § 3, 7-12-17)  
17.85.080 - Prohibited operations. 
Any commercial cannabis activity that does not have both (i) a development agreement or CUP and (ii) a regulatory permit required under this code is expressly prohibited in all city zones and is hereby declared a public nuisance that may be abated by the city and is subject to all available legal remedies, including but not limited to civil injunctions. 
(Ord. No. 1108, § 3, 7-12-17; Ord. No. 1114, § 6, 2-14-18)  
17.85.090 - Commercial cannabis cultivation—Interior only. 
All commercial cannabis cultivation shall be conducted only in the interior of enclosed structures, facilities and buildings, and all cultivation operations, including all cannabis plants, at any stage of growth, shall not be visible from the exterior of any structure, facility or building containing cultivation. All cultivation must take place indoors, within a permanent structure that is enclosed on all sides. Outdoor cultivation is prohibited. Portable greenhouses and/or non-permanent enclosures shall not be used for cultivation unless they are placed inside of a permanent structure that is enclosed on all sides. 
(Ord. No. 1108, § 3, 7-12-17)  
17.85.100 - Penalties for violations. 
A.  In addition to any other remedy allowed by law, any person who violates a provision of this chapter is subject to criminal sanctions, civil actions, and administrative penalties. 
B.  Violations of this chapter constitute an infraction or misdemeanor and may be enforced by any applicable law. 
C.  Violations of this chapter are hereby declared to be public nuisances. 
D.  Each person is guilty of a separate offense each day a violation is allowed to continue and every violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense and shall be subject to all remedies. 
E.  All remedies prescribed under this chapter shall be cumulative and the election of one or more remedies shall not bar the city from the pursuit of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions hereof. 
(Ord. No. 1108, § 3, 7-12-17)  
Chapter 17.86 - WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES 
 
17.86.010 - Intent and purpose. 
The purpose of these requirements is to provide placement, design, and screening criteria to regulate the establishment of wireless communication facilities to protect the public health, safety, general welfare, and quality of life in the city, while providing needed flexibility to wireless communication providers. Additionally, these regulations protect the visual aesthetics of the community through the promotion of stealthing techniques that architecturally integrate or camouflage wireless communication facilities with their surroundings. This chapter shall be applied on a competitively neutral and nondiscriminatory basis to all applicants for wireless communication facilities. 
(Ord. No. 1026, § 1, 1-12-11)  
17.86.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
"Applicant" means a provider of wireless communication services who applies to the city to install a wireless communication facility within the city. 
"Abandonment" means inoperative or unused for a period of one hundred eighty (180) calendar days or more. 
"Antenna" means that part of a wireless communication facility designed to transmit or receive radio frequency or electromagnetic signals, and includes panels, wires, poles, rods, dishes, or similar devices. 
"Cell site" or "site" means a parcel of land (or portion thereof) or public right-of-way location that contains a wireless communication facility(ies) including any antenna, support structure, accessory building, or other components associated with, or ancillary to, the use of the wireless communication facility. 
"Co-location" means the sharing of one site and infrastructure for the purpose of locating two or more wireless communication facilities. 
"Mount" means the structure or surface upon which antennae are mounted. 
"Project site" means the site on which an applicant proposes to construct a wireless communication facility, including any antenna, mount or support structure, accessory building, or other components associated with, or ancillary to, the use of the wireless communication facility. 
"Roof- or top-mounted" means a wireless communication facility where the antennae are mounted on the roof or top of a building or structure, other than a stand-alone facility. 
"Side-mounted" means a wireless communication facility where the antennae are mounted on the side of a building or structure, other than a stand-alone facility. 
"Site plan review" means the development review process as set forth in Chapter 17.62 of this code. 
"Stand-alone facility" means a wireless communication facility where the antennae are mounted to a dedicated ground-based structure in order to elevate the antennae to a useable altitude (i.e., monopole, cell tower, etc.). 
"Stealthed" means: (1) camouflaged, concealed or otherwise not identifiable as a wireless communication facility by a casual observer and (2) is aesthetically compatible and blends with the site and immediate surroundings. Stealthing may be achieved by any state-of-the-art means or combination of means including, but not limited to, the use of camouflage, textures, screening, painting or architectural integration with the surroundings (e.g., steeple or bell tower within a church, unobtrusive penthouse on a roof, false rock, false structure or a tree amongst other trees). For purposes of this definition, "stealth" or "stealthed" does not refer to and is not intended to be used as a trade name. 
"Wireless communication facility" or "Facility" means a facility for the provision of wireless communication services. 
(Ord. No. 1026, § 1, 1-12-11)  
17.86.030 - Applicability. 
A.  Except as set forth below, the procedures and rules set forth in this chapter are applicable to all wireless communication facilities built, installed or modified within all zones of the city of Coachella after the date this chapter is effective, including all wireless communication facilities built, installed or modified within all city public rights-of-way. 
B.  This chapter shall not apply to the following: 
1.  Public safety communications facilities owned or operated by the city or any other public agency (e.g., sheriff, fire, federal or state safety authorities). 
(Ord. No. 1026, § 1, 1-12-11)  
17.86.040 - Approval requirements. 
A.  Except as set forth in subsection (B) below, no wireless communication facility shall be built, installed or modified, on any property within the city in any zone (including the city's right-of-way), without first applying for and obtaining a conditional use permit from the planning commission. The planning commission shall hear all conditional use permit applications at a public hearing in accordance with Chapter 17.74 of this code. 
B.  Notwithstanding subsection (A) above, applicants requesting approval for a new co-location to an existing wireless communication facility ("base facility") shall only be required to obtain site plan review from the planning director, pursuant to Chapter 17.62 of this code, if all of the following apply: 
1.  The base facility has already received a conditional use permit; 
2.  The base facility has already been reviewed and approved by the city pursuant to CEQA, resulting in the preparation of a negative declaration, mitigated negative declaration, or environmental impact report (statutory and categorical exemptions for the base facility are insufficient); 
3.  The new co-location does not require a subsequent or supplemental environmental impact report due to substantial changes to the base facility, its site, its circumstances, or new information; and 
4.  The new co-location incorporates all mitigation measures that were required by CEQA for the base facility. 
C.  Any decision shall be subject to appeal pursuant to the following provisions of this code: 
1.  Decision of the planning commission with respect to a conditional use permit (to the city council): Section 17.74.040 
2.  Decision of the planning director with respect to site plan review (to the planning commission): Section 17.62.020 
(Ord. No. 1026, § 1, 1-12-11)  
17.86.050 - Application contents. 
Applications for the approval of wireless communication facilities shall include that information required by this code for the applicable land use permit (conditional use permit or site plan review), plus the following information: 
A.  Contact Information. The applicant shall submit and maintain current at all times basic contact information of a form to be supplied by the city. The applicant shall notify city of any changes to the information submitted within fifteen (15) calendar days following any such change. This information shall include, but is not limited to, the following: 
1.  The identity, including name, address and telephone number of the owner of the wireless communication facility including official identification numbers and FCC certifications and, if different from the owner, the identity of the person or entity responsible for operating the wireless communication facility; 
2.  Name, address and telephone number of a local contact person for emergencies and type of service provided. 
B.  Location and Zoning Information. Location of the project site, including the address and the names of two nearest cross streets, as well as the present zone designation of the project site. 
C.  Description of the Proposed Project. A description of the proposed wireless communication facility, including whether the project is a new facility, a co-located facility, or a modification to an existing facility. If a new facility, the applicant shall include an explanation of whether the new facility will be designed to accommodate future co-locations. The applicant shall provide a written description of the stealthing measures applicant proposes to use to aesthetically blend the facility to the immediate surroundings. This should include at minimum a description of proposed stealthing techniques, and the textures and colors to be used in the stealthing process. The applicant shall also indicate the proposed height of the facility. 
D.  Noise. A description of the facilities and/or equipment within the applicant's project that are expected to induce or generate noise, as well as anticipated noise levels of said facilities and/or equipment. 
E.  Wireless Communication Facility Site Plan. Fifteen (15) copies of a wireless communication facility site plan, at a scale of one inch= twenty (20) feet or larger and including the following: 
1.  The proposed wireless communication facility; 
2.  Location of lot lines, streets (with street names), easements, and all structures and improvements, including accessory equipment, underground utilities and support structures, existing and proposed; 
3.  Slopes, contours, trees and other pertinent physical features of the site, existing and proposed; 
4.  All exterior lighting on the site, existing and proposed; 
5.  Location, use and approximate distance from property lines of the nearest structures on all properties abutting the site; and 
6.  The location of parking for maintenance personnel. 
F.  Landscape Plan. Fifteen (15) copies of a landscape plan for the site, at a scale of one-eighths inch = one foot or larger and including the following: 
1.  Existing trees with trunk diameter over six inches at four feet above grade or fifteen (15) feet in overall height, within fifty (50) feet of the proposed wireless communication facility; 
2.  Species, diameter and condition of all such trees; 
3.  Final disposition of all existing trees; and 
4.  Species, location and sizes of trees and other vegetation proposed to be installed with the wireless communication facility. 
G.  Site Photographs. Current color photographs of the site and its surroundings. 
H.  Proximity Map and Information. For applications for a conditional use permit, a map depicting all properties (with street addresses) within five hundred (500) feet of the project site, a list of the names and addresses of all current owners of the depicted properties, according to the last equalized assessor's roll, plus an affidavit indicating that the list of names and addresses described above is accurate, based upon due and diligent inquiry of the applicant. The proximity map and information set forth above shall not be required for an application for site plan review. 
I.  Visual Impact Analysis. A visual impact analysis (which shall include photomontage, photo simulation or similar technique) which demonstrates, from all four primary directions (north, south, east and west) the potential visual impacts of the proposed wireless communication facility. Consideration shall be given to views from public areas as well as from private property. The analysis shall assess the cumulative impacts of the proposed wireless communication facility and other existing wireless communication facilities in the area, and shall identify and include all feasible mitigation measures consistent with the technological requirements of the proposed wireless communication service. All costs for the visual analysis, and applicable administrative costs, shall be borne by the applicant. The visual impact analysis shall also include a signed certification by the applicant that the proposed facility, when built, will appear as indicated in the visual impact analysis. 
J.  Wireless Communication Facility Mount. A description of whether the proposed facility is a co-located facility, stand-alone facility, roof/top-mounted, or side-mounted. 
K.  Justification for Location/Co-location. The applicant must provide justification as to why the applicant chose the location for the proposed wireless communication facility. Such justification shall include a written assessment of not less than two alternative locations considered by the applicant and the reasons why said alternative locations were rejected as candidates. Further, pursuant to subsection 17.86.070(I), the applicant shall provide written evidence that it has made a good faith effort to co-locate the proposed facility with an existing facility and indicate whether co-location is or is not feasible. 
L.  FCC/Signal Standards. A report certified by a licensed radio frequency engineer stating that electromagnetic (EM) emissions from the proposed facility will not exceed standards set by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC). 
M.  Map of Applicant's Existing Wireless Communication Facilities. A map and narrative description of all existing wireless communication facility sites used by the applicant which are located within the city, and any wireless communication facility sites located outside of the city but which provide coverage within any part of the city. 
N.  Coverage Assessment. A written report setting forth how and why the proposed wireless communication facility will improve the quality of the applicant's coverage. The report shall indicate the areas where coverage will be improved, and shall also include areas where the applicant currently has no coverage, a significant degradation in coverage or "dead zones". The report shall include a capacity analysis, a propagation analysis, percentage of dropped calls and/or a decibel level report to indicate the quality of service provided by the applicant both at present and after installation of the proposed wireless communication facility. 
O.  Licenses. Documentation certifying the applicant has obtained all applicable licenses or other approvals to provide the services proposed in connection with the application, whether required by the Federal Communications Commission, California Public Utilities Commission, or any other agency with authority over the proposed wireless communication facility. 
P.  Application Fee. A fee in the amount established by the current fee schedule adopted by the city council. 
Q.  Waiver. Any application to develop a wireless communication facility that does not meet the general requirements and restrictions of this chapter shall include a request for a waiver, as set forth in Section 17.86.090 of this code. A request for waiver may be submitted at a later time if it is determined that the proposed facility, as originally submitted, will not meet the requirements and restrictions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1026, § 1, 1-12-11)  
17.86.060 - Notices of hearing/determination. 
A.  Whenever this chapter requires a public hearing to be held before the planning commission, notices of hearing and determination shall be given as prescribed in Sections 17.70.050 and 17.74.010 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 1026, § 1, 1-12-11)  
17.86.070 - Location and development standards. 
A.  Subject to the restrictions and requirements of this chapter, the following wireless communication facilities are allowed ("A") or prohibited ("P") in the following zones 1 : 
Zone 	New Roof-, Top- or Side-Mounted 
Facilities 	Co-locations to Existing Roof-, Top- or Side-Mounted 
Facilities 	Co-locations to Existing Stand-alone 
Facilities 	New Stand-alone 
Facilities 
R-M (multiple-family) 	A 	A 	A 	P 
R-MH (mobilehome subdivision) 	A 	A 	A 	P 
C-N (neighborhood commercial) 	A 	A 	A 	P 
C-T (tourist commercial) 	A 	A 	A 	P 
Public rights-of-way (all zones) 	A 	A 	A 	P 
A-R (agricultural reserve) 	P 	A 	A 	P 
A-T (agricultural transition) 	P 	A 	A 	P 
R-E (residential estate) 	P 	P 	P 	P 
R-S (single-family) 	P 	P 	P 	P 
SP or PUD (residential and public/open space districts only) 	P 	A 	A 	P 
C-G (general commercial 	A 	A 	A 	A 
M-S (manufacturing service) 	A 	A 	A 	A 
M-H (heavy industrial) 	A 	A 	A 	A 
M-W (wrecking yard) 	A 	A 	A 	A 
SP or PUD (commercial and industrial districts only) 	A 	A 	A 	A 
 
1 Applicants wishing to locate wireless communications facility where it is otherwise prohibited by this section must request a waiver as set forth in Section 17.86.090 below. 
B.  Setbacks/Lot Coverage/Noninterference/Distance Between Stand-alone Facilities. Except for wireless communication facilities to be located within public rights-of-way, no facility shall be located within or extend into the required setbacks established in the applicable zone and each facility shall also comply with all applicable lot coverage and building separation standards in the applicable zone. Notwithstanding the above, all new stand-alone facilities proposed to be located adjacent to a residential zone shall be set back from the nearest residential zone line by a minimum distance of one hundred fifty (150) feet, provided, however, that this minimum distance may be shorter than one hundred fifty (150) feet if the new stand-alone facility is not visible from any adjacent residential zone from the shorter distance. The setback shall be measured from that part of the stand-alone facility that is closest to the nearest residential zone line (i.e., the setback for a monopalm would be measured from the end of the branch closest to the residential zone line). 
For facilities proposed to be located within public rights-of-way, no facility shall unreasonably interfere with usual and customary access or use by pedestrians, bicycles or vehicles, or negatively impact vehicular parking, circulation, line-of-sight or safety. 
C.  Lights, Signals and Signs. Wireless communication facility signals, lights or signs shall be designed so as to meet but not exceed minimum requirements for Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) or other applicable Federal or State regulations. Beacon lights shall not be included in the design of a facility unless required by the FAA. Any required lighting shall be shielded to eliminate, to the maximum extent possible, impacts on surrounding areas. Any other lighting of the facility that is not otherwise required is prohibited. No facility or its supporting equipment shall bear any sign, graphic or advertising device other than warning/safety signage or those required by this code or other applicable law. 
D.  Dish Antennae. Dish or parabolic antennae serving a wireless communication facility shall be situated so as to minimize visual impact without compromising their function. (NOTE: For regulations governing other types of antennas (i.e., radio, television, etc., see Chapter 17.68 of this code). 
E.  Equipment Structures. Ground level equipment, buildings, structures, and bases shall be concealed from public view. 
1.  Accessory Equipment. All accessory equipment associated with the operation of a wireless communication facility shall be located inside an existing building, a new addition to an existing building or an underground vault, unless not technically feasible, at which point, accessory equipment may be located within a separate above-ground enclosure. No separate above-ground structure may exceed six feet in height measured from the base of the foundation unless a greater height is necessary to maximize stealthing/architectural integration. All accessory equipment and structures, vaults or enclosures containing said equipment shall comply with the development standards of the zone in which the accessory equipment is located. 
2.  Security. Accessory equipment shall be equipped with tamperproof cabinets and/or locks to mitigate safety siting issues. All wireless communication facilities shall be designed so as to be resistant to and minimize opportunities for unauthorized access, climbing, vandalism, graffiti and other conditions which would result in hazardous conditions, visual blight or attractive nuisances. Barbed wire or razor wire fencing is prohibited. 
F.  Building Codes. Wireless communication facilities shall comply with all applicable building codes. 
G.  Height. All wireless communication facilities shall be located at the lowest possible height that will allow them to operate. Notwithstanding any other height limitations contained in this Title 17, wireless communication facilities may not exceed the height limitations set forth below: 
1.  Roof-mounted facilities (new or co-located) that are placed on an existing building, or top-mounted facilities (new or co-located) that are placed on an existing utility pole, water tank, or other similar structure may extend to, but shall not exceed, a height of ten (10) feet above the roof or top of the building or structure; 
2.  Side-mounted facilities (new or co-located) that are placed on an existing building, or on an existing utility pole, water tank, or other similar structure may not extend beyond the height of the existing building or structure; 
3.  Facilities co-located on an existing stand-alone facility may not extend beyond the height of the existing stand-alone facility; and 
4.  New stand-alone facilities may not exceed fifty-five (55) feet in height. 
Any applicant that proposes to construct or co-locate a wireless communication facility that would exceed the applicable height limitations set forth above must request a waiver, pursuant to Section 17.86.090. 
H.  Signal/Power Cables. All wireless communication facility cables, wires or similar electrical transmission devices must be placed underground, be placed within the existing building or structure or in cableways, and must be properly stealthed to the maximum extent possible. 
I.  Co-location Requirements: 
1.  Co-location. Where feasible, owners or operators shall share sites where wireless communication facilities are already located, thereby reducing the number of new facilities. 
2.  Good Faith Effort. All applicants shall demonstrate a good-faith effort to co-locate with existing facilities. The city may deny an approval to an applicant who has not demonstrated a good-faith effort to co-locate with an existing facility. Such good-faith effort includes written evidence by the applicant of: 
a.  Contact with all other licensed carriers for facilities within the area of proposed coverage. 
b.  Sharing nonproprietary technical information necessary to determine if co-location is feasible under the design configuration most accommodating to co-location. 
In the event the applicant determines that co-location is not feasible, the applicant shall include with its application a written statement of the reasons why co-location is not feasible. In the event the applicant determines that co-location is feasible, the applicant shall include provisions for co-location of its facility in its application. 
3.  Numerical Limits on Co-location. No greater than three facilities shall be co-located upon any single site. 
4.  All co-located facilities upon a site shall be architecturally coordinated and stealthed consistently with each other. 
J.  Parking. Any wireless communication facility shall not reduce the number of available parking spaces below the amount required by this code. 
K.  FCC Requirements. All existing and future wireless communication facilities shall meet all applicable FCC emissions and exposure standards for electromagnetic (EM) radiation, and all required notices and signs shall be posted on the site as required by the FCC and PUC. 
L.  Noise. All wireless communication facilities must comply with all existing noise ordinances of the city, but in no case shall any facility generate sound in excess of: (i) 50 dB CNEL at the property line of the nearest residential use, or (ii) 65 dB CNEL at the property line of the nearest nonresidential use. 
(Ord. No. 1026. § 1, 1-12-11)  
17.86.080 - Design criteria. 
A.  Pre-existing Character. Wireless communication facility location and development shall preserve the pre-existing character of the site as much as feasible. 
B.  Landscaping and Vegetation. Existing landscaping and vegetation, including trees, foliage and shrubs, whether or not utilized for stealthing, shall be preserved or improved, and disturbance of the existing topography of the site shall be minimized, unless removing, altering or disturbing the vegetation would result in less visual impact of the wireless communication facility on the surrounding area. Additional landscaping shall be planted where such vegetation is necessary to provide stealthing or to block the line of sight between a facility and adjacent residentially-zoned properties. If landscaping is removed to install the facility, landscaping shall be replaced on the site at a 1.5:1 ratio for the landscaping removed. 
C.  Stealthing. All wireless communication facilities shall be stealthed from view to the greatest extent feasible, considering technological requirements, by means of placement, camouflage, color choice, architectural compatibility and other site characteristics. The applicant shall use the smallest and least visible antennae and supporting equipment possible to accomplish the owner/operator's coverage objectives. 
Blending/Stealthing Methods: 
1.  All stand-alone facilities, plus supporting equipment, shall be composed of nonreflective materials and painted a color generally matching the surroundings or background that minimizes their visibility, unless the FCC, FAA, or other government agency requires a different color. If a new stand-alone facility cannot be camouflaged in any other way, it shall be camouflaged as a tree (i.e., monopalm, monopine). Lattice towers, guyed towers and flagpoles shall not be permitted as new stand-alone facilities, except by waiver granted pursuant to Section 17.86.090 below. Visible ground-level equipment, structures and buildings shall be stealthed from view by landscape plantings, fencing or other appropriate stealthing means, and shall be treated with graffiti-resistant paint or coating. 
2.  Roof-mounted, top-mounted or side-mounted wireless communication facilities shall be constructed, painted, finished and fully stealthed to match the color and texture of the building, structure and/or wall on which they are mounted. Façade-mounted equipment shall be camouflaged by incorporating the antenna into the design elements of the building or structure and shall be painted and textured to match the existing structure. If possible, antennae should be located entirely within an existing or newly created architectural feature so as to be completely screened from view. In no case shall antennae extend more than twenty-four (24) inches out from the building face. 
Equipment buildings or stealthing enclosures mounted on a roof shall be architecturally consistent with the building, such as having a finish similar to the exterior building walls. Equipment for roof-, top- or side-mounted antennae may also be located within the building on which the antenna is mounted. 
3.  The city council may, by resolution, promulgate additional regulations that further define and clarify the stealthing requirements of this subsection (C), consistent with the intent and purpose of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1026, § 1, 1-12-11)  
17.86.090 - Waiver request. 
A.  Waiver. A waiver of any of the location, design or other requirements and restrictions set forth in this chapter, may be granted by the planning commission or planning director, whichever is applicable, upon the request of the applicant, where the applicant demonstrates that such restriction or requirement either: 
1.  Prohibits or has the effect of prohibiting the provision of wireless communication services pursuant to the United States Telecommunications Act of 1996 (47 U.S.C. §332(c)(7)(B)(i)(II)); or 
2.  Unreasonably discriminates against the applicant when compared to other providers within the city who are providing functionally equivalent wireless communication services pursuant to the United States Telecommunications Act of 1996 (47 U.S.C. §332(c)(7)(B)(i)(I)). 
B.  Independent Consultant. Any application for a waiver shall include the applicant's authorization for the city to retain the services of an independent, qualified consultant, at the applicant's expense, to evaluate the issues raised by the waiver request. The application shall include a monetary deposit, as set by resolution of the city council, and an agreement by the applicant to reimburse the city for all reasonable costs associated with the consultation. 
(Ord. No. 1026, § 1, 1-12-11)  
17.86.100 - Findings for denial. 
Any decision to deny, in whole or in part, a conditional use permit or site plan review to place, construct or modify a wireless communication facility shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence contained in the written record. 
A.  A conditional use permit or site plan review, whichever is applicable, shall be approved unless it is determined that: 
1.  The applicant has failed to provide any information required in Section 17.86.050; 
2.  The proposed wireless communication facility fails to comply with the criteria of Sections 17.86.070 and 17.86.080; 
3.  In the case of a conditional use permit, the planning commission cannot make the findings required by subsection 17.74.020(B) of this code, or, in the case of a site plan review, the planning director has grounds for denial pursuant to subsection 17.62.010(C)(23) of this code. 
4.  In the case of a new wireless communication facility, co-location at a site with an existing wireless communication facility is feasible. 
B.  Any decision to deny, in whole or in part, a conditional use permit or site plan review to place, construct or modify a wireless communication facility shall also indicate one of the following: 
1.  The applicant did not request a waiver from the requirements of this chapter; or 
2.  The applicant did request a waiver from the requirements of this chapter, but failed to present sufficient evidence that the requirements and restrictions of this chapter either have the effect of prohibiting wireless communication services or unreasonably discriminate against the applicant, pursuant to Section 17.86.090. 
(Ord. No. 1026, § 1, 1-12-11)  
17.86.110 - Standard conditions of approval. 
In addition to conditions of approval which may be imposed in order to ensure compliance with this code, the following standard conditions shall be imposed on any conditional use permit or site plan review issued pursuant to this chapter: 
A.  The applicant shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city and its officers, agents and employees from any claim, action or proceeding against the city or its officers, agents or employees to attack, set aside, void or annul any approval under this chapter. The applicant shall further defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers, agents and employees from any damages, liabilities, claims, suits, or causes of action of any kind or form, whether for personal injury, death or property damage, arising out of or in connection with the activities or performance of the applicant, its agents, employees, licensees, contractors, subcontractors or independent contractors, pursuant to the approval issued by the city. 
B.  For all wireless communication facilities located within the public right-of-way, the applicant shall remove or relocate, at applicant's expense and without expense to the city, any or all of its wireless communication facilities, by reason of any change in grade, alignment or width of any public right-of-way, installation of services, water pipes, drains, storm drains, lift stations, power or signal lines, traffic control devices, public right-of-way improvements, or any other construction, repair or improvement to the public right-of-way. 
C.  Where a wireless communication facility site is capable of accommodating a co-located facility upon the same site, the owner or operator of the existing facility shall allow another carrier to co-locate its facilities and equipment thereon, provided the parties can mutually agree upon reasonable terms and conditions. 
D.  The applicant shall, within ninety (90) days after commencing wireless communication facility operations and annually thereafter, submit a written report to the city prepared by a qualified engineer, certifying that the facility continues to comply with all applicable federal, state and local regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1026, § 1, 1-12-11)  
17.86.120 - Revocations. 
A.  At any time, the city may initiate proceedings to revoke an approval issued pursuant to this chapter. 
B.  In addition to those provisions applicable to conditional use permits and site plan review, the following shall also constitute grounds for revocation of an approval issued pursuant to this chapter: 
1.  The owner or operator has abandoned the wireless communication facility; or 
2.  The wireless communication facility is no longer in compliance with its respective conditions of approval, with the requirements of this chapter, or with any other applicable law; or 
3.  The wireless communication facility is no longer in compliance with applicable FCC or FAA regulations. 
C.  The planning commission may revoke a conditional use permit only after holding a noticed public hearing in accordance with Sections 17.70.050 and 17.74.050 of this code. The planning director may revoke a site plan review only by following those procedures set forth in Section 17.62.020 of this code. 
D.  After a final revocation decision has been rendered, the owner or operator of the wireless communication facility shall terminate operations and remove the wireless communication facility from the site in accordance with Section 17.86.150. 
E.  Any decision of the planning commission or planning director to revoke may be appealed pursuant to subsection 17.86.040(C) of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1026, § 1, 1-12-11)  
17.86.130 - Maintenance requirements. 
All wireless communication facilities shall comply at all times with the following operation and maintenance standards: 
A.  Equipment. All facilities, including antennae, mounts, wires, conduit, lighting, fences, shields, cabinets, poles and stealthing materials (including artificial foliage), shall be maintained by the owner or operator in good repair, free from trash, debris, litter and graffiti and other forms of vandalism, and any damage from any cause shall be repaired as soon as practicable so as to maintain the facility's original appearance and to minimize occurrences of dangerous conditions or visual blight. All trash, debris, litter and graffiti shall be removed by the owner/operator within forty-eight (48) hours following notification from the city. 
B.  Landscaping. Each facility and site which contains trees, foliage or other landscaping elements, whether or not used as stealthing, shall be maintained in good condition at all times, and the owner or operator of the facility shall be responsible for replacing any damaged, dead or decayed landscaping as soon as practicable, and in accordance with the approved landscape plan. 
C.  Inspections. Each owner or operator of a facility shall routinely and regularly inspect each site to ensure compliance with the standards set forth in this chapter. Further, the planning director, or designee, may, upon providing reasonable advance notice to the owner or operator, conduct an inspection of a facility to verify compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
D.  To ensure compliance with this chapter, the owner or operator of a facility shall affix a label or marker to the facility in a prominent location that identifies the facility and provides a telephone number that may be called to report any damage, destruction, graffiti or vandalism to the facility. 
E.  Backup Generators. Backup generators shall only be operated during periods of power outages, and shall not be tested on weekends or holidays, or between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 1026, § 1, 1-12-11)  
17.86.140 - "Cells on wheels" prohibited/emergency deployment. 
"Cells on wheels" or other mobile wireless communication facilities are prohibited in all zones, except for the duration of a telecommunications emergency declared by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1026, § 1, 1-12-11)  
17.86.150 - Abandonment and removal. 
A.  Notice of Abandonment. Where an owner or operator intends to abandon a wireless communication facility or portion thereof, the owner or operator shall notify the city by certified U.S. mail of the proposed date of abandonment or discontinuation of operations and the date the facility shall be removed. The notice shall be given not less than sixty (60) days prior to abandonment. Failure to give notice shall not affect the owner's or operator's obligation to remove an abandoned facility. 
B.  Removal Due to Utility Undergrounding. All facilities located on a utility pole or structure shall be promptly removed at the owner's or operator's expense at the time a utility is scheduled to be undergrounded. 
C.  Removal. Upon abandonment, revocation, or other lawful order of any federal, state or local agency to terminate facility operations, the owner or operator shall physically remove the facility or terminated/abandoned elements within thirty (30) days following the date of abandonment or termination of use. "Physically remove" shall include, but not be limited to: 
1.  Removal of antennae, mounts, equipment cabinets and security barriers from the subject site; 
2.  Transportation of the antennae, mounts, equipment cabinets and security barriers to an appropriate repository; 
3.  Restoring the site to its natural condition except for retaining the landscaping improvements and any other improvements at the discretion of the planning director. 
D.  Stay. The planning director may stay the requirement to remove an abandoned/terminated wireless communication facility upon written request and evidence submitted by the owner or operator that another wireless provider is in reasonable negotiations to acquire and use the wireless communication facility. 
E.  If an owner or operator of an abandoned wireless communication facility fails to physically remove the facility and all related equipment within the time frames set forth herein, the city may do so at the owner/operator's expense. 
(Ord. No. 1026, § 1, 1-12-11)  
17.86.160 - Violation/penalty. 
A.  Any owner or operator of a wireless communication facility that violates the terms of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable in accordance with Chapter 3.48 of this code. 
B.  Civil Action/Nuisance Abatement. In addition to the above, if an owner or operator of a wireless communication facility violates the terms of this chapter, the city may pursue any and all civil remedies available at law or equity, including, but not limited to, injunctive relief or initiation of a nuisance abatement action pursuant to Title 3 of this code. 
C.  Costs of Action. All costs of taking action to enforce the terms of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the owner or operator of the wireless communication facility. 
(Ord. No. 1026, § 1, 1-12-11)  
Chapter 17.87 - TATTOO AND BODY PIERCING PARLORS 
 
17.87.010 - Applicability. 
The standards and criteria established in this chapter shall apply to any business enterprise or land use in the City of Coachella that engages in tattooing and/or body piercing. 
(Ord. No. 1033, § 1, 1-11-12)  
17.87.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
"Body piercing" means the creation of an opening in the body of a human being for the purpose of inserting jewelry or other decoration. This includes, but is not limited to, piercing of an ear, lip, tongue, nose, or eyebrow. "Body piercing" does not include piercing an ear with a disposable, single use stud or solid needle that is applied using a mechanical device to force the needle or stud through the ear. 
"Body piercing parlor" means any establishment where body piercing is conducted. 
"Branding" means any method, including, but not limited to, the use of heat, cold, chemical compound, or cauterizing to apply a scar to the body for the purpose of creating a permanent mark or design on the skin. 
"Extreme body modifications" means the practice of modifying the physical body using the techniques of branding, scarification, or body sculpting through the insertion of balls, beads, or other hard objects concealed under the skin. 
"Permanent cosmetics" means the application of pigments to or under the skin of a human being for the purpose of permanently changing the color or appearance of the skin. This includes, but is not limited to, permanent eyeliner, eye shadow, or lip color. 
"Scarification" means any method used to alter skin texture by cutting the skin and controlling the body's healing process in order to produce wounds which result in permanently raised welts or bumps, or any other technique that changes the contour, or level plane of the skin and/or results in a scar on the skin. 
"Tattooing" means to insert pigment under the surface of the skin of a human being, by pricking with a needle or otherwise, to produce an indelible mark or figure visible through the skin. 
"Tattoo parlor" means any establishment where tattooing or permanent cosmetics is conducted. 
"Tattoo artist or practitioner" means any person engaged in the act of tattooing, body piercing, or permanent cosmetics. 
(Ord. No. 1033, § 1, 1-11-12)  
17.87.030 - Zoning regulations. 
All proposed tattoo and body piercing parlors shall obtain approval of a conditional use permit by the planning commission and shall comply with the regulations contained in this chapter prior to obtaining a certificate of occupancy or business license for the use. 
A.  Allowable Locations. Tattoo and body piercing parlors may be permitted in the C-G (general commercial) and MS (manufacturing service) zoning districts, subject to obtaining a conditional use permit as specified in Section 17.74.010 of this title. 
B.  Prohibited Locations. Tattoo and body piercing parlors shall be prohibited in any agricultural, residential, commercial-tourist, industrial, public, manufacturing, transportation, and open space zoning district. 
C.  Required Findings. In addition to the findings required in Section 17.74 020 the planning commission must make a finding that the proposed tattoo and body piercing parlor complies with the minimum development and operational standards contained in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1033, § 1, 1-11-12)  
17.87.040 - Extreme body modification services prohibited. 
Business enterprises which engage in the performance of extreme body modifications services, as defined in this section, are prohibited in all zones throughout the City of Coachella. No permit or any other applicable license or entitlement for use, including, but not limited to, the issuance of a business license, shall be approved or issued for the establishment, maintenance or operation of any business enterprise that engages in the performance of extreme body modification services within the city limits of the City of Coachella. The establishment, maintenance or operation of any business enterprise which conducts extreme body modification services with the city limits is declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated by the city either pursuant to Chapters 3.34 through 3.56 (code enforcement) of the Coachella Municipal Code or any available legal remedies and/or civil injunctions. 
(Ord. No. 1033, § 1, 1-11-12)  
17.87.050 - Location criteria. 
The establishment of any tattoo and/or body piercing parlor shall be permitted only in the particular zones and locations, as set forth in Section 17.87.040 and in compliance with the following requirements: 
A.  The use shall not be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of any other tattoo and/or body piercing parlor. 
B.  The use shall not be located within five hundred (500) feet of any church, religious institution, public or private school, large-scale child day care facility, boys club, girls' club, or similar existing youth organization, public park or recreation area, or any public facility regularly frequented by children such as a library or community center. 
C.  The use shall not be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of any existing sexually oriented business. 
D.  The use shall not be within five hundred (500) feet of any existing residence. 
E.  The use shall not be within two hundred fifty (250) feet of any business selling alcoholic beverages for off-site consumption. 
(Ord. No. 1033, § 1, 1-11-12)  
17.87.060 - Measurement of distance. 
For the purposes of separation requirements pursuant to Section 17.87.050, the distance measured shall be from the exterior walls of the proposed tattoo and/or body piercing parlor to the nearest exterior wall of any other tattoo and/or body piercing parlor, sexually oriented business, church, religious institution, child day care facility, boys' club, girls' club, or similar existing youth organization, and from any business selling alcoholic beverages for off-site consumption. The distance from a residence, public park or recreation area, or public facility regularly frequented by children shall be measured from the exterior walls of the proposed tattoo and/or body piercing parlor to the nearest property line abutting the residence, public park or recreation area, or public facility regularly frequented by children such as a library or community center. 
(Ord. No. 1033, § 1, 1-11-12)  
17.87.070 - Business license required. 
A business license, pursuant to the provisions in Chapter 5.04 of the Coachella Municipal Code, shall be required prior to operating a tattoo establishment and/or body piercing establishment. A business license shall not be authorized unless sufficient evidence is provided that proprietors of the tattoo and/or body piercing parlor have registered with the Riverside County Health Department pursuant to Section 119303 of the California Health and Safety Code, and that the proposed location has complied with all provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1033, § 1, 1-11-12)  
17.87.080 - Development and operational standards. 
A tattoo and/or body parlor shall operate in conformance with the following standards: 
A.  Hours of operation shall be limited to: Monday through Saturday from 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. and Sunday from 10:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. 
B.  Adequate security and lighting shall be provided to ensure the safety of persons at all times subject to review and approval by the chief of police and planning director. 
C.  There shall be no on-site consumption, sale and/or possession of alcoholic beverages. 
D.  There shall be no on-site smoking or sale of tobacco products. 
E.  There shall be no loitering at or near the facility during or after the hours of operation. 
F.  All tattoo artists shall agree to be fingerprinted for a background investigation through the Riverside County Sheriff's Department or other approved agency prior to conducting any tattooing or body piercing work. Any prior history within the past five years involving gang-related activity, acts of violence or Health and Safety Code drug convictions shall preclude the tattoo artist from operating at a proposed tattoo and body piercing parlor. Verification to confirm that the applicant is not a registered sex offender (as defined under California Penal Code Section 290) shall be a part of the background investigation. No person who is a registered sex offender, as defined under California Penal Code Section 290, shall be allowed to own or operate a tattoo and/or body piercing parlor, or be employed at a tattoo and/or body piercing parlor as a practitioner. 
G.  All employees shall be at least eighteen (18) years of age. All patrons shall be at least eighteen (18) years of age unless accompanied by a parent or guardian. 
H.  All tattoo and body piercing parlors shall post a copy of their approved Riverside County Department of Public Health license and a copy of the conditional use permit conditions of approval in a visible location for patrons to observe. 
I.  All tattoo and body piercing parlors shall have signs posted inside the business with following messages: 
(1)  No One Under 18 Allowed Unless Accompanied By An Adult 
(2)  No Smoking Allowed 
(3)  No Alcoholic Beverages Allowed 
J.  A customer waiting area of at least one hundred fifty (150) square feet shall be provided for all tattoo and body piercing parlors. 
K.  All tattoo and body piercing parlors shall provide one tattooing workstation with a clear unobstructed dimension of five feet by five feet. 
(Ord. No. 1033, § 1, 1-11-12)  
17.87.090 - Enforcement. 
The establishment, maintenance or operation of a tattoo establishment and/or body piercing parlor in violation of this section, is declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated by the city either pursuant to Title 3 of the Coachella Municipal Code or any available legal remedies and/or civil injunctions. In addition, in the event the tattoo and/or body piercing parlor operates or is maintained in violation of and/or in noncompliance with the city's regulations, as set forth in this section, Health and Safety Code Section 119300 et seq., Chapter 6.1 of the California Health and Safety Code, also known as the Medical Waste Management Act (MWMA) of 1991, or the conditions of approval, the city may commence conditional use permit revocation proceedings, as provided in Section 17.74.050(B) of the city's Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 1033, § 1, 1-11-12)  
Chapter 17.88 - DENSITY BONUS AND DEVELOPMENT INCENTIVES 
 
17.88.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this section is to provide incentives for the production of housing for very low, low, and moderate income, special needs, and senior households in accordance with Government Code Sections 65915 through 65918. In enacting this section, it is the intent of the city council to facilitate the development of affordable housing and to implement the goals and policies of the city's general plan housing element. 
(Ord. No. 1051, § 1, 5-22-13)  
17.88.020 - Eligibility for density bonus and development incentives. 
The City of Coachella shall grant one density bonus, with concessions or incentives, as specified in Section 17.88.040 entitled number and types of incentives and bonuses allowed, or provide other incentives or concessions of equivalent financial value based upon the land cost per dwelling unit, when the applicant for the housing development seeks and agrees to construct a housing development, excluding any units permitted by the density bonus awarded pursuant to this section, that will contain at least one of the following: 
A.  Ten (10) percent of the total units of a housing development for lower income households; 
B.  Five percent of the total units of a housing development for very low income households; 
C.  Housing for special needs populations; 
D.  A senior citizen housing development; or 
E.  Ten (10) percent of the total dwelling units in a common interest development as defined in Section 1351 of the California Civil Code for persons and families of moderate income, provided that all units in the development are offered to the public for purchase. 
(Ord. No. 1051, § 1, 5-22-13)  
17.88.030 - General provisions for density bonus and development incentives. 
The following general provisions apply to the application and determination of all incentives and bonuses: 
A.  All density calculations resulting in fractional units shall be rounded up to the next whole number; 
B.  The granting of a density bonus shall not be interpreted, in and of itself, to require a general plan amendment, rezone, or other discretionary approval; 
C.  The density bonus shall not be included when determining the number of housing units that is equal to five or ten (10) percent of the total; 
D.  Upon request by the applicant, the city shall not require that a housing development meeting the requirements of Section (B), Eligibility for incentives and bonuses provide a vehicular parking ratio, inclusive of handicapped and guest parking, that exceeds the following: 
1.  Zero (studio) to one bedrooms: One on-site parking space per unit. 
2.  Two to three bedrooms: Two on-site parking spaces per unit. 
3.  Four and more bedrooms: Two and one-half parking spaces per unit. 
E.  If the total number of parking spaces required for a housing development is other than a whole number, the number shall be rounded up to the next whole number. For purposes of this subsection, a development may provide on-site parking through tandem parking or uncovered parking, but not through on-street parking. 
F.  The city shall not apply any development standard that would have the effect of precluding the construction of a housing development meeting the requirements of Section 17.88.020 entitled "Eligibility for incentives and bonuses" at the densities or with the incentives permitted by this section. An applicant may submit to the city a proposal for the waiver or reduction of development standards. Nothing in this subsection, however, shall be interpreted to require the city to waive or reduce development standards if the waiver or reduction would have a specific adverse impact, as defined in paragraph (2) of subdivision (d) of Section 65589.5 of the California Government Code, upon public health and safety or the physical environment or on any real property that is listed in the California Register of Historical Resources and for which the city determines there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact. Furthermore, the applicant shall be required to prove that the waiver or modification is necessary to make the target units economically feasible. 
(Ord. No. 1051, § 1, 5-22-13)  
17.88.040 - Number and types of density bonus and development incentives. 
A.  General Project Density Bonus. A housing development that satisfies all applicable provisions of this section shall be entitled to the following density bonus: 
1.  For developments providing lower income target units, a 20-percent base density bonus plus a one and one-half-percent supplemental increase over that base for every one percent increase in low income units above ten (10) percent. The maximum density bonus allowed including supplemental increases is thirty-five (35) percent; 
2.  For developments providing very low income target units, a 20-percent base density bonus plus a two and one-half-percent supplemental increase over that base for every one percent increase in very low income units above five percent. The maximum density bonus allowed including supplemental increases is thirty-five (35) percent; 
3.  For senior citizen housing developments, a flat twenty (20) percent density bonus; 
4.  For common interest developments providing moderate income target units, a five percent base density bonus plus a one percent increase in moderate-income units above ten (10) percent. The maximum density bonus allowed including supplemental increases is thirty-five (35) percent. 
B.  Number of Incentives or Concessions. In addition to the eligible density bonus percentage described in this section, an applicant may request one or more incentives or concessions in connection with its application for a density bonus as follows: 
1.  One incentive or concession for projects that include at least ten percent of the total units for lower income households, at least five percent for very low income households, or at least ten (10) percent for persons and families of moderate income in a common interest development; 
2.  Two incentives or concessions for projects that include at least twenty (20) percent of the total units for lower income households, at least ten (10) percent for very low income households, or at least twenty (20) percent for persons and families of moderate income in a common interest development; 
3.  Three incentives or concessions for projects that include at least thirty (30) percent of the total units for lower income households, at least fifteen (15) percent for very low income households, or at least thirty (30) percent for persons and families of moderate income in a common interest development. 
C.  Available Incentives and Concessions. The following incentives and concessions are available for compliance with this section: 
1.  A reduction in the site development standards or a modification of zoning code requirements or architectural design requirements that exceed the minimum building standards approved by the California Building Standards Commission as provided in Part 2.5 Section 18907 of Division 13 of Health and Safety Code, including, but not limited to, a reduction in setback and square footage requirements and in ratio of vehicle parking spaces that would otherwise be required and that results in identifiable, financially sufficient, and actual cost reductions; 
2.  Approval of mixed-use development in conjunction with the housing development if the nonresidential land uses will reduce the cost of the housing development and the nonresidential land uses are compatible with the housing development and surrounding development; 
3.  Other regulatory incentives or concessions proposed by the applicant or that the city determines will result in identifiable, financially sufficient, and actual cost reductions; 
4.  Priority processing of a housing development that provides income-restricted units. 
D.  Donations of Land. Additional density bonus and incentives and concessions may be provided for donations of land to the city in the following manner: 
1.  When an applicant for a tentative subdivision map, parcel map, or other residential development approval donates land to the city and agrees to include a minimum of ten (10) percent of the total units before the density bonus for very low income households, as provided for in this subsection, the applicant shall be entitled to a 15-percent base density bonus plus a one-percent supplemental increase for each additional percentage of very low income units to a maximum density bonus of thirty-five (35) percent; 
2.  The density bonus provided in this subsection shall be in addition to any other density bonus provided by this section to a maximum combined density bonus of thirty-five (35) percent; 
3.  The applicant shall be eligible for the increased density bonus described in this subsection if all of the following conditions are met: 
a.  The applicant donates and transfers the land no later than the date of approval of the final subdivision map, parcel map, or residential development application; 
b.  The developable acreage and zoning designation of the land being transferred are sufficient to permit construction of units affordable to very low income households in an amount not less than ten (10) percent of the number of residential units of the proposed development; 
c.  The transferred land is at least one acre in size or is of sufficient size to permit development of at least forty (40) units, has the appropriate general plan land use and zoning designations, and is or will be served by all required public facilities and infrastructure; 
d.  The transferred land and the affordable units shall be subject to a deed restriction ensuring continued affordability of the units consistent with the requirements of this section; 
e.  The land is transferred to the city or to a housing developer approved by the city; and 
f.  The transferred land shall be within the boundary of the proposed development or, at the city's approval, within one-quarter mile of the boundary of the proposed development. 
4.  Nothing in the provisions of this section shall be construed to enlarge or diminish the authority of the city to require a developer to donate land as a condition of development. 
E.  Child Care Facilities. Additional density bonus and incentives and concessions may be provided for development of child care facility in the following manner: 
1.  Housing developments meeting the requirements of Section 17.88.020 entitled "eligibility for incentives and bonuses" and including a child care facility that will be located on the premises of, as part of, or adjacent to the housing development shall receive either of the following: 
a.  An additional density bonus that is an amount of square footage of residential space equal to or greater than the amount of square footage in the child care facility; 
b.  An additional incentive or concession that contributes significantly to the economic feasibility of the construction of the child care facility. 
2.  The density bonus housing agreement for the housing development shall ensure that: 
a.  The child care facility shall remain in operation for a period of time as long as or longer than the period of time during which the target units are required to remain affordable; and 
b.  Of the children who attend the child care facility, the children of very low income households, lower income households, or persons or families of moderate income shall equal a percentage that is equal to or greater than the percentage of target units that are required pursuant to Section 17.88.020 entitled "eligibility for incentives and bonuses". 
3.  The city shall not be required to provide a density bonus or incentive or concession for a child care facility if it makes a written finding, based upon substantial evidence, that the community has adequate child care facilities. 
F.  Condominium Conversion Incentives for Low-Income Housing Development. When an applicant for approval to convert apartments to a condominium project agrees to the following, the city shall grant either a density bonus of twenty-five (25) percent over the number of apartments (to be provided within the existing structure or structures proposed for conversion) or provide other incentives of equivalent financial value: 
1.  Provide at least thirty-three (33) percent of the total units of the proposed condominium project to persons and families of low or moderate income; or 
2.  Provide at least fifteen (15) percent of the total units of the proposed condominium project to lower income households; and 
3.  Agree to pay for the reasonably necessary administrative costs incurred by the city. 
G.  For purposes of this subsection, "other incentives of equivalent financial value" shall not be construed to require the city to provide cash transfer payments or other monetary compensation but may include the reduction or waiver of requirements which the city might otherwise apply as conditions of conversion approval. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to require the city to approve a proposal to convert apartments to condominiums. 
H.  An applicant shall be ineligible for a density bonus or other incentives under this subsection if the apartments proposed for conversion constitute a housing development for which a density bonus or other incentive was previously provided. 
(Ord. No. 1051, § 1, 5-22-13)  
17.88.050 - Location of bonus units. 
As required by state law, the location of density bonus units within the housing development may be at the discretion of the developer. However, the inclusionary units shall be dispersed throughout the development (where feasible); shall contain, on average, the same number of bedrooms as the non-inclusionary units in the development; and shall be compatible with the design or use of the remaining units in terms of appearance, materials, and quality finish. 
(Ord. No. 1051, § 1, 5-22-13)  
17.88.060 - Continued availability. 
A.  If a housing development providing low- or very low-income target units receives only a density bonus, the target units must remain restricted to low or very low income households for a minimum of thirty (30) years from the date of issuance of the certificate of occupancy. 
B.  If a housing development providing low or very low income target units receives both a density bonus and an additional incentive, the target units must remain restricted to low or very low income households for a minimum of fifty (50) years from the date of issuance of the certificate of occupancy. 
C.  In the case of a common interest housing development providing moderate income target units, the initial occupant of the target unit must be a person or family of moderate income. Upon resale any appreciation shall be shared between the seller and the city. The seller of the target units shall retain the value of any improvements, the down payment, and the seller's proportionate share of appreciation, which shall be used within three years for any of the purposes described in subdivision (e) of Section 33334.2 of the California Health and Safety Code that promote homeownership. The city's proportionate share is the difference between the original fair market value of the home and the initial sales price of the home. This allows the city to recover the financial assistance to the homeowner that was provided at the initial sales to make the home affordable to the buyer. 
(Ord. No. 1051, § 1, 5-22-13)  
17.88.070 - Process for approval or denial. 
A.  Process for Approval. The density bonus and incentives and concessions request shall be considered in conjunction with any necessary development entitlements for the project. The designated approving authority for density bonuses shall be the city council. In approving the density bonus and any related incentives or concessions, the city and applicant shall enter into a density bonus agreement. The form and content of the density bonus agreement shall be determined by the city. 
B.  Approval Required Unless Denial Findings Made. The city shall grant the density bonus, incentives, and concessions requested by the applicant unless the city makes a written finding, based upon substantial evidence, of either of the following: 
1.  The incentive or concession is not required in order to provide for affordable housing costs or affordable rents; 
2.  The incentive or concession would have a specific adverse impact, as defined in paragraph (2) of subdivision (d) of Section 65589.5 of the California Government Code, upon public health and safety or physical environment or any real property that is listed in the California Register of Historical Resources and for which the city determines there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact without rendering the development unaffordable to low and moderate income households. 
(Ord. No. 1051, § 1, 5-22-13)  
Chapter 17.89 - COTTAGE FOOD OPERATION PERMITS 
 
17.89.010 - Purpose. 
The city council adopts this chapter pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Section 51035. Its purpose is to prescribe reasonable land-use standards, restrictions and requirements concerning space and concentration, traffic control, parking and noise control relating to cottage food operations. Its purpose is also to establish an economical process consistent with state law for obtaining a use permit to operate a cottage food operation in conformance with such standards, restrictions and requirements. Its purpose is not to license, certify or otherwise regulate the quality and safety of food products provided by cottage food operations and those who operate them, which is governed exclusively at the county level by the department of environmental health. 
(Ord. No. 1058, § 2, 12-11-13)  
17.89.020 - Application process. 
A.  A cottage food operation, as defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 113758, must obtain a use permit prior to operation within the city. 
B.  Applications for use permits to operate a cottage food operation shall be made to the city's community development director or his or her designee, who shall specify the form of said applications consistent with this section. At a minimum, application forms shall indicate all of the following: 
1.  Type(s) of food to be produced at the cottage food operation; 
2.  Number of employees; 
3.  Completed and approved County registration/permitting form; 
4.  Completed County self-certification checklist (for Class "A" only); 
5.  County registration number or county permit number; 
6.  Proof that the applicant is in lawful possession and control of the real property proposed to be used as a cottage food operation; and 
7.  Proof that the applicant has a valid business license. 
(Ord. No. 1058, § 2, 12-11-13)  
17.89.030 - Application fee. 
There is established an application fee of two hundred ten dollars ($210.00) for the review and processing of applications for use permits pursuant to this chapter. 
That fee shall be revised when the city deems it necessary. Said fee shall not exceed the city's cost of administering the review and permit process. 
(Ord. No. 1058, § 2, 12-11-13; Ord. No. 1117, § 1, 2-14-18)  
17.89.040 - Notice to property owners. 
Not less than ten (10) days prior to the date on which the decision will be made on the application, the planning director or his or her designee shall give notice of the proposed use by mail or delivery to all abutting property owners to the north, south, east, and west of the subject site, including those lots located across the street from the proposed cottage food operation. A copy of the notice shall also be sent to the applicant. The notice shall inform its recipient that no hearing shall be held before a decision on the application unless requested by the recipient. 
(Ord. No. 1058, § 2, 12-11-13; Ord. No. 1117, § 1, 2-14-18)  
17.89.050 - Decision by the planning director. 
After proper notice has been given to affected property owners pursuant to Section 17.89.040, the planning director or his or her designee shall render a decision on the application. Unless requested by the applicant or other affected person, no hearing shall be held on the application before a decision is made. The application shall be approved if all of the following standards and requirements are met: 
A.  Space and Concentration. Properties proposed for use as cottage food operations shall be located no closer than six hundred (600) feet in all directions from another cottage food operation, subject to an application for an exception to said six hundred-foot distance which may, after a public hearing and notice to the adjacent property owners in accordance with Section 17.89.040 of this chapter, cause a reduction of no more than two hundred (200) feet from another cottage food operation. 
B.  Traffic Control. A maximum of one cottage food operation per dwelling unit may be permitted. 
C.  Parking. One off-street parking space shall be provided for the dwelling unit proposed for a cottage food operation. A nine-foot by nineteen-foot parking space on a residential driveway will satisfy the parking requirement. 
D.  Noise Control. Operation of the facility shall comply with all provisions of Title 7 of this code. Additional conditions may be placed on use permits to reduce noise impact if ongoing problems exist. 
E.  Signage. No signs or other exterior markings identifying a cottage food operation shall be allowed on the applicant's home. 
F.  Residency. The applicant must be a primary resident of the home that is proposed as a cottage food operation. 
G.  Contact Person. The current name and telephone number of the applicant of the cottage food operation shall be on file with the community development department at all times. 
H.  County registration/permit. All appropriate registration/permits from the county department of environmental health shall be obtained prior to commencing operation of any cottage food operation in the city. 
I.  Building and Fire Code Compliance. Consistent with Section 51035 of the Health and Safety Code, the proposed cottage food operation must comply with all building and fire code provisions applicable to single-family residences. 
J.  Residential Zoning. No use permit shall be issued unless the dwelling unit proposed to be used as a cottage food operation is located on a lot zoned RS (residential single family) or RM (multiple-family residential) under this title. 
K.  Proof of Control. No use permit shall be issued unless the applicant can demonstrate legal authority and control over the real property proposed to be used as a cottage food operation. 
L.  Employee. Notwithstanding the city of Coachella home occupation regulations of the Municipal Code Chapter 17.58, a maximum of one employee, not including a family member or household member of the cottage food operator, may be allowed within the registered or permitted area of a private home where the cottage food operator resides. 
M.  Home Occupation Standards. No use permit shall be issued unless the applicant complies with Municipal Code Section 17.58.010(B) subsections (2), (4), (5), (6), (7), and (8). 
(Ord. No. 1058, § 2, 12-11-13; Ord. No. 1117, § 1, 2-14-18)  
17.89.060 - Appeal of decision. 
The applicant or other affected person may appeal the decision to grant or deny an application for a use permit pursuant to this chapter to the planning commission. The planning commission's decision shall be final unless the matter is called up for review by the city council. The appellant shall pay the city's costs, if any, of processing and conducting the appeal. The amount of such costs shall be estimated in advance by the planning director or his or her designee and the appellant shall deposit said amount with the city before the city will process the request for an appeal. If at the end of the appeal, the city's actual costs were less than the estimate, then the city shall refund the unused portion of the deposit to the appellant. In the event that the city's costs exceeded the amount of the deposit, then the appellant shall pay the amount of the difference to the city. 
(Ord. No. 1058, § 2, 12-11-13)  
17.89.070 - Expiration of permit. 
If a cottage food operation possessing a use permit ceases to operate for a period greater than three hundred and sixty consecutive days or its county registration or permit expires, whichever occurs first, then its use permit shall be considered null and void. Permits are nontransferable. 
(Ord. No. 1058, § 2, 12-11-13)  
17.89.080 - Review of permit—Suspension or revocation. 
A.  Upon determination by the Planning director that the holder of a cottage food operation use permit has not complied with all of the standards and requirements of this chapter, especially Section 17.89.050, the planning director may require the use permit to be reviewed by the planning commission at a public hearing. A noticed public hearing to review the use permit is mandatory when the city receives six substantiated complaints alleging violations of this chapter. 
B.  If the planning commission determines that the holder has failed in a material way to comply with all of the standards and requirements of this chapter, then the planning commission may suspend or revoke the permit or may, in its discretion, impose additional reasonable standards and requirements consistent with state law, based on findings derived from testimony and evidence presented at the public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 1058, § 2, 12-11-13)  
17.89.090 - Preexisting cottage food operations. 
Any cottage food operation operating in the city on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall apply to the city for a use permit pursuant to this chapter within thirty days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, by filing with the city a copy of their existing registration or permit provided by the county of Riverside. Such permits shall be issued by the city without further notice or hearing. Such homes may continue to operate during the city's processing and receipt of these applications. Any such home not applying to the city within thirty days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be considered a nuisance and be abated. 
(Ord. No. 1058, § 2, 12-11-13)  
17.89.100 - Violation—Public nuisance and misdemeanor. 
Operation of a cottage food operation pursuant to this chapter is a privilege, not a right. Any cottage food operation operating in the city without a valid use permit as required by this chapter is prohibited and is both a misdemeanor and a public nuisance. The nuisance may be enjoined or otherwise abated by the city in the manner prescribed by Title 3 of this code and any other applicable provision of state or local law. 
(Ord. No. 1058, § 2, 12-11-13)  
Chapter 17.90 - RECYCLING OPERATIONS 
 
17.90.010 - Intent and purpose. 
The purpose of these requirements is to provide land use regulations, development standards and operational restrictions for the establishment of recycling operations to protect the public health, safety, general welfare, and quality of life in the city, while providing opportunities for certain recycling operations to establish in the city's commercial and industrial districts. 
(Ord. No. 1065, § 1, 6-11-14)  
17.90.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
"Community recycling collection facility" means a facility for the collection of recyclable waste materials for transport to off-site locations, including but not limited to the collection of paper, glass, plastic, aluminum and other nonferrous metals. 
"Composting facility" means any facility devoted to the collection and processing of green waste, with or without the combined use of plant-based food waste, animal by-product waste, or other additives to produce organic products and soil enhancements for use in landscaping, gardening, golf course management, farming and similar operations. 
"Construction and demo material recycling" means a facility where demolished building construction materials such as treated woods, concrete, asphalt, and stone are collected, further sorted and separated, then bulked or converted for transport off the premises, or for on-site reprocessing by hand or machinery. 
"Material recovery facility" means a solid waste facility where mixed municipal solid waste is sorted or separated, by hand or by use of machinery, for the purpose of recovering recyclable materials. 
"Neighborhood recycling center" means an accessory use up to five hundred (500) square feet that incorporates the use of bins, boxes, reverse vending machines, or transportable containers for the purpose of collecting nonhazardous household materials including cans, bottles, and paper goods for recycling purposes. 
"Transfer station, small scale" means a collection and transportation facility, up to two thousand (2,000) square feet in size within an enclosed structure, used by persons and route collection vehicles to deposit collected paper, glass, plastic, aluminum and other nonferrous metals from off-site into a larger transfer vehicle for transport to a solid waste handling facility. 
"Transfer station, large scale" means a collection and transportation facility, in excess of two thousand (2,000) square feet and enclosed entirely within a structure, used by persons and route collection vehicles to deposit collected paper, glass, plastic, aluminum and other nonferrous metals from off-site into a larger transfer vehicle for transport to a solid waste handling facility. 
"Recycle" is the process of collecting, sorting, cleansing, treating and reconstituting materials that would otherwise become solid waste, and return them to the economic mainstream in the form of raw material for new, reused, or reconstituted products that meet the quality standards necessary to be used in the marketplace. 
"Wood and green waste recycling" means a facility devoted to sawing, grinding, shredding, splitting or chopping, of clean wood and green waste for off-site delivery to end users, composting facility, or other location for further processing. 
(Ord. No. 1065, § 1, 6-11-14)  
17.90.030 - Zoning regulations. 
A.  Recycling operations may be allowed in the zoning districts, subject to the administrative and discretionary reviews identified below. Additionally, the recycling facility must comply with the additional use regulations specified in Sections 17.90.040 through 17.090.090 of this chapter. 
1.  Community recycling collection facilities are allowed in the M-W zoning district subject to the regulations contained in this chapter, and subject to obtaining a conditional use permit pursuant to chapter 17.74 of this code. 
2.  Composting facilities are prohibited in all zoning districts of the city. 
3.  Construction and demo material recycling facilities are allowed in the M-W zoning district subject to the regulations contained in this chapter, and subject to obtaining a specific plan adoption pursuant to Chapter 17.36 of this code. 
4.  Material recovery facilities are prohibited in all zoning districts of the city. 
5.  Neighborhood recycling centers are allowed in the C-G zoning district subject to a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.74 of this code if located outside of a building. Collection facilities conducted entirely within an enclosed structure are allowed subject to site plan review by the planning director, pursuant to Chapter 17.72 of this code. 
6.  Transfer stations, large scale are allowed in any M-W zoning district subject to the regulations of this chapter and subject to obtaining a specific plan adoption pursuant to Chapter 17.36 of this code. 
7.  Transfer stations, small scale are allowed in all M-H and M-W zoning districts subject to the regulations contained in this chapter and subject to obtaining a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.74 of this code. 
8.  Wood and green waste recycling may be allowed in the M-W zone subject to the regulations of this chapter and subject to obtaining a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.74 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 1065, § 1, 6-11-14)  
17.90.040 - Composting operations. 
Composting operations are prohibited in all zoning districts of the city either as a primary use or as an accessory use to any permitted or conditionally permitted use in the city. Any property annexed into the City of Coachella with a legally-established composting operation under adjacent jurisdiction's ordinances in effect at the time the use was established, may continue to operate subject to the nonconforming uses provisions contained in Chapter 17.78 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 1065, § 1, 6-11-14)  
17.90.050 - Construction and demo material recycling. 
Construction and demo material recycling uses must conform to the following regulations. 
1.  Site Location Criteria. The construction and demo material recycling facility shall meet the following location criteria: 
a.  The facility shall be located a minimum distance of one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet away from any residential zone. The distance requirement shall be measured from property boundary of the construction and demo material recycling facility to the zoning district boundary. 
b.  The site shall have frontage on an improved street, adequate in width and pavement type to carry the quantity and type of traffic generated by the use. 
c.  The zoning of the property must be internally consistent with the city's adopted general plan. 
d.  The site shall be served by municipal water and sewer services. 
2.  Operational and Development Standards. In addition to the provisions of the underlying base zone and any applicable overlay zone(s), the construction and demo material recycling facility shall meet the following operation and development standards: 
a.  The gross land area shall not be less than fifteen (15) acres with a minimum street frontage of two hundred fifty (250) feet. 
b.  A minimum landscaped front yard and corner yard setback of twenty-five (25) feet shall be required. 
c.  All construction and demo material waste received may be temporarily stored outdoors provided a 10-foot high masonry wall encloses the site's outdoor storage areas and piles are no higher than eight feet in height, and completely screened from view to adjoining properties and the street. 
d.  On-site truck stacking and maneuvering area shall be provided as necessary to accommodate the anticipated vehicular usage of the facility, and shall be completely screened by solid masonry walls not less than eight feet in height with appropriate landscaping and irrigation. No truck stacking and maneuvering area shall be permitted within the required front and street side yard setback. 
e.  Hours of business operation may be only from 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday, and from 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on Sunday, unless otherwise specified by specific plan. 
f.  On-site activities shall not result in the creation of any odors, noise, vibration, dust, or smoke detectable from anywhere within two hundred fifty (250) feet of the property boundaries. 
g.  All open areas, other than landscaped areas or retention basins, shall be paved with not less than two and one-half inches of asphaltic concrete or an equivalent surfacing meeting the city's standard specifications of the engineering/public works departments. 
h.  All incoming or outgoing trucks shall be completely enclosed or equipped with an impermeable cover. 
(Ord. No. 1065, § 1, 6-11-14)  
17.90.060 - Neighborhood recycling centers. 
Neighborhood recycling centers must conform to the following additional land use regulations. 
1.  Site Location Criteria. All neighborhood recycling centers shall meet the following location criteria: 
a.  The site must be developed with an existing neighborhood shopping center of at least five acres in size, with publicly accessible, paved circulation areas throughout the parking and loading areas of the site. 
b.  The site shall have frontage on an improved street, adequate in width and pavement type to carry the quantity and type of traffic generated by the use. 
c.  The site shall be served with municipal water and sewer services. 
2.  Operational and Development Standards. In addition to the provisions of the underlying base zone and any applicable overlay zone(s), neighborhood recycling centers shall meet the following operation and development standards: 
a.  All drop-off bins, reverse vending machines, and containers shall be located a minimum of fifty (50) feet from any street property line and substantially screened from view to the street. 
b.  Drop-off bins and reverse vending machines shall comply with the following standards: 
i.  The drop-off facility shall be no larger than five hundred (500) square feet, not including space used to remove materials or replace containers. It shall comply with the building setbacks for the district and shall not occupy parking spaces required by the primary use. 
ii.  The facility shall not obstruct pedestrian, vehicular and emergency access. 
iii.  The bins shall be constructed and maintained with durable waterproof and rustproof materials, covered and secured from unauthorized entry or removal of materials when the facility is closed, and shall be large enough to accommodate the materials collected and the collection schedule. Any deposit or storage of material outside of the containers is prohibited. 
iv.  The facility shall be maintained free of odor, litter and other nuisances, on a daily basis. A trash receptacle shall be located adjacent to the drop-off facility for disposal of containers used to carry materials to the facility and materials unacceptable for recycling. Trash and recyclables shall be collected from the drop-off facility regularly. 
v.  Facilities within one hundred (100) feet of a property zoned or occupied by residential uses shall operate only between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. daily. 
vi.  Containers shall be clearly marked to identify the type of materials which may be deposited. The facility shall be clearly identified with the name and telephone number of the operator and hours of operation, and shall display a notice that no material shall be left outside the recycling enclosure or containers. Total signage shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet and shall not be illuminated. 
c.  Reverse Vending Machines. Reverse vending machines shall only be established in conjunction with an existing non-residential use which is in compliance with the zoning, building and fire codes. 
i.  Machines shall be located adjacent to the main building on the site and within thirty (30) feet of the entrance to the primary use and shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation. 
ii.  Machines shall not occupy any parking spaces required by the primary use and shall not obstruct pedestrian, vehicular and emergency access. 
iii.  Machines shall be clearly signed to identify the type of material to be deposited, operating instructions, and the identity and phone number of the operator or responsible person to call, if the machine is inoperative. Sign area shall be limited to four square feet per machine and shall be located flat against the surface of the reverse vending machine. 
iv.  The neighborhood recycling center shall be maintained free of litter and odor at all times. A trash receptacle shall be located adjacent to the machine(s) for disposal of containers used to carry materials to the facility and materials unacceptable for recycling. Trash and recyclables shall be collected from the recycling center regularly. 
(Ord. No. 1065, § 1, 6-11-14)  
17.90.070 - Material Recovery and transfer stations. 
1.  Material Recovery Facilities. Material recovery facilities are prohibited in all zoning districts of the city either as a primary use or as an accessory use to any permitted or conditionally permitted use in the city. Any property annexed into the City of Coachella with a legally-established material recovery facility under the adjacent jurisdiction's ordinances in effect at the time the use was established, may continue to operate subject to the nonconforming uses provisions contained in Chapter 17.78 of this code. 
2.  Transfer Station, Large Scale. Large scale transfer stations must conform to the following regulations. 
a.  Site Location Criteria. A large scale transfer station facility shall meet the following location criteria: 
i.  The facility shall be located a minimum distance of one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet away from any residential zone. The distance requirement shall be measured from property boundary of the large scale transfer station to the zoning district boundary. 
ii.  The site shall have frontage on an improved street, adequate in width and pavement type to carry the quantity and type of traffic generated by the use. 
iii.  The zoning of the site shall be internally consistent with the city's general plan. 
iv.  The site shall be served by municipal water and sewer services. 
b.  Operational and Development Standards. In addition to the provisions of the underlying base zone and any applicable overlay zone(s), the large scale transfer facility shall meet the following operation and development standards: 
i.  A minimum landscaped front yard and corner yard setback of twenty-five (25) feet shall be required. 
ii.  All recyclables shall be transferred from the collection trucks to the transfer trailers within an enclosed permanent structure designed to allow for collection trucks to maneuver into and out of the structure for drop-off and pick-up of recyclables. The site and building shall be maintained in a condition free of debris after the transfer of recyclables. The structure shall be located a minimum of two hundred fifty (250) feet from any street line and designed such that openings are not visible to the street. 
iii.  On-site truck stacking and maneuvering area shall be provided as necessary to accommodate the anticipated vehicular usage of the facility, and shall be completely screened by solid masonry walls not less than eight feet in height with appropriate landscaping and irrigation. No truck stacking and maneuvering area shall be permitted within the required front and street side yard setback. 
iv.  Hours of business operation may be only from 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday, and from 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on Sunday, unless otherwise specified by specific plan. 
v.  On-site activities shall not result in the creation of any odors, noise, vibration, dust, or smoke detectable from anywhere within 250 feet of the property boundaries. 
vi.  All open areas, other than landscaped areas or retention basins, shall be paved with not less than two and one-half inches of asphaltic concrete or an equivalent surfacing meeting the city's standard specifications of the engineering/public works departments. 
vii.  All incoming or outgoing trucks shall be completely enclosed or equipped with an impermeable cover. 
viii.  All large scale transfer stations shall be located on a site where outdoor storage uses are enclosed within an eight-foot high masonry enclosure. 
ix.  All recyclable waste materials received may be temporarily stored outdoors provided a 10-foot high masonry wall encloses the site's outdoor storage areas and waste piles are not higher than eight feet in height, and completely screened from view to adjoining properties and the street. 
x.  All recyclables received on the site shall be transported and completely removed from the site within seventy-two (72) hours from the time they are received on the site. 
3.  Transfer Stations, Small Scale. Small scale transfer stations must conform to the following regulations. 
a.  Site Location Criteria. The small scale transfer station facility shall meet the following location criteria: 
i.  The site shall be developed with a primary industrial use that is in compliance with all zoning, building, and fire codes. The small scale transfer station is only allowed as an accessory use to the primary use. 
ii.  The facility shall be located a minimum distance of one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet away from any residential zone. The distance requirement shall be measured from property boundary of the small scale transfer station facility to the zoning district boundary. 
iii.  The zoning of the site shall be internally consistent with the city's general plan. 
iv.  The site shall be served by municipal water and sewer services. 
b.  Operational and Development Standards. In addition to the provisions of the underlying base zone and any applicable overlay zone(s), the small scale transfer facility shall meet the following operation and development standards: 
i.  The site shall have frontage on an improved street, adequate in width and pavement type to carry the quantity and type of traffic generated by the use. 
ii.  A minimum landscaped front yard and corner yard setback of twenty-five (25) feet shall be required. 
iii.  All transferring of recyclable materials from collection trucks to travel trailers shall take place within an enclosed structure up to two thousand (2,000) square feet in size only. The site and building shall be maintained in a condition free of debris after the transfer of recyclables from the collection trucks to the transfer trailers. 
iv.  The transfer trailers will be required to transfer any recyclable materials to a designated materials recovery facility on the same day that recyclable materials are transferred to the site from collection materials. 
v.  The site shall be used for the transfer of recyclable materials only and shall not be utilized to transfer waste other than recyclable materials. 
vi.  The site may not be used as a materials recovery facility for waste or recyclable materials. 
vii.  A maximum of fifty (50) tons per day of recyclable materials is permitted to be transferred to the site. 
viii.  The number of service trucks that serve the facility shall be as specified by conditional use permit, subject to review by the city engineer. 
ix.  No materials shall be accepted at the site from public or private customers. 
x.  Once the travel trailer is full of recyclable materials transferred from collection trucks, all external debris shall be removed prior to exiting the building. 
xi.  On-site activities shall not result in the creation of any odors, noise, vibration, dust, or smoke detectable from anywhere within two hundred fifty (250) feet of the property boundaries. 
xii.  All open areas, other than landscaped areas or retention basins, shall be paved with not less than two and one-half inches of asphaltic concrete or an equivalent surfacing meeting the city's standard specifications of the engineering/public works departments. 
xiii.  All recyclables received on the site shall be transported and completely removed from the site within twenty-four (24) hours from the time they are received on the site. 
(Ord. No. 1065, § 1, 6-11-14)  
17.90.080 - Community recycling collection facilities. 
Community recycling collection facilities must conform to the following regulations. 
1.  Site Location Criteria. The community recycling collection facility shall meet the following location criteria: 
a.  The facility shall be located a minimum distance of one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet away from any residential zone, and a minimum of three hundred (300) feet from any other community recycling collection facility. The distance requirement shall be measured from property boundary of the community recycling collection facility to the zoning district boundary or site property line. 
b.  The site shall have frontage on an improved street, adequate in width and pavement type to carry the quantity and type of traffic generated by the use. 
c.  Community recycling centers are prohibited as an accessory use to any primary use on a developed site, and are prohibited on any site used as multi-tenant outdoor industrial yard. 
d.  The site shall be served by municipal water and sewer services. 
2.  Operational and Development Standards. In addition to the provisions of the underlying base zone and any applicable overlay zone(s), the construction and demo material recycling facility shall meet the following operation and development standards: 
a.  The site area or building area devoted to community recycling collection shall not be less than five acres with a minimum street frontage of two hundred fifty (250) feet. 
b.  A minimum landscaped front yard and corner yard setback of twenty-five (25) feet shall be required. 
c.  All recyclable waste material received may be temporarily stored outdoors provided an eight-foot high masonry wall encloses the outdoor storage area and piles are no higher than six feet in height, and completely screened from view to adjoining properties and the street. 
d.  On-site activities shall not result in the creation of any odors, noise, vibration, dust, or smoke detectable from anywhere within two hundred fifty (250) feet of the property boundaries. 
e.  All open areas, other than landscaped areas or retention basins, shall be paved with not less than two and one-half inches of asphaltic concrete or an equivalent surfacing meeting the city's standard specifications of the engineering/public works departments. 
f.  All recyclable materials received on the site shall be transported and completely removed from the site within seven days from the time they are received on the site. 
(Ord. No. 1065, § 1, 6-11-14)  
17.90.090 - Wood and green waste recycling. 
Wood and green waste recycling facilities must conform to the following regulations. 
1.  Site Location Criteria. The wood and green waste recycling facility shall meet the following location criteria: 
a.  The facility shall be located a minimum distance of one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet away from any residential zone. The distance requirement shall be measured from property boundary of the community recycling collection facility to the zoning district boundary or site property line. 
b.  The site shall have frontage on an improved street, adequate in width and pavement type to carry the quantity and type of traffic generated by the use. 
c.  Wood and green waste recycling facilities are prohibited as an accessory use to any primary use on a developed site, and are prohibited on any parcel used as a multi-tenant outdoor industrial yard. 
d.  The site shall be served by municipal water and sewer services. 
2.  Operational and Development Standards. In addition to the provisions of the underlying base zone and any applicable overlay zone(s), the wood and green waste recycling facility shall meet the following operation and development standards: 
a.  The gross land area shall not be less than five acres with a minimum street frontage of two hundred fifty (250) feet. 
b.  A minimum landscaped front yard and corner yard setback of twenty-five (25) feet shall be required. 
c.  All wood and green waste material received may be temporarily stored outdoors provided an eight-foot high masonry wall encloses the outdoor storage area and piles are no higher than six feet in height, and completely screened from view to adjoining properties and the street. 
d.  On-site activities shall not result in the creation of any odors, noise, vibration, dust, or smoke detectable from anywhere within two hundred fifty (250) feet of the property boundaries. Only non-treated wood materials and green waste shall be received on the site. 
e.  All open areas, other than landscaped areas or retention basins, shall be paved with not less than two and one-half inches of asphaltic concrete or an equivalent surfacing meeting the city's standard specifications of the engineering/public works departments. 
f.  All wood and green waste materials received on the site shall be transported and completely removed from the site within seventy-two (72) hours from the time they are received on the site. 
(Ord. No. 1065, § 1, 6-11-14)  
17.90.100 - Violation; penalty. 
A.  Any owner or operator of a recycling operation that violates the terms of this chapter, or violates a condition of approval imposed by the entitling conditional use permit, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable in accordance with Chapter 3.48 of this code. 
B.  Civil Action/Nuisance Abatement. In addition to the above, if an owner or operator of a recycling operation violates the terms of this chapter, or violates a condition of approval imposed by the entitling conditional use permit, the city may pursue any and all civil remedies available at law or equity, including but not limited to injunctive relief or initiation of a nuisance abatement action pursuant to Title 3 of this code. 
C.  Costs of Action. All costs of taking action to enforce the terms of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the owner or operator of the recycling operation. 
(Ord. No. 1065, § 1, 6-11-14)  
Chapter 17.91 - COMMERCIAL ANIMAL BREEDING 
 
17.91.010 - Intent and purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety, general welfare, and quality of life in the city. The city council finds that commercial animal breeding is not compatible with surrounding uses in any zone of the city because of the noise and odors associated therewith. In addition, the city council finds that commercial animal breeding contributes to stray animal population of the city. Furthermore, the city council finds that commercial animal breeding often contributes to unhealthy and inhumane conditions for dogs and cats within the city. 
(Ord. No. 1093, § 2, 9-14-16)  
17.91.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, "commercial animal breeding" shall mean the business of breeding dogs or cats for the purpose of sale, lease, or exchange for something of value. Breeding shall include the mating and production of offspring by animals and be deemed to have occurred upon the production of offspring, whether such offspring result from sexual activity or artificial insemination, and whether such sexual activity was intentional or the result of improper confinement. 
(Ord. No. 1093, § 2, 9-14-16)  
17.91.030 - Prohibition on animal breeding. 
Commercial animal breeding is prohibited throughout the city. No person shall permit, establish, or operate a commercial animal breeding operation at any property within any zone of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1093, § 2, 9-14-16)  
17.91.040 - Violation and enforcement. 
Any violation of this chapter is designated as a misdemeanor and a public nuisance. The nuisance may be enjoined or otherwise abated by the city in the manner prescribed by Title 3 of this Code and any other applicable provision of state or local law. 
(Ord. No. 1093, § 2, 9-14-16)  
Chapter 17.100 - DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS 
 
17.100.010 - Authority and purpose. 
This chapter is enacted pursuant to and in compliance with Section 65864 et. seq. of the California Government Code and prescribes the requirements for execution of development agreements by the city. A development agreement is a legislative act taken by the city council with the purpose of strengthening the public planning process, encouraging private participation in comprehensive planning, and reducing the economic costs of development while providing assurances to the applicant for a development project that upon approval of the project, the applicant may proceed with the project in accordance with existing policies, rules and regulations, and subject to conditions of approval. 
(Ord. No. 1071-B, § 1, 12-10-14)  
17.100.020 - Application. 
Application for a development agreement shall be made by the person(s), or the authorized agent of the person(s), having a legal or equitable interest in the affected property. Application shall be made on a form prescribed by the development services director and shall be filed with the development services department. The development agreement application shall be signed by the property owner(s) or authorized agent and said signature(s) shall be verified by a notary public. The application shall include the following information: 
A.  A legal description of the affected property, a listing of property owners, and the proposed parties to the agreement; 
B.  A complete description of the associated development project and corresponding city entitlements (i.e. general plan amendment, specific plan, change of zone, tentative tract map, planned unit development etc.); 
C.  The duration of the agreement; 
D.  The permitted uses of the property, the density or intensity of use, the maximum height and size of proposed buildings, and provisions for reservation or dedication of land for public purposes; 
E.  A consistency analysis with the city's general plan, zoning ordinance and any applicable specific plan; 
F.  A fiscal impact analysis report; 
G.  An infrastructure plan; 
H.  A public facilities financing plan; 
I.  A phasing and implementation plan; 
J.  Any other such information and supporting data specific to the project proposal as determined necessary or convenient by the development services director to facilitate processing of the application. 
(Ord. No. 1071-B, § 1, 12-10-14)  
17.100.030 - Fees and exactions. 
The application shall be accompanied by a deposit-based processing fee as set forth in the development services fee schedule prescribed by resolution of the city council. The applicant shall enter into a reimbursement agreement with the city to compensate the city for one hundred (100) percent of third party reviews including fiscal/economic experts, project planners, legal review and related consultants as may be needed for the development agreement. A periodic development agreement review fee shall also be established as part of the development agreement that adequately funds periodic reviews required in Section 17.100.100 of this chapter for a minimum of five years after execution of the development agreement. 
A development agreement fee shall be imposed on all new privately-constructed buildings subject to a city building permit on properties affected by a development agreement as a condition for issuance of said building permit. The development agreement fee shall be calculated as two percent of the construction project valuation of the new building, as determined by the city's building official at the time the building permit is issued. 
(Ord. No. 1071-B, § 1, 12-10-14)  
17.100.040 - Review of application. 
Upon determination of a complete application, the development services director shall prepare a staff report and recommendation regarding the contents of the development agreement and whether the development agreement, as proposed or in an amended form, would be consistent with the general plan, zoning ordinance, and any applicable specific plan. The development services director shall also process the development agreement for environmental review in compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act. 
(Ord. No. 1071-B, § 1, 12-10-14)  
17.100.050 - Public hearing notice. 
Upon completion of the staff report, the development services director shall give notice of intention to consider adoption of a development agreement. A public hearing on an application for a development agreement shall be held by the planning commission and the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1071-B, § 1, 12-10-14)  
17.100.060 - Planning commission recommendation. 
After duly noticed public hearing, the planning commission shall make its recommendation in writing to the city council. The recommendation shall include the planning commission's determination whether the development agreement proposed: 
A.  Is consistent with the objectives, policies, general land uses and programs specified in the general plan and any applicable specific plan; 
B.  Is compatible with the uses authorized in and the regulations prescribed for the land use district in which the real property is located; 
C.  Is in conformity with the public necessity, public convenience, general welfare and good land use practices; 
D.  Will be detrimental to the health, safety and general welfare; 
E.  Will adversely affect the orderly development of property or the preservation of property values; 
F.  Will have a positive fiscal impact on the city. 
(Ord. No. 1071-B, § 1, 12-10-14)  
17.100.070 - City council decision. 
After duly noticed public hearing, the city council may approve, modify or disapprove the recommendation of the planning commission. The city council may not approve the development agreement unless it finds that the provisions of the agreement are: 
A.  Consistent with the general plan, and any applicable specific plan; 
B.  Is compatible with the uses authorized in, and the regulations prescribed for the land use district in which the real property is located; 
C.  Is in conformity with good land use planning; 
D.  Will not be detrimental to the health, safety and general welfare; and 
E.  Is in the best interest of the City of Coachella and its residents. 
The development agreement shall be approved by adoption of an ordinance by the city council. The contents and effect of the development agreement shall be as specified at California Government Code Sections 65865.2, 65865.4 and 65866. 
(Ord. No. 1071-B, § 1, 12-10-14)  
17.100.080 - Execution. 
Upon adoption of an ordinance by the city council approving a development agreement, the city manager shall be authorized to execute the agreement by signature. The city attorney shall also approve said agreement as to form by signature. 
(Ord. No. 1071-B, § 1, 12-10-14)  
17.100.090 - Amendment or cancellation. 
A development agreement may be amended or cancelled as follows: 
A.  Either the city or the applicant or successor in interest thereto may propose an amendment or cancellation in whole or in part of the development agreement. 
B.  The procedure for proposing and approving an amendment to or cancellation in whole or in part of the development agreement shall be the same as the procedure for entering into a development agreement. 
C.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, a proposed amendment to a development agreement to delete certain real property from the terms and conditions of the agreement and sell such property to a public entity considered by the planning commission without a noticed public hearing so long as the planning commission holds a properly noticed public hearing in connection with a proposed general plan amendment and/or zone change for such property. Upon consideration of the proposed amendment and written recommendation to the city council by the planning commission, the city council shall hold a properly noticed public hearing and consider the amendment in accordance with the same procedure for entering into a development agreement. 
D.  A development agreement may only be amended or canceled in whole or in part by the city or by the mutual consent of all other parties to the development agreement or their successors in interest. 
(Ord. No. 1071-B, § 1, 12-10-14)  
17.100.100 - Recordation. 
No later than ten (10) calendar days after the city enters into a development agreement, the city clerk shall record with the county recorder a copy of the agreement provided all outstanding fees are paid by applicant, which shall describe the land subject thereto and cause the development agreement to be recorded on the property title. If the agreement is amended or canceled, pursuant to Section 17.100.090, the city clerk shall record notice of such action with the recorder. 
(Ord. No. 1071-B, § 1, 12-10-14)  
17.100.110 - Periodic reviews and compliance. 
Each development agreement shall be reviewed at least once every twelve (12) months and the review period shall be specified in the agreement. As part of periodic review proceedings, the applicant or successor in interest shall be required to demonstrate good faith compliance with the terms of the agreement. If the development services director finds that such compliance has been deficient, this finding and a recommendation of the director shall be forwarded to the city council for consideration in accordance with Section 17.100.110 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1071-B, § 1, 12-10-14)  
17.100.120 - Modification or termination. 
At any time the city council may, at a public hearing, consider whether there are grounds for termination of any development agreement. Notice of the hearing shall be given in the manner specified in the development agreement. At the hearing, the applicant or successor in interest shall be required to demonstrate good faith compliance with the terms of the agreement. If, as a result of such review, the council finds and determines, on the basis of substantial evidence, that the applicant or successor thereto has not complied in good faith with the terms or conditions of the agreement, the council may terminate or modify the agreement in whole or in part. 
(Ord. No. 1071-B, § 1, 12-10-14)  
Chapter 17.110 - SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR SYSTEMS 
 
17.110.010 - Applicability and purpose. 
This chapter applies to the permitting of all small residential rooftop solar energy systems in the city. The purpose of this chapter is to create an expedited, streamlined solar permitting process that complies with the Solar Rights Act, as amended by AB 2188 (Chapter 521, Statutes 2014), to achieve timely and cost-effective installations of small residential rooftop solar energy systems. This chapter encourages the use of small residential rooftop solar energy systems by removing unreasonable barriers, minimizing costs to property owners and the city, and expanding the ability of property owners to install small rooftop solar energy systems. This chapter allows the city to achieve these goals while protecting the public health and safety. 
(Ord. No. 1079, § 2, 9-23-15)  
17.110.020 - Definitions. 
The definitions set forth below shall be applicable to the provisions in this chapter. 
"Manager" means the city's planning manager. 
"Electronic submittal" means the utilization of one or more of the following: 
1.  Email; 
2.  The Internet; 
3.  Facsimile. 
"Small residential rooftop solar energy system" means a solar energy system which meets all of the following: 
1.  Is no larger than ten (10) kilowatts alternating current nameplate rating or thirty (30) kilowatts thermal; 
2.  Conforms to all applicable state fire, structural, electrical, and other building codes as adopted or amended by the city, and all state and city health and safety standards; 
3.  Conforms to all applicable safety and performance standards established by the California Electrical Code, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where applicable, rules of the Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and reliability; 
4.  Is installed on a single or duplex family dwelling; 
5.  The panel or module array does not exceed the maximum legal building height as defined by the city. 
"Solar energy system" has the meaning set forth in paragraph (1) and (2) of subdivision (1) of Section 801.5 of the Civil Code, as such section or subdivision may be amended, renumbered, or redesignated from time to time. 
"Specific, adverse impact" means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete. 
(Ord. No. 1079, § 3, 9-23-15)  
17.110.030 - Small residential rooftop solar system requirements. 
A.  A solar energy system that qualifies as a small residential rooftop solar energy system, as defined in this chapter, shall be processed in accordance with the terms of this chapter. 
B.  A small residential rooftop solar energy system shall meet applicable health and safety standards and requirements imposed by the state and the city, local fire department or district. 
C.  The manager shall, prior to September 30, 2015, adopt an administrative, nondiscretionary expedited review process for small residential rooftop solar energy systems, which shall include standard plan(s) and checklist(s). The checklist(s) shall set forth all requirements with which small residential rooftop solar energy systems must comply with to be eligible for expedited review. 
D.  The small residential rooftop solar system permit process, standard plan(s), and checklist(s) shall substantially conform to recommendations for expedited permitting, including the checklist and standard plans contained in the most current version of the California Solar Permitting Guidebook adopted by the Governor's Office of Planning and Research. 
(Ord. No. 1079, § 4, 9-23-15)  
17.110.040 - Applicant obligations. 
A.  Prior to submitting an application, the applicant shall: 
1.  Verify, to the applicant's reasonable satisfaction, through the use of standard engineering evaluation techniques that the support structure for the small residential rooftop solar energy system is stable and adequate to transfer all wind, seismic, and dead and live loads associated with the system to the building foundation; and 
2.  At the applicant's cost, verify to the applicant's reasonable satisfaction, using standard electrical inspection techniques that the existing electrical system including existing line, load, ground and bonding wiring as well as main panel and subpanel sizes are adequately sized, based on the existing electrical system's current use, to carry all new photovoltaic electrical loads. 
(Ord. No. 1079, § 5, 9-23-15)  
17.110.050 - Electronic processing. 
A.  All documents required for the submission of an expedited small residential rooftop solar energy system application shall be made available on a publicly accessible city website. 
B.  Electronic submittal of the required permit application and documents by electronic means shall be made available to all small residential rooftop solar energy system permit applicants. The city's website shall specify the permitted method of electronic document submission. 
C.  An applicant's electronic signature shall be accepted on all forms, applications, and other documents in lieu of a wet signature. 
(Ord. No. 1079, § 6, 9-23-15)  
17.110.060 - Application review. 
A  An application that city staff determines satisfies the information requirements contained in the city's checklist(s) for expedited small residential rooftop solar system processing, including complete supporting documents, shall be deemed complete. 
B.  If an application is deemed incomplete, a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information or documentation required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance shall be sent to the applicant for resubmission. 
C.  After city staff deems an application complete, city staff shall review the application to determine whether the application meets local, state, and federal health and safety requirements. 
D.  Unless the planning manager determines a use permit is warranted, city staff shall issue a building permit or other nondiscretionary permit within a reasonable period of time after receipt of a complete application that meets the requirements of the approved checklist, standard plan and this chapter. 
E.  The planning manager may require an applicant to apply for an administrative use permit if the planning manager finds, based on substantial evidence, that the solar energy system could have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health and safety. Such decision may be appealed to the planning commission. 
F.  The city shall not condition approval of an application on the approval of an association, as defined in Section 4080 of the Civil Code. 
(Ord. No. 1079, § 7, 9-23-15)  
17.110.070 - Use permit. 
A.  If a use permit is required, the planning manager may deny an application for the administrative use permit if the planning manager makes written findings based upon substantive evidence in the record that the proposed installation would have a specific, adverse impact upon public health or safety and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid, as defined, the adverse impact. Such findings shall include the basis for the rejection of the potential feasible alternative for preventing the adverse impact. Such decision may be appealed to the planning commission. 
B.  Any condition imposed on an application shall be designed to mitigate the specific, adverse impact upon health and safety at the lowest possible cost. 
C.  "A feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact" includes, but is not limited to, any cost-effective method, condition, or mitigation imposed by the city on another similarly situated application in a prior successful application for a permit. The city shall use its best efforts to ensure that the selected method, condition, or mitigation does not significantly increase the cost of the system or decrease its efficiency or specified performance in excess of the following: 
1.  For Water Heater Systems or Solar Swimming Pool Heating Systems: an amount exceeding ten (10) percent of the cost of the system, but in no case more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or decreasing the efficiency of the solar energy system by an amount exceeding ten (10) percent, as originally specified and proposed. 
2.  For Photovoltaic Systems: an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) over the system cost as originally specified and proposed, or a decrease in system efficiency of an amount exceeding ten (10) percent as originally specified and proposed. 
(Ord. No. 1079, § 8, 9-23-15)  
17.110.080 - Inspections. 
A.  Only one inspection shall be required and performed by the building department for small residential rooftop solar energy systems eligible for expedited review. 
B.  The inspection shall be done in a timely manner. 
C.  If a small residential rooftop solar energy system fails inspection, a subsequent inspection is authorized but need not conform to the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1079, § 9, 9-23-15) 
