CHARTER AND CODE 
____________ 
CITY OF 
DEL MAR, CALIFORNIA 
____________ 
Published in 2017 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
  
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a complete publication of the ordinances of the City of a general and permanent nature. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were materials provided by the City, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the council, commencing with Ord. No. 915, adopted May 16, 2016. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the Comparative Table appearing in the back of this volume, the reader can locate subsequent ordinances included herein. 
The various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Footnotes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state laws have been included. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The Code is organized by subject matter under an expandable three-factor decimal numbering system which is designed to facilitate supplementation without disturbing the numbering of existing provisions. Each section number designates, in sequence, the numbers of the chapter, section, and subsection. Thus, Section 6.04.050 is Subsection .050, located in Section 6.04 of Chapter 6. In most instances, sections are numbered by tens (.010, .020, .030, etc.), leaving nine vacant positions between original sections to accommodate future provisions. Similarly, chapters and sections are numbered to provide for internal expansion. 
Indices 
The indices have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of the headings being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by municipal officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within each index which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which he is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this Code to which the attention of the user is especially directed is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing for the Code. With this system, the Code will be kept up-to-date periodically. Upon the final passage Of amendatory ordinances, they will be properly edited and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the Code, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. Each such amendment, when incorporated into this Code, may be cited as a part hereof. 
The successful maintenance of this Code up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the volume. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publishers that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
The publication of this Code was under direct supervision of Zanne Ebersole, Supervising Editor, and Aline True, Quality Control Captain, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publishers are most grateful to Ms. Ashley Jones, Administrative Services Director, for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this Code. It is hoped that her efforts and those of the publishers have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the City readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of its affairs. 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida  
TITLE 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Chapters:  
Chapter 1.04 - CODE ADOPTION 
 
1.04.010 - Adoption. 
The ordinances embraced in the following Titles, together with such amendment as may be made, shall constitute and be cited as the "Del Mar Municipal Code." The Del Mar Municipal Code shall include such secondary codes that are adopted by reference, except those portions of the secondary codes that are modified or deleted by provisions of the Del Mar Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 415)  
1.04.020 - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phase of this Code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Code. The City Council hereby declares that it would have passed this Code, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase thereof, and will pass any amendments thereto, irrespective of the fact that any one or more of the other sections, subsection, sentences, clauses or phrases had been declared invalid or unconstitutional.  
1.04.030 - Definitions. 
A.  Unless the provisions or the context otherwise require, words and phrases in this Code shall be construed and understood according to their common and approved usage. Words or phrases that have acquired a particular meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
B.  Title, Chapter, and Section headings contained herein shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of this Code. 
C.  The provisions of this Code, and all proceedings under them, are to be construed with a view to effect their objects and to promote justice.  
1.04.040 - Judicial Review. 
Pursuant to Section 1094.5 of the Code of Civil Procedure, the provisions of Section 1094.6 of the Code of Civil Procedure are hereby made applicable to persons seeking judicial review of a decision of the City of Del Mar.  
1.04.050 - Repeal of Ordinance. 
The repeal of any ordinance within this Code shall not repeal the repealing clause of such ordinance, nor shall it revive any ordinance which has been repealed thereby.  
1.04.060 - Duties of Officers and Employees. 
The obligations imposed upon the City officers and employees for implementation and enforcement of the provisions of this Code are directory in nature. Nothing in this Code shall be construed as limiting or eliminating any defense or immunity from liability for the City or its officers or employees established by the provisions of Title 1, Division 3.6 of the California Government Code, or by any other provision of law. The manner and timing of enforcement and implementation of this Code shall be within the discretion of the City Manager and other designated City officers and employees. This Code shall not be construed to hold the City or any officer or employee of the City responsible for any damage to persons or property by reason of a failure to enforce, implement or execute any of the provisions of this Code. Nothing in this Code shall be construed to hold the City or any officer or employee of the City responsible for any damage resulting to persons or property reason of any interpretation of this Code by any City officer or employee.  
Chapter 1.08 - ENFORCEMENT 
 
1.08.010 - General Penalty. 
Any person who violates a provision of this Code, where such violation constitutes a crime, shall be guilty of an infraction, unless otherwise expressed, punishable as follows: 
A.  A fine not exceeding $100.00 for a first violation. 
B.  A fine not exceeding $200.00 for a second violation of the same section of the Municipal Code within one year. 
C.  A fine not exceeding $500.00 for each additional violation of the same section of the Municipal Code within one year. 
(Ord. No. 415; Ord. No. 493)  
1.08.020 - Expressed Misdemeanor. 
Any person convicted of violating a provision of this Code, where such violation is expressly made a misdemeanor, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Government Code Sec. 36901) 
(Ord. No. 569)  
1.08.030 - Separate Violation. 
Each separate day, or any portion thereof, during which a violation of this Code occurs or continues, shall constitute a separate offense.  
1.08.040 - Aiding or Abetting a Violation. 
Whenever an act or omission is made unlawful by this Code, it shall also be unlawful for any person to allow, permit, aid, abet, suffer or conceal such act or omission.  
1.08.050 - Nuisance. 
A.  Every act or omission in violation of the provisions of this Code shall constitute a public nuisance, redressable by civil action. 
B.  Any person who creates, causes, commits or maintains a public nuisance shall bear the expense incurred by the City in abating such nuisance. The expense of abating the nuisance shall be a lien upon the property on which it is maintained and shall be a personal obligation against the property owner thereof. 
(Ord. No. 569)  
1.08.060 - Citizen Complaints. 
A.  To file a complaint alleging a violation of one or more of the provisions of this Code, the complaining citizen shall submit, in writing, a statement signed under penalty of perjury which sets out the location of the alleged violation, the person involved and each and every fact upon which the complaint is based. 
B.  Upon receipt of a properly prepared citizen's complaint, the City of Del Mar may direct an investigation into the alleged violation and take further action as appropriate.  
1.08.070 - Enforcement by Criminal Citation. 
A.  A Code Enforcement Officer issued a badge number by the City is authorized to issue a citation for an infraction of the Municipal Code occurring in the Officer's presence. 
B.  Upon satisfactory completion of a course of instruction required by the City, a Code Enforcement Officer may be issued a badge number at the discretion of the City Manager. 
C.  The course of instruction shall provide for refresher training and periodic recertification. 
D.  If an Officer with an issued badge number fails to satisfactorily complete refresher training or recertification, the City Manager shall immediately revoke the badge number. Thereafter, a badge number shall not be reissued to the Officer until the Officer has satisfactorily completed a course of instruction required by the City. 
(Ord. No. 542)  
1.08.080 - Civil Penalties. 
Civil penalties for violations of the Del Mar Municipal Code are hereby established, to be applied through the Administrative Citation process set forth in the Del Mar Municipal Code Chapter 1.10. As an alternative to the Administrative Citation process, in any civil action filed by the City to enforce the provisions of this Code, the City may request the Court to impose civil penalties in the maximum amount may be imposed by that Chapter, or any other provision of law. 
(Ord. No. 762)  
Chapter 1.10 - ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS 
 
1.10.010 - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this Chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage to give this ordinance its most reasonable application. 
A.  Enforcement Officer means any officer or employee of the City with the authority to enforce the Del Mar Municipal Code, including, but not limited to a code enforcement officer, park ranger, lifeguard, parking enforcement officer, inspector, and the fire marshal. 
B.  Responsible Person means an individual, partnership, corporation, limited liability company, non-profit corporation, trustee, association or any other legal entity, who is the owner or occupant of real property, the holder or the agent of the holder of any permit, entitlement, or review, or the party or agent of a party to any agreement covered by this Chapter, the owner or authorized agent of any business, company, or entity subject to this Chapter; or the parent or legal guardian of any such person under the age of 18 years, who violates any ordinance, regulation, permit, entitlement, review, or agreement described in Section 1.10.030. 
(Ord. No. 762)  
1.10.020 - Nature of Violations. 
A.  Continuing Violations. Each separate day, or part thereof, during which a violation of this Code is committed, continued, maintained, permitted, or allowed, shall constitute a separate offense, punishable as such. A separate citation may be issued for each day a violation occurs. 
B.  Responsibility of New Owners. When a continuing violation of this Code is created or maintained on real property, each successive owner of the real property, including Responsible Persons as described in Section 1.10.010, who neglects to abate the continuing violation, is responsible for the violation in the same manner as the former owner. 
C.  Aiding and Abetting a Violation. Whenever an act or omission is unlawful under this Code, it shall be unlawful for any person to aid, abet, conceal, suffer, permit, allow or maintain such violation, or become an accessory to such violation after the fact. 
D.  Lapse of Time. No lapse of time shall legalize a violation of this Code.  
1.10.030 - Issuance of Administrative Citation. 
A.  Any person who violates any provision of the Del Mar Municipal Code or regulation of the City, any condition of approval of a permit or entitlement, any condition of an environmental review, or any term or condition of any agreement with the City made pursuant to the police power may be issued an administrative citation by an Enforcement Officer as provided in this Chapter. A violation of the Del Mar Municipal Code includes, but is not limited to, all violations of that Code, the Uniform Codes adopted by the City, and all uncodified ordinances, including any violation of the following: 
1.  A design review permit, conditional use permit, administrative design review permit, administrative sign permit, variance, specific plan, parcel map, subdivision map, building or grading permit, any plan, permit or best management practice authorized by the Del Mar Municipal Code. 
2.  Any encroachment or right of way permit, any license or permit issued pursuant to the Del Mar Municipal Code. 
3.  Any condition of approval of an environmental impact report, mitigated negative declaration, negative declaration, or determination of categorical exemption. 
4.  Any condition of any agreement with the City made pursuant to the police power including, but not limited to, any development agreement, owner participation agreement, disposition and development agreement, road maintenance agreement, any easement, license, or other real property use agreement, or any agreement made with the City to implement any ordinance, plan, permit entitlement or review approved by the City. 
B.  A civil fine shall be assessed by means of an administrative citation issued by the Enforcement Officer and shall be payable directly to the City of Del Mar. 
C.  Fines shall be assessed in the amounts specified for administrative penalties elsewhere in the Del Mar Municipal Code, by resolution of the City Council, or as follows: 
1.  A fine not exceeding $100.00 for a first violation. 
2.  A fine not exceeding $200.00 for a second violation of the same ordinance, term, or condition. 
3.  A fine not exceeding $500.00 for a third violation of the same ordinance, term, or condition. 
4.  A fine not exceeding $1,000.00 for each additional violation after the third violation of the same ordinance, term or condition. 
D.  A second or subsequent violation need only be of the same ordinance, term, or condition to require the larger fine, and need not involve the same personnel or property, provided that the same Responsible Person is cited. The fine amounts shall be cumulative where multiple citations are issued.  
1.10.040 - Service Procedures. 
An administrative citation on a form approved by the City Manager may be served upon any Responsible Person by an Enforcement Officer in the following manner: 
A.  Personal Service. In any case where an administrative citation is issued: 
1.  The Enforcement Officer shall attempt to locate and personally serve the Responsible Person and obtain the signature of the Responsible Person on the administrative citation. 
2.  If the Responsible Person served refuses or fails to sign the administrative citation, the failure or refusal to assign shall not affect the validity of the administrative citation or of subsequent proceedings. 
B.  Service of Citation by Mail. If the Enforcement Officer is unable to locate a Responsible Person, the administrative citation shall be mailed to the Responsible Person by certified mail, postage prepaid with a requested return receipt. Simultaneously, the citation shall be sent by first class mail. If the citation is sent by certified mail and returned unsigned, then service shall be deemed effective pursuant to first class mail, provided the citation sent by first class mail is not returned. 
C.  Service of Citation by Posting Notice. If the Enforcement Officer does not succeed in personally serving a Responsible Person, or by certified mail or regular mail, the Enforcement Officer shall post the administrative citation on any real property within the City in which the City has knowledge that the Responsible Person has a legal interest, and such posting shall be deemed effective service.  
1.10.050 - Contents of an Administrative Citation. 
Each Administrative Citation issued to a person shall contain the following: 
A.  The date of issuance of the citation and the date, approximate time, and address or definite description of the location where the violation(s) was observed, where applicable; 
B.  The Code section(s) or condition(s) violated and a description of the violation(s); 
C.  An order for the Responsible Person to correct the violations by a specified correction date, if applicable, and an explanation of the consequences of failure to correct the violation(s); 
D.  The amount of the fine for each violation; 
E.  An explanation of how the fine shall be paid and the date by which it shall be paid; 
F.  Identification of the right of appeal, including the time within which the citation may be contested and the place to obtain a request for hearing form to contest the administrative citation; and 
G.  A statement that if the fine is not paid timely, a late payment charge of 50 percent of the amount of the fine will be added to the fine.  
1.10.060 - Satisfaction of Administrative Citation. 
Upon receipt of a citation, the Responsible Person must do both of the following: 
A.  Pay the fine to the City within 30 days from the date the administrative citation was issued. All fines assessed shall be payable to the City of Del Mar. Payment of a fine shall not excuse or discharge the failure to correct the violation(s), nor shall it bar further enforcement action by the City. 
B.  Remedy the violation(s), if the violation(s) is of such a nature that it can be remedied. 
If the Responsible Person fails to correct the violation(s), subsequent administrative citations may be issued for the same violation(s) or a criminal or civil action may be filed.  
1.10.070 - Appeal of Administrative Citation. 
A.  Any recipient of an administrative citation may contest that there was a violation of any ordinance, regulation, permit, entitlement, or agreement covered by this Chapter, or that he or she is the Responsible Person by completing a request for hearing form and returning it to the City Clerk within 15 days from the issuance date of the administrative citation. The request for hearing shall be accompanied by a deposit in the amount of the fine or by a sworn affidavit together with documentation demonstrating to the satisfaction of the City Manager the person's actual financial inability to deposit the amount of the fine in advance of the hearing. Any administrative citation deposit shall be refunded within ten days of a determination, after a hearing, that the person charged in the administrative citation was not responsible for the violation(s) or that there was no violation(s) as charged in the administrative citation. 
B.  The City Manager shall issue a letter to the person submitting a hardship waiver affidavit granting or denying the waiver. If the waiver is denied, the appeal shall be dismissed if the deposit of the fine amount is not made within five days of the date of the letter denying such waiver. The determination of the City Manager shall be final and shall not be subject to appeal or judicial review.  
1.10.080 - Hearing Officer. 
The Del Mar City Manager shall establish a process to designate a fair and impartial hearing officer for the administrative citation hearing. The compensation of the hearing officer, if any, shall be paid by the City. Compensation shall not be directly or indirectly conditioned upon whether or not administrative citations are upheld by the hearing officer.  
1.10.090 - Hearing Procedures. 
A.  No hearing to appeal an administrative citation before a hearing officer shall be held unless and until a request for hearing form has been completed and submitted in accordance with Section 1.10.070, and the deposit has been made or hardship waiver granted. 
B.  A hearing before the hearing officer shall be set for a date that is not sooner than 15 and not more the 60 days from the date that the request for hearing is filed in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. The appellant shall be notified of the time and place set for the hearing at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing unless the hearing date has been expedited. 
C.  The hearing officer shall only consider evidence that is relevant to whether the violation(s) occurred and whether the Responsible Person has caused or maintained the violation(s). Courtroom rules of evidence shall not apply. Relevant hearsay evidence and written reports may be admitted whether or not the speaker or author is present to testify, if the hearing officer determines that the evidence is reliable. Admission of evidence and the conduct of the hearing shall be controlled by the hearing officer in accordance with the fundamentals of due process. The hearing officer may limit the total length of the hearing to one hour, and shall allow the appellant at least as much time to present its case as is allowed the City. 
D.  The appellant shall be given the opportunity to testify and present witnesses and evidence concerning the administrative citation. The City's case shall be presented by an Enforcement Officer or by any other authorized agent of the City. The appellant may be represented by counsel. 
E.  The failure of the appellant to appear at the hearing shall constitute a forfeiture of the fine and a failure to exhaust administrative remedies. 
F.  The administrative citation and any additional documents prepared by the City in connection with the violation(s) may be submitted by the Enforcement Officer and shall constitute prima facie evidence of the respective facts contained in those documents. 
G.  If the appellant so requests, the City shall provide to the appellant copies of all documents that it intends to introduce at the hearing within five days of the request. If, after copies of documents have been provided to appellant, the City determines to submit to the hearing officer additional documents then, whenever possible, a copy of such documents shall be provided to the appellant prior to the hearing. 
H.  The hearing officer may continue the hearing and request additional information from the Enforcement Officer or the appellant prior to issuing a written decision.  
1.10.100 - Hearing Officer's Decision. 
A.  After considering all of the testimony and evidence submitted at the hearing, the hearing officer may announce a decision orally, but in any event, shall prepare a written decision. The decision shall be provided to the parties within ten days of the hearing and shall either affirm the issuance of the citation as issued or dismiss the citation. The decision shall briefly state the reason for the conclusion of the hearing officer. The City shall serve the decision on the appellant in accordance with Section 1.10.040. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final. 
B.  If the hearing officer affirms the issuance of the administrative citation, then the deposit with the City shall be retained by the City. If a hardship waiver was granted, the decision shall set forth a payment schedule for the fine. 
C.  If the hearing officer dismisses the administrative citation, then the City shall promptly refund the deposit. 
D.  The hearing officer shall not have the power to reduce the fine.  
1.10.110 - Failure to Pay Fines. 
A.  The failure of any person to pay the civil fines imposed by an administrative citation within the time specified on the citation may result in the filing of a claim. In the court action, the City may also recover its collection costs, including the cost of the hearing officer, and any court fees, according to proof. 
B.  In lieu of, or in addition to, the filing of a court action, the City may impose a Code Enforcement Lien on the real property upon which the violation occurs. Any lien imposed pursuant to this Chapter shall attach upon the recordation of a Notice of Code Enforcement Lien in the Office of the County Recorder.  
1.10.120 - Reduction of Cumulative Fines. 
If the violation is corrected within a reasonable time after the decision of the hearing officer, the City Manager shall have the discretion to reduce any cumulative fines to a total of not less than $1,000.00 upon good cause shown by the Responsible Person. The determination of the City Manager shall be final and shall not be subject to appeal or judicial review. Fines shall not otherwise be reduced.  
1.10.130 - Late Payment Charges. 
Any person who fails to pay a fine imposed by this Chapter on or before the date that payment is due, shall also be liable for the payment of a late payment charge of 50 percent of the fine.  
1.10.140 - Right to Judicial Review. 
Either the City or the appellant aggrieved by a decision of a hearing officer on an administrative citation may obtain review of the decision by filing a petition for review with the San Diego Superior Court in accordance with the timelines and provisions as set forth in California Government Code Section 53069.4(b). Said procedure shall be available for all judicial review under this Chapter, notwithstanding that the term or condition being enforced pursuant to this Chapter may not be a matter covered by Section 53069.4(a). Judicial review of a citation shall not be available without first participating in a hearing as provided in this Chapter.  
1.10.150 - Procedural Compliance. 
Failure to comply with any procedural requirement of this Chapter, to receive any notice or decision specified in this Chapter, or to receive any copy required to be provided by this Chapter shall not affect the validity of proceedings conducted hereunder unless the Responsible Person is denied constitutional due process thereby.  
1.10.160 - Choice of Remedies. 
Nothing in this Chapter shall limit the City from pursuing a civil or criminal action based on violations of this Code.  
Chapter 1.12 - APPEALS 
 
1.12.010 - Scope. 
An appeal by an interested person seeking City Council review of a final, nonrecommending determination made at an administrative or public hearing by a board, committee, commission or department subordinate to the City Council shall be made and processed in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. For purposes of this section an "interested person" is a person who was present at a public hearing from which the appeal arose and who had filed a speaker slip with the decision maker at that public hearing or a person who expressed an interest in the decision in writing to that decision maker before the close of the public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 389; Ord. No. 476; Ord. No. 900)  
1.12.020 - Filing of an Appeal. 
A.  To be sufficient for filing, the written appeal must be delivered to the City Clerk, together with any required fee, within ten working days following the determination for which a review is sought. Further, the appeal must be legible and set forth: 
1.  The appellant's full name, address, and phone number; 
2.  The subordinate entity; 
3.  The date of the determination; 
4.  The determination for which review is sought; 
5.  The appellant's interest in the appealed determination; and 
6.  The grounds for the appeal with supporting documentation. 
B.  Grounds for Appeal. 
1.  Factual Error. The statements or evidence relied upon by the decision maker when approving, conditionally approving or denying a permit, map, or other matter were inaccurate. 
2.  New Information. New information is available to the applicant or the interested person that was not available through reasonable efforts or due diligence at the time of the decision. 
3.  Findings Not Supported. The decision maker's stated findings to approve, conditionally approve, or deny the permit, map or other matter are not supported by the information provided to the decision maker; 
4.  Conflicts. The decision to approve, conditionally approve, or deny the permit is in conflict with a land use plan, a City policy or the Municipal Code. 
C.  An insufficient appeal shall be returned to the appellant. 
D.  If the appeal is sufficient, the City Clerk shall set the matter for initial consideration by the City Council at the next available City Council meeting. 
E.  The City Clerk shall mail the appeal document to the applicant with notice of the opportunity to submit a written response to the appeal request at least 14 days prior to the initial consideration by the City Council. 
F.  The City Clerk shall deliver a copy of the appeal document to the appropriate City department which will prepare a City response to the request for the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 901)  
1.12.030 - Response. 
The City response to the appeal document and any written position submitted by the applicant shall be made available to the public, at City Hall, no less than five working days prior to the date set for initial consideration by the City Council.  
1.12.040 - Initial Consideration. 
A.  At the initial consideration, the only matter before the City Council is whether to set the matter for hearing. In so doing, the City Council shall consider the written appeal document, any written response from the applicant, the City response, any testimony received and the record from the public hearing which is the subject of the appeal. In addition, the appellant may have up to three minutes for oral comments, and the applicant may have up to three minutes for oral comments. No rebuttal arguments will be heard. 
B.  The decision from which the appeal has been made will be deemed affirmed unless two or more members of the City Council vote to hear the matter. 
(Ord. No. 766; Ord. No. 848; Ord. No. 901)  
1.12.050 - Matter Set for Hearing. 
If the City Council determines to hear the matter: 
A.  The determination of the subordinate authority shall be deemed advisory only. 
B.  The City Clerk shall place the matter on the agenda of the City Council as a public hearing or administrative hearing depending on how the subordinate authority was required to consider the matter. 
C.  The City Clerk shall give notice of the City Council consideration in the same manner as notice was required for the consideration by the subordinate authority; but in every case, notice shall be provided in the agenda, posted at least 72 hours prior to the meeting during which the matter will be considered by the City Council.  
1.12.060 - Conduct of Hearing. 
A.  The City Council shall consider the application, staff report, and any other written or oral comments from members of the public. 
B.  By resolution prepared by the appropriate City department, the City Council shall make a final determination on the application.  
1.12.070 - Exceptions from Initial Consideration. 
An appeal on an application for a variance from the requirements of a zoning ordinance, an application for a conditional use permit or equivalent development permit, a proposed revocation or modification of a variance or use permit or equivalent development permit shall be exempt from the Initial Consideration process in Section 1.12.040. Such actions shall be heard by the City Council as a public hearing pursuant to Section 1.12.050 and the requirements of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 901)  
Chapter 1.16 - FEES FOR ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES 
 
1.16.010 - Purpose. 
A.  It is the purpose of this Chapter to establish procedures for imposing fees to pay for the costs of providing administrative services. 
B.  A "fee for providing an administrative service" is a fee which does not exceed the estimated reasonable cost of providing the service for which the fee is charged. 
C.  This Chapter does not apply to fees which are imposed as an exaction upon development of land. 
(Ord. No. 478)  
1.16.020 - Scope. 
This Chapter applies to the levying of new fees and to the increasing of existing fees for administering the following: 
A.  Zone variances, zone changes, use permits (Gov. Code Sections 54990, 65909.5). 
B.  Building inspections and building permits (Gov. Code Section 54990, H and S, Code Sections 19132.3, 19854, 17951). 
C.  Specific Plans (Gov. Code Section 65456). 
D.  Producing copies of public record documents. 
E.  Documents required by the California Environmental Quality Act. 
F.  Appeals. 
G.  Water and sewer connection charges (Gov. Code Section 54991).  
1.16.030 - Procedure. 
A.  The City Council shall conduct a public hearing during a regularly scheduled meeting at which oral and written presentations by the public may be made regarding the proposed fee. (Gov. Code Section 54992). 
B.  At least 14 days prior to the hearing, notice shall be sent in response to written requests. 
C.  At least ten days prior to the hearing, notice shall be published once in a newspaper of general circulation within the City. 
D.  At least ten days prior to the hearing, the City shall make available to the public data indicating the amount of the cost, or estimated cost, required to provide the service for which the fee is charged and the revenue sources anticipated to provide this service, including general fund revenues.  
1.16.040 - Limitation on Enactment. 
If the proposed fee will exceed the estimated costs required to provide the service for which the fee is levied, the City Council may: 
A.  Adopt a fee which does not exceed the cost; 
B.  Abandon the proposal; or 
C.  Adopt a resolution approving the fee and referring the matter to a vote of the electorate. The proposed fee will become law upon the approving vote of two-thirds of those electors voting on the measure.  
1.16.050 - Basis of Fee. 
A.  A flat fee may be charged for a request or application which is within established criteria defining a standard request or application. 
B.  If the department providing the service initially determines that the request or application exceeds the criteria for a standard request or application, or if such department determines during the course of the processing of a request or application that the matter will exceed the criteria defining a standard request or application, then the department may require the applicant to deposit with the City an amount sufficient to reimburse the City for the time and expense actually incurred in providing the service. During the course of providing the service, additional deposits may be required. At the completion of providing the service or upon the termination of the process by the applicant, any unused amount remaining on deposit shall be returned to the applicant.  
1.16.060 - Fee Becoming Effective. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided, the fee shall be effective 30 days after the adoption of the ordinance imposing the fee. 
B.  An ordinance increasing a fee upon single-family or multi-family development will be effective 60 days following its adoption. However, the City Council may adopt an urgency measure imposing the fee immediately for an interim period. (Gov. Code Section 65962).  
Chapter 1.18 - CLAIMS 
 
1.18.010 - Authority. 
The Chapter is enacted pursuant to Section 935 of the California Government Code. 
(Ord. No. 734; Ord. No. 858)  
1.18.020 - Claims Required. 
All claims against the City for money or damages not otherwise governed by the Tort Claims Act, California Government Code Sections 900 et seq., or another state law (hereinafter in this Chapter, "claims") shall be presented within the time, and in the manner, prescribed by Part 3 of Division 3.6 of Title 1 of the California Government Code (commencing with Section 900 thereof) for the claims to which that Part applies by its own terms, as those provisions now exist or shall hereafter be amended, and as further provided by this chapter.  
1.18.030 - Form of Claim. 
All claims shall be made in writing and verified by the claimant or by his or her guardian, conservator, executor or administrator. No claim may be filed on behalf of a class of persons unless verified by every member of that class as required by this section. In addition, all claims shall contain the information required by California Government Code Section 910.  
1.18.040 - Claim Prerequisite to Suit. 
In accordance with California Government Code Sections 935(b) and 945.6, all claims shall be presented as provided in this section and acted upon by the City Council prior to the filing of any action on such claims and no such action may be maintained by a person who has not complied with the requirements of this Chapter.  
1.18.050 - Suit. 
Any action brought against the City of Del Mar upon any claim or demand shall conform to the requirements of Sections 940-949 of the California Government Code. Any action brought against any employee of the City of Del Mar shall conform with the requirements of Sections 950-951 of the California Government Code.  
1.18.060 - Settlement Authority. 
The City Manager is authorized to settle claims filed or made pursuant to this chapter and monetary claims filed or made pursuant to the California Tort Claims Act, (California Government Code section 900 et seq.) or other State or Federal legislation ("Additional Claims") up to a maximum of $2,500.00. The amount of delegated settlement authority provided by this Section 1.18.060 shall not exceed the maximum amount unless modified by Resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 858) 
Note— By Resolution 2015-53, the City Manager has the authority to settle claims up to a maximum amount of $9,999.99.  
TITLE 2 - ADMINISTRATION  
Chapter 2.04 - CITY HALL 
 
2.04.010 - Location of City Offices. 
City Hall shall be located and maintained on the premises located at 1050 Camino del Mar, Del Mar, California. 
(Ord. No. 521)  
2.04.020 - Holidays and Hours of Operation. 
A.  The holidays of the City shall be as follows: 
1.  January 1, known as "New Years Day". 
2.  The third Monday in January, known as "Martin Luther King's Birthday". 
3.  The third Monday in February, known as "Washington's Birthday". 
4.  The last Monday in May, known as "Memorial Day". 
5.  July 4, known as "Independence Day". 
6.  The first Monday in September, known as "Labor Day". 
7.  The second Monday in October, known as "Columbus Day". 
8.  November 11th, known as "Veteran's Day". 
9.  The Thursday in November appointed by Congress as "Thanksgiving Day". 
10.  The Friday immediately following the Thursday designated as "Thanksgiving Day". 
11.  December 24th, known as "Christmas Eve". 
12.  December 25th, known as "Christmas Day". 
13.  December 31st, known as "New Year's Eve". 
14.  Every day appointed by the President or Governor for a public fast, thanksgiving, national day of mourning or holiday. This subsection shall not become effective unless made applicable by resolution of the City Council for the specific day so appointed. 
B.  City offices shall be closed on all holidays of the City and, in addition thereto, every Saturday and Sunday. In the event a designated holiday falls on a Saturday, the holiday shall be observed on the preceding Friday. In the event that a designated holiday falls on a Sunday, the holiday shall be observed on the succeeding Monday. 
C.  In addition thereto, the City Council, for just cause and good reason consistent with municipal concern, may designate special holidays by resolution. 
D.  Business hours for the City offices shall be established by resolution of the City Council.  
2.04.030 - Filing of Applications and Payment of Fees. 
Unless otherwise provided in this Code, any application required to be filed with the City or any fee required to be paid to the City shall be delivered to the City Clerk.  
2.04.040 - City Records. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove any papers or documents from the custody of the City unless authorized by the City Manager, the City Clerk or a binding court order.  
2.04.050 - Location for Posting Documents. 
The following public places are designated for the official posting of documents: 
A.  1050 Camino del Mar.  
Chapter 2.16 - CAMPAIGN REGULATIONS 
 
2.16.005 - Purpose. 
This Chapter is intended, among other things: 
A.  To promote an educated electorate by providing information to assist in the evaluation of ballot choices and to make an informed choice; 
B.  To accomplish fair and honest elections; 
C.  To prevent corruption or the appearance of corruption by regulating and making public those contributions whose amount is significant in light of the circumstances of the City; 
D.  To gather information in order to detect violations of the provisions of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 659; Ord. No. 935 , § 1, 3-19-2018)  
2.16.010 - Application of Chapter. 
A.  The provisions of this Chapter are applicable only to: 
1.  Candidates seeking election in the City Council, their controlled committees, or committees formed or existing primarily to support or oppose their candidacies, and 
2.  Committees formed or existing primarily to support or oppose a candidate, or to support or oppose the qualification of, or passage of, a local ballot measure which is being voted on only in the City, and to City general purpose committees active only in the City. 
B.  When the term "committee" appears (1) in this Chapter, or (2) in provisions of the Political Reform Act of 1974, as amended, and is used by this Chapter to create duties, it refers to a person or combination of persons when such person or combination of persons: 
1.  Receives, for a particular City election, campaign contributions totaling $250.00 or more; or 
2.  Expends for a particular City election a total of $250.00 or more. 
C.  Unless otherwise provided herein, the provisions, definitions and interpretations of the Political Reform Act of 1974 (Government Code Secs. 81000 et seq.), as amended, including the regulations of the California Fair Political Practices Commission, as amended, are to be relied upon in administering this Chapter. 
D.  The requirements of this Chapter are in addition to, and shall not be administered or interpreted in conflict with, the requirements of the Political Reform Act of 1974, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 411; Ord. No. 624; Ord. No. 935 , § 1, 3-19-2018)  
2.16.020 - Statement of Organization. 
A.  Time for Filing. 
1.  Except as provided in this Section, within ten days of a committee coming into existence in accordance with this Chapter, the committee shall file with the City Clerk a "statement of organization" on a form approved by the City Clerk, setting forth the information contained in Government Code Sec. 84102. The committee shall thereafter comply with the regulations imposed on committees by this Chapter. 
2.  If a committee comes into existence in accordance with this Chapter within 15 or fewer days prior to an election in which the committee participates, then, within 24 hours of the committee coming into existence, the committee shall file with the City Clerk a "statement of organization" on a form approved by the City Clerk, setting forth the information contained in Government Code Sec. 84102. The committee shall thereafter comply with the regulations imposed on committees by this Chapter. 
B.  Report of Changes. 
1.  Except as provided in this Section, within ten days of any change in information contained in its statement of organization, the committee shall file with the City Clerk an amendment setting forth the change in information. 
2.  If a change in information contained in its statement of organization occurs within 15 or fewer days prior to an election in which the committee participates, then, within 24 hours of such change, the committee shall file with the City Clerk an amendment setting forth the change in information. 
(Ord. No. 935 , § 1, 3-19-2018)  
2.16.030 - Contribution Disclosure. 
Each candidate and committee, as defined in this Chapter, shall file campaign statements when and in the manner specified in the Political Reform Act of 1974, as amended. In addition to the information required by the Political Reform Act of 1974, as amended, each candidate and committee filing a campaign statement shall, for each contribution of $75.00 or more, disclose the information required by Government Code Sec. 84211(f). ;hn; (Ord. No. 935 , § 1, 3-19-2018)  
2.16.040 - Limitation: Contribution to Candidates. 
A.  No person, except as provided in Subsection C. below, shall contribute more than $200.00 total to a candidate or such candidate's controlled committees for any election. 
B.  No candidate or controlled committee shall solicit or retain a contribution from any person when such contribution shall cause the contributor to be in violation of Subsection A. herein. 
C.  It shall be unlawful for a political party committee, as defined in California Government Code Sec. 85205, to make, or for a candidate or controlled committee to solicit or retain a contribution that would cause the total amount contributed by all local, state, and federal committees of the same political party to the candidate and the candidate's controlled committee to exceed $2,000.00 for any election. 
D.  The provisions of this Section do not limit a candidate in making contributions of his or her personal funds to his or her own campaign contribution account. 
(Ord. No. 781; Ord. No. 935 , § 1, 3-19-2018)  
2.16.050 - Identification of Source of Campaign Material. 
A.  "Advertisement" as used in this Chapter shall have that meaning provided in Government Code Sec. 84501(a), including, but not limited to, mailers, flyers, pamphlets, door hangers, walking cards, posters, yard signs, billboards, business cards, campaign buttons ten inches in diameter or larger, or bumper stickers 60 square inches or larger, whether distributed through the mail, by campaign workers, or any other means, and electronic materials disseminated over the Internet. 
B.  Every campaign advertisement in printed form shall include the words "paid for by" immediately followed by the name, street address, and city of the person who paid for the communication in a contrasting Arial equivalent typeface that is easily legible and no less than ten points in size. 
C.  Subject to the additional requirements and exceptions expressly noted below, and limited to advertisements concerning City Council candidates and City ballot measures, the campaign advertising disclosure rules contained in the Political Reform Act of 1974, as amended, including but not limited to California Government Code Secs. 84305 through 84511, and the regulations of the California Fair Political Practices Commission, as amended, including but not limited to Regulations 18440 through 18450.11, are hereby adopted by reference and incorporated into this Chapter 2.16 of the Del Mar Municipal Code as if fully set forth herein. 
1.  Print Materials. When disseminating printed advertisements, City Council candidates and candidate-controlled committees shall make their advertising disclosures as if formed as independent expenditure committees under California Government Code Sec. 82013(b), except when such independent expenditure committees are disseminating mass campaign literature through the mail. 
2.  Display Media. When placing advertisements on large signs, as defined by Title 2, Section 18450.1(a) of the California Code of Regulations, City Council candidates and candidate-controlled committees shall make their advertising disclosures as if formed as independent expenditure committees under Government Code Sec. 82013(b). 
3.  Electronic Materials. When disseminating video, audio, text, or graphic advertisements over the Internet, candidates and committees shall include the "who funded this ad?" and "paid for by" advertising disclosures in the manner required by state law, except that candidates and candidate-controlled committees shall make such disclosures as if formed as independent expenditure committees under California Government Code Sec. 82013(b). 
4.  Political Advertisements. When placing advertisements in newspapers, magazines, and periodicals, candidates and committees shall include the "paid for by" advertising disclosures in the manner required by state law, except that candidates and candidate-controlled committees shall make such disclosures as if formed as independent expenditure committees under Government Code Sec. 82013(b). 
D.  Nothing in this section establishes a Del Mar Municipal Code requirement: 
1.  That any City Council candidate or candidate controlled committee comply with California Government Code Sec. 84506.5; or 
2.  That is applicable to any slate mailer organization. 
E.  Nothing in this section relieves any candidate or committee from its obligation to comply with any advertising disclosure requirement contained in state law. 
(Ord. No. 773; Ord. No. 935 , § 1, 3-19-2018)  
2.16.060 - Penalties. 
A.  Any person who knowingly or willfully violates any provision of this Chapter may be prosecuted for an infraction or a misdemeanor, at the discretion of the City's special counsel. 
B.  Any person who violates a provision of this Chapter shall be liable in a civil action for damages in the amount of three times the amount not properly reported or unlawfully contributed, solicited or accepted, or expended on illegally distributed campaign materials, not to exceed $1,000.00. Upon collection, said sum shall be deposited into the general fund of the City. (Government Code Sec. 36901). 
C.  Any person who violates a provision of this Chapter by failing either to file a statement of organization or report a change of information in a filed statement of information shall be liable in a civil action for damages in the amount of $1,000.00. Upon collection, said sum shall be deposited into the general fund of the City. (Government Code Sec. 36901). 
(Ord. No. 935 , § 1, 3-19-2018)  
2.16.070 - Enforcement. 
A.  The City Attorney shall not investigate or prosecute any alleged violation of this Chapter, but may defend the constitutionality and legality of this Chapter in any civil proceeding in which the City or the City Council is a party. 
B.  An action on behalf of the City alleging a violation of this Chapter may be commenced only by special counsel appointed and retained by the City Council. 
1.  Persons residing in the City who believe that a violation of this Chapter has occurred may file a written complaint requesting investigation of such violation by the special counsel. 
2.  Whether or not a resident's written complaint is received, if the special counsel determines that there is reason to believe a violation of this Chapter has occurred, special counsel is authorized to conduct an investigation and may commence such administrative, civil or criminal legal action as special counsel deems necessary to enforce this Chapter. 
3.  Special counsel shall have investigative powers as are necessary for the performance of the duties described in this Chapter and may demand and shall be furnished records of campaign contributions and expenditures of any person or committee subject to this Chapter. Special counsel shall be immune to liability for special counsel's enforcement of this Chapter. 
C.  Any resident of the City may bring a civil action, in a court of competent jurisdiction, regarding the provisions of this Chapter: 
1.  To enjoin an actual or threatened violation; 
2.  To compel compliance by a private person; or 
3.  To obtain judicial declarations. 
D.  Any action alleging a violation of this Chapter must be commenced within six months of the time the alleged violation occurred. 
(Ord. No. 935 , § 1, 3-19-2018)  
Chapter 2.20 - CITY COUNCIL 
 
2.20.010 - Election and Tenure. 
The electors of the City of Del Mar shall elect Councilmembers at the General Municipal Election held every two years. The General Municipal Election shall be consolidated with the Statewide General Election held in November of even numbered years. Councilmembers shall serve a term of four years, staggered to result in two seats being open at one election and three seats being open at the next election. 
(Ord. No. 322; Ord. No. 371; Ord. No. 680)  
2.20.020 - Presiding Officer. 
A.  City Council shall meet at their usual place of meeting on the first Tuesday in December after the General Municipal Election, provided that the Elections Official has certified the election, and shall pass a resolution reciting the fact of the election, shall install the newly elected officers and shall choose one of its members as Mayor and one of its members as Deputy Mayor. 
B.  The Mayor, and the Deputy Mayor, shall serve a term of one year, or until a successor for each position is chosen. Three affirmative votes shall be required to choose or change the Mayor or Deputy Mayor. 
C.  In addition to the powers and duties of a Councilmember, the Mayor, or in the Mayor's absence, the Deputy Mayor, shall be the presiding officer of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 680)  
2.20.030 - Compensation. 
A.  Councilmembers shall receive a salary of $300.00 per month. (Adopted by a vote of the people 4/12/1988.) 
B.  Upon the submission of an itemized account, any Councilmember may be reimbursed for the actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of official duty.  
2.20.040 - Regular Meetings. 
A.  Regular meetings of the City Council shall be held on the first and third Monday of each month, commencing at 4:30 p.m. in the Town Hall, 1050 Camino del Mar. If a regular meeting falls on a holiday, the regular meeting shall be held on the next business day. 
B.  The City Council may, by resolution, designate another date, time, and location for a regular meeting. 
(Ord. No. 951 , § 1, 8-5-2019)  
2.20.050 - Rules of Procedure. 
The City Council may, from time to time, adopt by resolution, rules of procedure for the conduct of meetings. These resolutions shall be compiled and maintained by the City Clerk and made available to the public and to the City Council during every meeting.  
2.20.060 - Orderly Conduct. 
A.  Any person who fails to comply with a direction given by the presiding officer for the purpose of maintaining order at a City Council meeting shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
B.  All persons shall comply with the meeting procedures announced by resolution of the City Council and no person shall interfere with or interrupt a City Council meeting. 
C.  The presiding officer may designate a member of the County Sheriff's Department as Sergeant at Arms who shall carry out the directions of the presiding officer, to include making arrests as directed by the presiding officer.  
Chapter 2.24 - CITY MANAGER 
 
2.24.010 - Office of City Manager Created. 
A.  The office of City Manager is hereby created and established. 
B.  The City Manager shall be the administrative head of the municipal government under the direction and control of the City Council and shall exercise those general powers necessary for the efficient administration of the City as well as those powers set forth in this Chapter. 
C.  The City Council and its members shall deal with the administration of the City only through the City Manager. Except for purposes of inquiry, neither the City Council nor a member of the City Council shall give orders to subordinates of the City Manager. 
(Ord. No. 391)  
2.24.020 - Appointment. 
A.  The City Manager shall be appointed by the City Council wholly on the basis of the City Manager's executive and administrative qualifications and ability. 
B.  The residence of the City Manager shall be located so as to allow for the effective and timely performance of the duties and responsibilities of the position. 
C.  No person elected or appointed as a Council-member of the City shall, subsequent to such election or appointment, be eligible for appointment as City Manager until one year has elapsed since such person has held the position of City Councilmember. 
D.  The City Manager may appoint a City officer or employee to serve as temporary City Manager. If required, failing such an appointment, the City Council may designate a temporary City Manager.  
2.24.030 - Removal. 
A.  The City Manager shall hold the office at the pleasure of the City Council. 
B.  To remove the City Manager, at least three members of the City Council must approve a written notice of removal with an effective date no sooner than 30 days after the giving of such notice. 
C.  Upon the giving of written notice for removal, the City Council may suspend the City Manager from duty with pay until the effective date of removal. 
D.  In no event shall the City Manager be served with a notice of removal within a period of 90 days from a municipal election in which an individual is newly elected as a member of the City Council.  
2.24.040 - Full-time Position. 
The City Manager shall expend full time on the performance of the duties enumerated herein and shall not take on additional employment without the consent of the City Council.  
2.24.050 - Compensation. 
A.  The City Manager shall receive such compensation and expense allowances as the City Council shall, from time to time, determine and fix by resolution. 
B.  The City Manager shall be reimbursed for all sums necessarily incurred or paid by the City Manager in the performance of the City Manager's duties to include travel on City business.  
2.24.060 - Bond. 
The City Manager shall furnish a corporate surety bond from a surety and in an amount approved by the City Council for the faithful performance of the duties imposed upon the City Manager. The premium for such bond shall be a proper charge against the City.  
2.24.070 - Duties, Responsibilities and Authority. 
The duties, responsibilities, and authority of the City Manager shall include, without limitation, the following: 
A.  To enforce all laws and ordinances of the City; 
B.  To enforce all franchises, permits, and privileges granted by the City; 
C.  To appoint, remove, promote, and demote all department heads serving at the pleasure of the City Manager; 
D.  To control, order, and give directions to all department heads; 
E.  To attend all meetings of the City Council, unless excused therefrom; 
F.  To attend Commission meetings upon the City Manager's own volition or upon the direction of the City Council; 
G.  To recommend to the City Council the adoption of such measures and ordinances as the City Manager deems necessary; 
H.  To keep the City Council fully advised at all times as to the financial conditions and needs of the City and to furnish quarterly financial reports to the City Council; 
I.  To control the purchases of all supplies for all departments or divisions of the City to include submitting or recommending expenditures to the City Council; 
J.  To prepare and submit a proposed annual budget and a proposed salary plan to the City Council by June 1st of each year; 
K.  To investigate into the affairs of the City and any department or division thereof, and into the proper performance of any contract or other obligation pertaining to the City; 
L.  To investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the City to include services maintained by public utilities in the City; 
M.  To supervise the use of all public buildings, public parks, and all other public property which are under the control and jurisdiction of the City; 
N.  To perform such other duties and exercise such other powers and authority as may be delegated to the City Manager from time to time by action of the City Council.  
Chapter 2.28 - OFFICERS, HEADS OF DEPARTMENTS AND EMPLOYEES 
 
2.28.010 - Appointment. 
A.  The City Manager is authorized to appoint, remove, promote and demote all management employees, as classified by the City's Management and Professional Compensation Plan, hired on or after the effective date of this Section. 
B.  The City Manager is authorized to appoint, remove, promote and demote the Executive Assistant to the City Manager and City Council. 
C.  Each head of department, as defined by Section 2.28.050 of this Chapter, may appoint, promote and remove or demote any employee who works for such department pursuant to the City's Personnel Rules and Regulations Manual. 
(Ord. No. 393; Ord. No. 833)  
2.28.020 - Removal. 
A.  All management employees, as classified by the City's Management and Professional Compensation Plan, serve at the pleasure of the City Manager. 
B.  The Executive Assistant to the City Manager and City Council serves at the pleasure of the City Manager. 
C.  Removal of employees not covered by Subsections A. and B. of this Section shall be pursuant to the City's Personnel Rules and Regulations Manual.  
2.28.030 - Cooperation. 
It shall be the duty of all officers and heads of departments to cooperate with and assist the City Manager in administering the affairs of the City in an efficient, economic and harmonious manner, so far as may be consistent with their duties as prescribed by law.  
2.28.040 - Compensation. 
The salaries, compensation, and benefits of officers, heads of departments, and employees of the City shall be as fixed and determined by resolution of the City Council except those fixed by this Code.  
2.28.050 - Heads of Departments. 
The following heads of department positions are established, each of which shall have the duties, responsibilities, and authority necessary for the performance of the position: 
A.  Director of Community Services. 
B.  Chief of Fire Department. 
C.  Administrative Services Director (this position shall be designated City Clerk). 
D.  Director of Finance/City Treasurer. 
E.  Director of Planning/Community Development. 
F.  Director of Public Works. 
G.  City Engineer by part-time contract. 
(Ord. No. 588; Ord. No. 892)  
2.28.060 - Other Officers. 
The City Council shall appoint the following part-time officers on such terms and conditions as the City Council deems appropriate: 
A.  City Attorney.  
2.28.070 - Director of Finance. 
A.  The Director of Finance shall be the chief accounting officer for the City and shall assume the duties of City Treasurer. The financial and accounting duties imposed upon the City Clerk are transferred to the Director of Finance. 
B.  The Director of Finance shall furnish a corporate surety bond in such sum as determined by resolution of the City Council for the faithful performance of the duties imposed on the Director of Finance. The premium for such bond shall be a proper charge against the City. 
C.  In addition to such other and further duties or functions as the City Council or City Manager may, from time to time, prescribe, the Director of Finance is specifically charged with the performance of the following duties: 
1.  Supervise and control all personnel in the Department of Finance. 
2.  Administer laws and ordinance pertaining to taxes, licenses, and permits as directed. 
3.  Cause current accounts to be kept of all funds, revenues, receipts, expenditures, and financial commitments of the City. 
4.  Maintain a system of budgetary accounting for the recording of actual and estimated revenues and expenditures in such a manner as to show the financial position of each fund and department of the City at all times. 
5.  Collect, receive, and deposit all monies of the City, and keep proper records thereof. 
6.  Assist the City Manager in the preparation of the annual budget and certify to the accuracy of anticipated revenues to meet the proposed budget. 
7.  Serve as the custodian of the City's permanent accounting records. 
8.  Prescribe and control forms and procedures of all other departments which pertain to revenues, receipts or expenditures in any manner. 
9.  Prepare and issue all warrants and payroll checks. 
10.  Prepare financial statements and statistical reports. 
11.  Perform cost accounting as directed by the City Manager. 
12.  Exercise the right to audit the accounting functions performed by all other departments and divisions of the City.  
2.28.080 - Director of Planning and Community Development. 
A.  The Director of Planning and Community Development shall be responsible for administering the provisions of Titles 23, 24, and 30. 
B.  Subject to the supervision and direction of the City Manager, the Director of Planning and Community Development shall accomplish tasks directed by the City Council or the Planning Commission. 
C.  The Director of Planning and Community Development shall prepare drafts of appropriate amendments to the Community Plan and to the provisions of this Title for submission to the City. 
D.  The Director of Planning and Community Development shall cause to be prepared all maps, charts, and other supporting materials which may be necessary or advisable for adequate consideration of each proposed change. 
E.  The Director of Planning and Community Development shall investigate and report on the compliance with the regulatory provisions of Titles 23, 24 and 30. 
F.  The Director of Planning and Community Development shall investigate and prepare recommendations for each approval, determination and permit authorized by Titles 23, 24 and 30.  
Chapter 2.30 - COMMISSIONS, BOARDS AND COMMITTEES: GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
2.30.010 - Appointment. 
Three affirmative votes of members of the City Council are required to appoint an individual to a City commission, board or committee for a full term or unexpired portion of a vacated term. 
(Ord. No. 392; Ord. No. 792)  
2.30.020 - Absence from Meeting. 
If a member of a commission, board or committee is absent from three regular, adjourned or special meetings within a 12-month period without cause, the term of such member is automatically vacated. The Council liaisons to the commission, board or committee shall determine whether the absence was for cause. If the commission, board or committee does not have two Council liaisons, then the Mayor and the Deputy Mayor shall act as liaisons to that commission, board or committee for this purpose. 
(Ord. No. 792)  
2.30.030 - Compensation of Members. 
No member of a City commission, board or committee shall receive compensation for services as a commission, board or committee member. However, members may be compensated for expenses reasonably and necessarily incurred in the performance of official duties. 
(Ord. No. 792)  
2.30.040 - Rules and Regulations. 
Each commission or board may adopt such rules and regulations as are required for their operation and which are consistent with the provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 792)  
2.30.050 - Finances. 
The City Council shall provide the funds, equipment, and accommodations necessary for the work of each City commission or board. 
(Ord. No. 792)  
2.30.060 - Records. 
Each commission or board shall keep a record of the resolutions, transactions, findings, and determinations made, which shall be filed with the City Clerk and maintained as a public record. 
(Ord. No. 792)  
Chapter 2.34 - PLANNING COMMISSION 
 
2.34.010 - Planning Commission Established. 
The Planning Commission for the City of Del Mar is hereby established. 
(Ord. No. 394)  
2.34.020 - Membership. 
A.  The Planning Commission shall consist of five members who are registered voters of the City of Del Mar and maintain residency within the City's municipal boundaries. Residency shall be maintained for no less than six months prior to appointment and if a Commissioner ceases to reside within the City during their membership on the Planning Commission, the appointment of such person shall be deemed to have been terminated. For the purposes of this section, residency shall mean someone who maintains residence and is physically present in the City of Del Mar for no less than six months per calendar year. 
B.  Members shall serve staggered, four-year terms. 
(Ord No. 931 , § 1, 9-18-2017)  
2.34.030 - Meetings. 
A.  Three members of the Planning Commission shall constitute a quorum. 
B.  The Planning Commission shall hold at least one regular meeting in each month. 
C.  The Planning Commission shall elect a chairperson and a vice chairperson from among its members for a one-year term.  
2.34.040 - Duties of Planning Commission. 
The Planning Commission shall perform such duties as may be specified by ordinance, by resolution of the City Council or by the laws of the State of California. Further, the Planning Commission shall study and report to the City Council upon any matter referred to it by the City Council and shall keep the City Council currently advised of all matters pending, and shall furnish any specific information, reports or materials which the City Council may request.  
2.34.050 - Appeal of Final Decisions. 
All final determinations of the Planning Commission are appealable to the City Council in accordance with the provisions of this Code.  
Chapter 2.38 - DESIGN REVIEW BOARD 
 
2.38.010 - Board Established. 
The Design Review Board of the City of Del Mar is hereby established. 
(Ord. No. 465)  
2.38.020 - Membership. 
A.  The Design Review Board shall consist of seven members who are registered voters of the City of Del Mar and maintain residency within the City's municipal boundaries. Residency shall be maintained for no less than six months prior to appointment and if a Board Member ceases to reside within the City during their membership on the Design Review Board, the appointment of such person shall be deemed to have been terminated. For the purposes of this section, residency shall mean someone who maintains residence and is physically present in the City of Del Mar for no less than six months per calendar year. 
B.  Members shall serve staggered, four-year terms. 
C.  The members shall be persons who, by experience, training, education, or occupation, have demonstrated talent and interest in developing the aesthetics of environmentally sensitive design within the framework of practical considerations. 
D.  The Design Review Board shall also include an eighth, ex-officio member and an ex-officio alternate, both appointed to a two-year term by a majority of the City Council. 
1.  The ex-officio member and alternate shall be appointed based on their professional experience in architecture, landscape architecture, planning or urban design. 
2.  The ex-officio member, or alternate, shall assist the Design Review Board members in their deliberations as to whether an application for a Design Review Permit is consistent with the applicable standards of review. As requested, the ex-officio member, or alternate, shall also assist the members in a determination of the existence of feasible design alternatives. However, neither the ex-officio member, nor alternate, shall participate in the votes on applications. 
3.  The ex-officio member, or alternate, shall not be counted for purposes of determining the existence of a quorum of the Design Review Board. 
4.  The ex-officio member and alternate should preferably be residents of the City but neither is required to be a resident of the City. 
5.  The ex-officio alternate shall serve in the absence of the ex-officio member. 
6.  The ex-officio member and alternate shall comply with all City of Del Mar Conflict of Interest regulations. 
(Ord. No. 767; Ord. No. 785; Ord. No. 793; Ord. No. 825; Ord No. 931 , § 1, 9-18-2017)  
2.38.030 - Meetings. 
A.  Four members of the Design Review Board shall constitute a quorum. 
B.  The Design Review Board shall hold at least one regular meeting in each month. 
C.  The Design Review Board shall elect a chair-person and a vice chairperson from among its members to serve for one year.  
2.38.040 - Duties of Design Review Board. 
The Design Review Board shall perform such duties as may be specified by ordinance or by resolution of the City Council. Further, the Design Review Board shall study and report to the City Council upon any matter referred to it by the City Council and shall furnish any specific information, reports or materials which the City Council may request.  
2.38.050 - Appeal of Final Decisions. 
All final decisions of the Design Review Board are appealable to the City Council in accordance with the provisions of this Code.  
Chapter 2.52 - EMERGENCY SERVICES 
 
2.52.010 - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this Chapter to provide for the coordination of emergency services for the protection of persons and property within the City in the event of a proclamation of federal, state or local emergency. 
(Ord. No. 423)  
2.52.020 - Local Emergency. 
A local emergency shall be proclaimed when there exists conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons or property within the City, caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, draught, sudden and severe energy shortage, plant or animal infestation or disease, a Governor's warning of an earthquake, or other conditions other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy, which conditions are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment and facilities of the City, and require the combined forces of other political subdivisions to combat.  
2.52.030 - Director of Emergency Services. 
A.  The Director of Emergency Services shall be the City Manager. 
B.  The Assistant Director of Emergency Services shall be appointed by the Director and shall exercise the powers of the Director in accordance with the terms of that appointment.  
2.52.040 - Proclamation of Local Emergency. 
A.  The City Council may proclaim a local emergency. 
B.  When the City Council is not in session, the Director may proclaim a local emergency for a period of seven days or less.  
2.52.050 - Powers of Director of Emergency Services. 
In the event of a proclamation of federal, state or local emergency related to the City, the Director is authorized to exercise the following powers when necessary to mitigate the emergency: 
A.  Request the Governor to proclaim a state of emergency. 
B.  Control and direct the effort of every City employee in accordance with the emergency organization of this City for the accomplishment of the purposes of this Chapter. 
C.  Represent this City in all dealings with public or private agencies on matters pertaining to emergencies. 
D.  Call upon appropriate county, state, and federal officers for assistance. 
E.  Impose curfew and make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by the emergency; and suspend existing policies, regulations, or guidelines, other than municipal ordinances, as necessary to mitigate the emergency. 
F.  Acquire supplies, equipment, and such other properties and service needed for the protection of life and property, to include, if required immediately, commandeering the same for public use. 
G.  Expend or encumber an amount equal to five percent of the City's gross annual operating budget to mitigate the emergency. 
H.  Recruit, retain, deputize, and direct temporary personnel for the duration of the emergency, for the purpose of mitigating the emergency, solely on the basis of the recruit's ostensible ability to mitigate the emergency.  
2.52.060 - Expenditures. 
Any expenditure made in connection with emergency activities, including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the City.  
2.52.070 - Emergency Plan. 
A.  The Disaster Council which shall consist of: 
1.  The Mayor, who shall be Chairperson. 
2.  The City Manager, who shall be Vice Chairperson. 
3.  The Assistant Director of Emergency Services. 
4.  Additional person nominated by the City Manager and approved by the Mayor. 
B.  The Disaster Council shall prepare an emergency plan to provide for the effective mobilization of all of the resources of this City, both public and private, to meet any condition constituting a federal, state or local emergency or state of war, and shall provide for the organization, powers, duties and services of that emergency organization. 
C.  An approved emergency plan shall be periodically updated and exercised.  
2.52.080 - Violations. 
Any person who refuses to willfully neglect to obey any lawful order or regulation promulgated or issued as provided in this Chapter, violates Section 8655 of the Government Code which penalizes such conduct by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or imprisonment not to exceed six months or by both such fine and imprisonment.  
TITLE 3 - TAXES  
Chapter 3.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
3.04.010 - Transfer of Duties. 
The offices of City Assessor and City Tax Collector are abolished as of July 20, 1964 and their duties are transferred to the Assessor and Property Tax Collector of the County of San Diego. 
(Ord. No. 401)  
3.04.020 - Director of Finance. 
The Director of Finance is authorized to assess and collect the taxes imposed by the provisions of this Code.  
3.04.030 - Appeal. 
Final determinations by the Director of Finance are appealable to the City Council in accordance with the provisions of this Code.  
3.04.040 - Enforcement. 
The Director of Finance is responsible for the enforcement of the tax provisions of this Code.  
3.04.050 - Debt to City. 
The amount of any tax or penalty imposed by this Title shall be deemed a debt to the City recoverable in an action brought in any court of competent jurisdiction.  
3.04.060 - Penalty. 
Any person failing to pay a tax imposed by the provisions of this Code shall, in addition to the tax, be liable for the payment of a penalty equal to four times the amount of tax due or the sum of $500.00, whichever is greater, in addition to any other penalty provided by law.  
3.04.070 - Conviction No Bar to Payment. 
The conviction of any person for the violation of any provision of this Code imposing a tax shall not excuse or exempt such person from payment of such tax or any penalty due thereon.  
3.04.080 - Determination of Tax by Director of Finance. 
If any person shall fail or refuse to collect a tax or to make, within the time provided in this Title, any report and remittance of such tax or any portion thereof required by this Title, the Director of Finance shall proceed to obtain facts and information on which to base an estimate of the tax due. As soon as the Director of Finance procures such facts and information, the Director shall proceed to determine and assess against such person the tax, interest, and penalties provided for by this Title. 
The Director of Finance shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the person so assessed at the last known address. Such person may, within ten days after the serving or mailing of such notice, make application in writing to the Director of Finance for a hearing on the amount assessed. If application by the person for a hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the tax, interest, and penalties, if any, determined by the Director of Finance, shall become final and conclusive and immediately due and payable. If such application is made, the Director of Finance shall give not less than five days written notice in the manner prescribed herein to the person to show cause at a time and place fixed in such notice why such amount specified therein should not be fixed for such tax, interest, and penalties. At such hearing, the person may appear and offer evidence why such specified tax, interest, and penalties should not be so fixed. After such hearing, the Director of Finance shall determine the tax, interest, and penalties. The amount determined to be due shall be payable after 15 days, unless an appeal is taken.  
3.04.090 - Duty to Provide Information. 
It shall be unlawful for any person required to pay a tax in accordance with the provisions of this Code to fail or refuse to furnish information required by the provisions of this Title, or to falsely or fraudulently provide information required by this Code.  
Chapter 3.08 - ADMISSIONS TAX 
 
3.08.010 - Taxable Event. 
A.  Unless otherwise provided in this Chapter, when a charge or admission price for a single admission is paid for the right or privilege of being admitted to any event anywhere in the City, there is levied and assessed, and there shall be collected, a tax of ten percent of the price of admission for each such admission, with a minimum tax due on each such admission of 15 cents. 
B.  1.  When a charge or admission price for a single admission is paid for the right or privilege of being admitted to any horse racing event, there is levied and assessed, and there shall be collected, a tax of 40 cents for each such admission; except that, for each senior citizen special rate admission of $1.00 or less, there is levied and assessed and there shall be collected, a tax of 15 cents for each such admission and, for senior citizen's special rate admissions or amounts over $1.00, the tax shall amount to 15 percent of the actual charge. 
2.  The tax rate herein above established on admission to a horse race event shall be reviewed annually by the City Council at the close of the second quarter of the City's fiscal year. 
(Ord. No. 403; Ord. No. 435; Ord. No. 453; Ord. No. 507; Ord. No. 511)  
3.08.020 - Distribution in Lieu of Tax. 
A.  For those entities which conduct horse racing meetings and which distribute funds to the City in accordance with the provisions of the Business and Professions Code, the City elects to receive those funds in lieu of the Admissions Tax imposed by this Chapter and will suspend the imposition of other taxes and fees in accordance with the requirements of the Business and Professions Code. 
B.  For those entities which conduct satellite horse racing meetings and which distribute funds to the City in accordance with the provisions of the Business and Professions Code, the City elects to receive those funds in lieu of the Admissions Tax imposed by this Chapter and will suspend the imposition of other taxes and fees in accordance with the requirements of the Business and Professions Code. 
(Ord. No. 511)  
3.08.030 - Exemptions. 
A.  The City Council may at any time, by the affirmative vote of at least three of its members entered upon the City Council minutes, waive any or all of the requirements of this Chapter with respect to any business or event which is conducted or sponsored within the City by any institution, organization, association or corporation which is organized and carried on wholly for the benefit of religious, charitable, educational, recreational or scientific purposes and from which no individual person, other than bona fide employees and help necessarily contracted for, receives or is eligible to receive any gain, remuneration or profit. 
B.  The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to admissions to a county fair regularly conducted by a district agriculture association organized pursuant to Division 1, Chapter 3, Article 2, of the Agricultural Code of the State, nor to events conducted as part of such county fair. 
(Ord. No. 24, ¶ 13, 16)  
3.08.040 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this Section: 
A.  Admission. Every act of entry by a person or patron to any portion of any premises. 
B.  Attend. Such term includes the terms "see", "view", "witness", "enjoy", "watch", "be present at" and "participate in". 
C.  Charge or Admission Price. Such term includes, in addition to or in lieu of money, any valuable consideration paid, given or received in exchange for the right or privilege of admittance to any premises or attending any event, and any additional consideration paid, given or received after admission to any premises in exchange for the right or privilege of admission to any portion of such premises or any accommodations or facilities therein located or provided. 
D.  Conduct. To operate, carry on, maintain, keep, render, perform, hold, give, put on, and exhibit. 
E.  Event. Any meeting, performance, race, dance, demonstration, entertainment, exhibition, transaction, show, feature and attraction for which a separate or additional charge or admission price is paid for the right or privilege of attending the same. 
F.  Operator. Any person owning, operating, conducting, directing, managing or controlling, alone or in conjunction with others, in whole or in part, as principal, agent, officer, employee or independent contractor, any business, admission to any event or portion of which is subject to the tax imposed by this Chapter.  
3.08.050 - Season Tickets and Passes. 
A.  In the case of admission by season ticket or subscription, the tax levied by this Chapter shall be levied, assessed, collected and paid based on the price so charged for the admission of a person to one event and shall be multiplied by the number of events to which the holder or owner of such season ticket or subscription is entitled to attend. The tax shall be paid at the time of payment for such season ticket or subscription by the purchaser thereof. In the case of admission by passes, the tax on such pass shall be paid at the time of admission to each event. No tax shall be levied upon active participants in racing.  
3.08.060 - Time of Accounting to City. 
If an event subject to the tax imposed by this Chapter is scheduled by the operator to be held for a period of less than seven days, the operator shall account to the City in the manner specified in the following section within 24 hours after the completion of each such single event. If any such event is scheduled by the operator to be held for a period of more than seven days but less than 30 days, the operator shall account to the City in like manner on each Monday for all preceding events not previously accounted for. If any such event is scheduled by the operator to be held for a period of more than 30 days, the operator shall account to the City in like manner on the 20th day of each calendar month for all events thus conducted by him from the first to the 15th calendar days of such month, and on the fifth day of each calendar month for all events thus conducted by him from the 16th calendar day to the last calendar day of the preceding calendar month. Nothing in this Section shall preclude an operator from accounting more frequently or upon a date earlier than herein specified. 
(Ord. No. 24, ¶ 6)  
3.08.070 - Manner of Accounting to City. 
A.  Generally. At the times required by the preceding section, the operator shall file with the City Treasurer a written statement setting forth the number of single admissions to the premises for which a charge or admission price was paid, the number of season passes and the price or admission charge paid for such season passes to the premises, the total number of leased seats at the premises or leases of any portion of the premises purchased or paid for, the total number of events to which such season passes entitled the owner or holder thereof to admission, the total number of events at which such leased seats entitle the purchaser or holder thereof to the use of accommodations or any portion of the premises and a statement of the total taxes due under the terms of this Chapter upon each of the foregoing, the period of time covered by the accounting, and such other information as may be required by the City Treasurer for a proper understanding of such statement, and a complete audit of the taxes due thereunder. Such statement shall be dated, subscribed by the individual making the statement, state the capacity in which the signer makes the same, and the signer shall certify, under the penalty of perjury, that the statements made therein are, to the best of his information, knowledge and belief, true and correct. Such statement shall be accompanied by payment, in legal tender or in other form approved by the City Treasurer, of the total amount of taxes shown in such statement to be due and payable under the terms of this Chapter for the period thus accounted for, plus all penalties that may be due thereon under the terms hereof. All taxes and penalties thus received shall be deposited by the City Treasurer in the general fund, unless the City Council by resolution directs otherwise. 
B.  Alternative Procedure. Upon the filing by an operator with the City Council of a written application setting forth good cause for a modification of the time and manner of accounting for and payment of taxes due under this Chapter, the City Council may, by the approval of at least three of its members entered upon the City Council minutes, authorize such operator to account for and to pay over to the City all taxes due, payable or paid under the provisions of this Chapter at a time or times and in a manner other than those specified in this and the preceding section. 
(Ord. No. 24, ¶ 7)  
3.08.080 - Penalty for Late Payment. 
The failure of an operator to pay to the City the entire amount of taxes due under the provisions of this Chapter at the time and in the manner herein prescribed shall automatically cause the amount of such taxes then unpaid forthwith to become and be delinquent, and a penalty of five percent of the taxes so delinquent shall be added and paid by the operator to the City at the time of account or payment. 
(Ord. No. 24, ¶ 8)  
3.08.090 - Bond Required. 
Every operator shall, before engaging in any business, admission to any premises, portion or event of which is subject to the tax imposed by this Chapter, post with the Director of Finance a cash bond equal to the amount of the maximum tax payable by patrons thereof, multiplied by the total seating capacity of the premises, multiplied by the number of events scheduled thereat; provided, that in computing the cash bond, no more than the total number of events within any one accounting period shall be used; provided further, that no such bond shall be required in the event the operator owns the premises upon which such business is conducted, or holds a valid current license from the State to conduct horse racing or harness racing. The Director of Finance shall have the right at any reasonable time and place to examine all books, records, and reports of the operator relative to the matters required by this Chapter to be set forth in each account. If the operator fails to account at the time and in the manner required by this Chapter, or if he fails to permit inspection of his records when demand for such inspection is made by the Director of Finance, the City Council may, upon notification of any such facts, declare such operator's cash deposit forfeited. Such forfeiture shall not relieve the operator from liability for any such taxes due upon admissions to any event conducted by him. Upon the expiration of the period for which any event shall have been scheduled by the operator, and upon certification by the Director of Finance that all accounts required of an operator under this Chapter have been made by the operator and audited by the Director of Finance, and that all taxes and penalties due thereunder have been paid over to the City, the City Council shall cause all cash bonds theretofore deposited by the operator with the City under this Chapter and not previously declared forfeited as herein before provided to be refunded to the operator by warrant drawn on the Director of Finance and executed in the form and manner as provided for other City warrants. 
(Ord. No. 24, ¶ 9)  
3.08.100 - Authorized Operator. 
Any act required by this Chapter to be performed by an operator shall be performed by each person included in the definition of operator; provided, that performance by any one such person shall be deemed performance by all such persons. 
(Ord. No. 24, ¶ 10)  
Chapter 3.12 - TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX 
 
3.12.010 - Taxable Event. 
A.  For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient shall pay a tax in an amount up to 13 percent of the rent charged by the operator. The exact rate shall be as set by resolution of the City Council. The transient satisfies this tax obligation by paying the tax to the operator. 
B.  The tax is payable at the time that rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with each installment. The balance of the tax shall be due upon the transient's ceasing occupancy in the hotel. 
C.  If sufficient funds are not paid to the operator by the transient to pay the tax in full, the Tax Administrator may commence an action against the transient to recover the amount of the tax. 
(Ord. No. 402; Ord. No. 426; Ord. No. 432; Ord. No. 464; Ord. No. 576; Ord. No. 751; Ord. No. 823)  
3.12.020 - Exemptions. 
No tax under this Chapter shall be imposed upon: 
A.  Any person as to whom, or any occupancy as to which, it is beyond the power of the City to impose the tax herein provided. 
B.  Any federal or State of California officer or employee when on official business. 
C.  Any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by reason of express provision of federal law or international treaty. 
No exemption shall be granted except upon a claim therefor made at the time rent is collected and under penalty of perjury upon a form prescribed by the tax administrator. 
(Ord. No. 81, § 4)  
3.12.030 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this Section: 
Hotel. Any structure or any portion of any structure which has three or more units occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes, including any hotel, inn, tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodging house, rooming house, apartment house, dormitory, public or private club, mobile home or house trailer at a fixed location or other similar structure or portion thereof. 
Occupancy The use or possession or the right to the use or possession of any room or portion thereof in any hotel for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes. 
Operator. The person who is proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee or any other capacity. Where the operator performs his functions through a managing agent or any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this Chapter and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his principal. Compliance with the provisions of this Chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both. 
Rent. The consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy of space in a hotel valued in money, whether to be received in money, goods, labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property and services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
Transient. Any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other agreement for a period of 30 consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any such person so occupying space in a hotel shall be deemed to be a transient until the period of 30 days has expired unless there is an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy; provided, that any person who actually occupies the same premises for a period of 31 or more consecutive days shall be deemed exempt from the tax imposed by this Chapter on that specific occupancy. In determining whether a person is a transient, uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior and subsequent to the effective date of this Chapter may be considered. 
(Ord. No. 81, § 2)  
3.12.040 - The Collection of Tax. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for an operator to fail to collect from the transient the tax imposed by this Chapter at the same time as the rent is collected from the transient. 
B.  The operator shall deliver to the transient a receipt for payment which states the amount of the tax separately from the amount of the rent charged. 
C.  No operator shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that the tax will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part will be refunded except in a manner provided in this Chapter.  
3.12.050 - Registration. 
Within 30 days after commencing business, each operator of any hotel renting occupancy to transients shall register such hotel with the Director of Finance and obtain from the Director a "Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate" which certificate shall be at all times posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. Such certificate shall, among other things, state the following: 
A.  The name of the operator. 
B.  The address of the hotel. 
C.  The date upon which the certificate is issued. 
D.  "This Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the Transient Occupancy Tax Ordinance by registering with the Tax Administrator for the purpose of collecting from transients the Transient Occupancy Tax and remitting said tax to the Director of Finance. This certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in any unlawful manner, nor to operate a hotel without strictly complying with all local applicable laws, including but not limited to those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or office of this City. This certificate does not constitute a permit." 
(Ord. No. 81, § 6)  
3.12.060 - Obligation of Operator. 
A.  If the operator receives any consideration for allowing the transient to occupy the hotel, the value of such consideration shall be first applied by the operator to satisfy the tax owed. It shall be unlawful for the operator to fail to hold the tax collected by the operator in trust for the benefit of the City. It shall be unlawful for the operator to fail to remit the collected tax to the City in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. 
B.  On or before the last day of each month, the operator shall file a return with the Tax Administrator on a form approved by the City, setting forth for the previous month: 
1.  The total rents charged; 
2.  The total rents received; 
3.  The amount of tax funds held by the operator; 
4.  An explanation if the amount of Item 3 is less than ten percent of the amount of Item 1. 
C.  The tax funds collected for the previous month shall be remitted together with the return for that month. 
D.  The operator shall comply with shorter reporting and payment periods if imposed by the Tax Administrator in order to facilitate the collection of this tax. 
E.  If the operator ceases business, it shall be unlawful for the operator to fail to file immediately with the City the return and tax funds for the previous month and the return and tax funds for the period of the current month in which the operator ceased business.  
3.12.070 - Penalties and Interest. 
A.  Original Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this Chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty of ten percent of the amount of tax, in addition to the amount of the tax. 
B.  Continued Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any delinquent remittance on or before a period of 30 days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty of ten percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax and the ten percent first imposed. 
C.  Fraud. If the Director of Finance determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this Chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of 25 percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto, in addition to the penalties stated in Subsections A. and B. of this Section. 
D.  Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this Chapter shall pay interest at the rate of one-half of one percent per month or fraction thereof on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid. 
E.  Penalties Merged with Tax. Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this Section shall become a part of the tax herein required to be paid. 
(Ord. No. 81, § 8)  
3.12.080 - Records and Inspection. 
It shall be the duty of every operator liable for the collection and payment to the City of any tax imposed by this Chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of three years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he may have been liable for the collection of and payment to the City, which records the Director of Finance shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. 
(Ord. No. 81, § 11)  
3.12.090 - Refunds. 
A.  Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the City under this Chapter, it may be refunded as provided in Subsections B. and C. of this Section; provided, that a claim in writing therefor, stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, shall be filed as a claim against the City as set forth in Chapter 1.18 of this Code. 
B.  An operator may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established in a manner prescribed by the Director of Finance that the person from whom the tax has been collected was not a transient; provided, that neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either been refunded to the transient or credited to rent subsequently payable by the transient to the operator. 
C.  A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid or paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the City by filing a claim in the manner provided in Subsection A of this Section, but only when the tax was paid by the transient directly to the tax administrator, or when the transient having paid the tax to the operator, establishes to the satisfaction of the Director of Finance that the transient has been unable to obtain a refund from the operator who collected the tax. 
D.  No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this Section unless the claimant establishes his right thereto by written records showing entitlement thereto. 
(Ord. No. 81, § 12; Ord. No. 734)  
Chapter 3.16 - CONSTRUCTION TAX 
 
3.16.010 - Taxable Event. 
Every person who proposes construction within the City shall pay a tax at the rate of 35 cents per square foot of floor area of the proposed construction. 
(Ord. No. 406)  
3.16.020 - Exemption. 
All properties that were zoned "interim" or "conservation study" and have subsequently been released from those categories and have been granted all of the required discretionary permits from the City for a specific project prior to January 1, 1975 are exempt from the provisions of this Chapter.  
3.16.030 - Definitions. 
As used in this Chapter, the term floor area shall be defined as that term is defined by this Code for purposes of zoning.  
3.16.040 - Payment of Tax. 
The tax imposed by this Chapter shall be due and payable upon final plan check by the City and before the release of such plans.  
Chapter 3.20 - DOCUMENTARY TRANSFER TAX 
 
3.20.010 - Taxable Event. 
A.  In accordance with the provisions of the Documentary Transfer Tax Act, Revenue and Taxation Code Section 11901 et seq., there is hereby imposed a documentary transfer tax on each deed, instrument or writing by which any lands, tenements, or other realty sold within the City shall be granted, assigned, transferred, or otherwise conveyed to or vested in the purchaser or purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his or their direction, when the consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon at the time of sale) exceeds $100.00. 
B.  The tax shall be imposed at the rate of 27½ cents for each $500.00 or fractional part thereof of the consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed. 
C.  The tax shall be paid by any person who makes, signs or issues any document or instrument subject to the tax or for whose use or benefit the same is made, signed or issued. 
(Ord. No. 404)  
3.20.020 - Exemptions. 
Exemptions from this tax are those set forth in Division 2, Part 6.7, Chapter 3 of the Revenue and Taxation Code commencing at Section 11921.  
3.20.030 - Administration. 
This Chapter shall be administered in accordance with the provisions of Division 2, Part 6.7, Chapter 4 of the Revenue and Taxation Code commencing with Section 11931.  
3.20.040 - Claims for Refund. 
Claims for refund of taxes imposed pursuant to this Chapter shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 1.18 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 734)  
Chapter 3.24 - SALES AND USE TAX 
 
3.24.010 - Taxable Event—Retail Sale. 
A.  For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, every retailer in the City shall pay a sales tax at the rate of one percent of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold by that person at retail within the City. 
B.  For the purposes of this Chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. 
(Ord. No. 192, § 7; Ord. No. 405)  
3.24.015 - Same—Use. 
A.  A tax at the rate of one percent of the purchase price is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased from a retailer for storage, use or consumption in the City. 
B.  The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to State sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made.  
3.24.020 - Adoption of State Law. 
A.  The provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code commencing with Section 6001, insofar as they relate to sales and use taxes, are hereby adopted by this reference and made a part hereof as though fully set forth herein; except insofar as those provisions are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. 
B.  In adopting the provisions of the Revenue and Taxation Code, the City of Del Mar, as the taxing agency, shall be substituted for that of the State except in the phrase "retailer engaged in business in this state" in Section 6203; and further, except in those circumstances in which the result would be obtained contrary to the intent of the Revenue and Taxation Code and this Chapter. 
C.  An additional sellers permit shall not be required if a permit has been or is issued to the seller under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. 
D.  All subsequent amendments to the Revenue and Taxation Code adopted by reference in this Chapter shall automatically become part of this Chapter so long as those amendments relate to sales and use tax and are not inconsistent with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code.  
3.24.030 - Contract with Board of Equalization. 
This Chapter is operative as of January 1, 1974. Prior thereto, the City shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this Chapter which shall continue in effect so long as the County of San Diego has an operative sales and use tax ordinance enacted pursuant to Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code.  
3.24.040 - Exclusions and Exemptions. 
A.  The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which has been subject to sales tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county or city in California, shall be exempt from the tax due under this Chapter. 
B.  The amount subject to tax under this Chapter shall not include the amount of any sales tax or use tax imposed by the State of California upon a retailer or consumer. 
C.  There is exempt from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of waterborne vessels to be used or consumed principally outside the City in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property in such vessels for commercial purposes. 
D.  The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of waterborne vessels and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property in such vessels for commercial purposes is exempted from the use tax. 
E.  There is exempt from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of California, the United States or any foreign government. 
F.  In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, the storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of or property for hire or compensation under a Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity issued pursuant to the laws of California, the United States or any foreign government is exempt from the use tax.  
Chapter 3.28 - SPECIAL GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND 
 
3.28.010 - Creation of Fund. 
There is hereby created a special fund to be known as the "Special Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund" pursuant to the provisions of Article 5, Chapter 1, Division 1 of the Street and Highway Code, together with all amendments thereto. 
(Ord. No. 418)  
3.28.020 - Operation. 
A.  All money received by the City from the State under the provisions of the Street and Highway Code shall be paid into the Special Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund. 
B.  The Special Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund shall be used only in accordance with the provisions of Article 5, Chapter 1, Division 1 of the Street and Highway Code.  
Chapter 3.32 - TRANSACTIONS AND USE TAX 
 
3.32.010 - Title. 
This Chapter shall be known as the City of Del Mar Transactions and Use Tax Ordinance. The City of Del Mar hereinafter shall be called "City." This Chapter shall be applicable in the incorporated territory of the City. 
(Ord. No. 916 , § 1, 8-1-2016)  
3.32.020 - Operative Date. 
Operative Date means the first day of the first calendar quarter commencing more than 110 days after the adoption of this Chapter, the date of such adoption being as set forth below. 
(Ord. No. 916 , § 1, 8-1-2016)  
3.32.030 - Purpose. 
This Chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes: 
A.  To impose a retail transactions and use tax in accordance with the provisions of Part 1.6 (commencing with Section 7251) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and Section 7285.9 of Part 1.7 of Division 2 which authorizes the City to adopt this tax ordinance which shall be operative if a majority of the electors voting on the measure vote to approve the imposition of the tax at an election called for that purpose. 
B.  To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the State of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. 
C.  To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that imposes a tax and provides a measure therefore that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California State Sales and Use Taxes. 
D.  To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that can be administered in a manner that will be, to the greatest degree possible, consistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting the transactions and use taxes, and at the same time, minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 916 , § 1, 8-1-2016)  
3.32.040 - Contract With State. 
Prior to the operative date, the City shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this transactions and use tax ordinance; provided, that if the City shall not have contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract. 
(Ord. No. 916 , § 1, 8-1-2016)  
3.32.050 - Transactions Tax Rate. 
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is hereby imposed upon all retailers in the incorporated territory of the City at the rate of one percent of the gross receipts of any retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in said territory on and after the operative date of this Chapter. The tax imposed hereby shall be in addition to the tax imposed pursuant to Chapter 3.24 of the Del Mar Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 916 , § 1, 8-1-2016)  
3.32.060 - Place of Sale. 
For the purposes of this Chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the State or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. 
(Ord. No. 916 , § 1, 8-1-2016)  
3.32.070 - Use Tax Rate. 
An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the City of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date of this Chapter for storage, use or other consumption in said territory at the rate of one percent of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. The tax imposed hereby shall be in addition to the tax imposed pursuant to Chapter 3.24 of the Del Mar Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 916 , § 1, 8-1-2016)  
3.32.080 - Adoption of Provisions of State Law. 
Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are hereby adopted and made a part of this Chapter as though fully set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 916 , § 1, 8-1-2016)  
3.32.090 - Limitations on Adoption of State Law and Collection of Use Taxes. 
In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code: 
A.  Wherever the State of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this City shall be substituted therefor. However, the substitution shall not be made when: 
1.  The word "State" is used as a part of the title of the State Controller, State Treasurer, State Board of Equalization, State Treasury, or the Constitution of the State of California; 
2.  The result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against this City or any agency, officer, or employee thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this Chapter. 
3.  In those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the State of California, where the result of the substitution would be to: 
a.  Provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the State under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or; 
b.  Impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the said provision of that code. 
4.  In Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. 
B.  The word "City" shall be substituted for the word "State" in the phrase "retailer engaged in business in this State" in Section 6203 and in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. 
(Ord. No. 916 , § 1, 8-1-2016)  
3.32.100 - Permit Not Required. 
If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional transactor's permit shall not be required by this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 916 , § 1, 8-1-2016)  
3.32.110 - Exemptions and Exclusions. 
A.  There shall be excluded from the measure of the transactions tax and the use tax the amount of any sales tax or use tax imposed by the State of California or by any city, city and county, or county pursuant to the Bradley-Burns Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law or the amount of any state-administered transactions or use tax. 
B.  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of transactions tax the gross receipts from: 
1.  Sales of tangible personal property, other than fuel or petroleum products, to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the county in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this State, the United States, or any foreign government. 
2.  Sales of property to be used outside the City which is shipped to a point outside the City, pursuant to the contract of sale, by delivery to such point by the retailer or his agent, or by delivery by the retailer to a carrier for shipment to a consignee at such point. For the purposes of this paragraph, delivery to a point outside the City shall be satisfied. 
a.  With respect to vehicles (other than commercial vehicles) subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, and undocumented vessels registered under Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code by registration to an out-of-City address and by a declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, stating that such address is, in fact, his or her principal place of residence; and 
b.  With respect to commercial vehicles, by registration to a place of business out-of-City and declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, that the vehicle will be operated from that address. 
3.  The sale of tangible personal property if the seller is obligated to furnish the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of this Chapter. 
4.  A lease of tangible personal property which is a continuing sale of such property, for any period of time for which the lessor is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by the lease prior to the operative date of this Chapter. 
5.  For the purposes of Subsections 3. and 4. of this Subsection B., the sale or lease of tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised. 
C.  There are exempted from the use tax imposed by this Chapter, the storage, use or other consumption in this City of tangible personal property: 
1.  The gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to a transactions tax under any State-administered transactions and use tax ordinance. 
2.  Other than fuel or petroleum products purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this State, the United States, or any foreign government. This exemption is in addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State of California. 
3.  If the purchaser is obligated to purchase the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of this Chapter. 
4.  If the possession of, or the exercise of any right or power over, the tangible personal property arises under a lease which is a continuing purchase of such property for any period of time for which the lessee is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by a lease prior to the operative date of this Chapter. 
5.  For the purposes of Subsections 3. and 4. of this Subsection C., storage, use, or other consumption, or possession of, or exercise of any right or power over, tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised. 
6.  Except as provided in Subsection C.7., a retailer engaged in business in the City shall not be required to collect use tax from the purchaser of tangible personal property, unless the retailer ships or delivers the property into the City or participates within the City in making the sale of the property, including, but not limited to, soliciting or receiving the order, either directly or indirectly, at a place of business of the retailer in the City or through any representative, agent, canvasser, solicitor, subsidiary, or person in the City under the authority of the retailer. 
7.  "A retailer engaged in business in the City" shall also include any retailer of any of the following: vehicles subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, or undocumented vessels registered under Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code. That retailer shall be required to collect use tax from any purchaser who registers or licenses the vehicle, vessel, or aircraft at an address in the City. 
D.  Any person subject to use tax under this Chapter may credit against that tax any transactions tax or reimbursement for transactions tax paid to a district imposing, or retailer liable for a transactions tax pursuant to Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code with respect to the sale to the person of the property the storage, use or other consumption of which is subject to the use tax. 
(Ord. No. 916 , § 1, 8-1-2016)  
3.32.120 - Amendments. 
All amendments subsequent to the effective date of this Chapter to Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code relating to sales and use taxes and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, and all amendments to Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, shall automatically become a part of this Chapter, provided however, that no such amendment shall operate so as to affect the rate of tax imposed by this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 916 , § 1, 8-1-2016)  
3.32.130 - Citizens Oversight Committee. 
Prior to the operative date, the City Council shall: 
A.  Adopt a resolution establishing the composition of a committee of no more than five residents of the City to review and annually report on the revenue and expenditure of the funds from the tax adopted by this Chapter; 
B.  Define the scope of the committee's responsibilities; and 
C.  Appoint at least a quorum of the members of the committee. 
City employees, consultants, or vendors are expressly precluded from serving as members of the committee. The committee's reports shall be presented to the Council and made available to the public. 
(Ord. No. 916 , § 1, 8-1-2016)  
3.32.140 - Enjoining Collection Forbidden. 
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the State or the City, or against any officer of the State or the City, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this Chapter, or Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. 
(Ord. No. 916 , § 1, 8-1-2016)  
TITLE 4 - ANIMALS  
Chapter 4.04 - ANIMAL REGULATIONS 
 
4.04.010 - Purpose. 
Any person who keeps, possesses or maintains an animal within the City shall comply with the requirements of this Chapter, and the failure to so comply shall be unlawful. 
(Ord. No. 358)  
4.04.020 - Adoption of Code by Reference. 
There is hereby adopted by reference, by the City of Del Mar, for the purpose of prescribing rules and regulations for the protection of the public health and safety, the following portions of the San Diego County Code together with such secondary references as are included in those portions, effective as of the date set forth in Section 4.04.030 below. The provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the City of Del Mar to include without limitation, the fees, regulatory provisions and definitions, but excluding the procedural provisions beyond those specified for processing applications, conducting investigations, issuing permits, and enforcing regulatory provisions: 
A.  Title 6, Division 2, Chapter 1, regulating livestock; 
B.  Title 6, Division 2, Chapter 6, relating to rabies, animal control, and regulations; 
C.  Title 6, Division 2, Chapter 8, relating to the disposal of dead animals; 
D.  Title 6, Division 2, Chapter 7, relating to animals in vehicles.  
4.04.030 - Effective Date. 
The effective date of this Chapter is January 6, 1997. 
(Ord. No. 585; Ord. No. 679)  
4.04.040 - Issuing Authority. 
The San Diego County Department of Animal Control together with the County Veterinarian is hereby designated as the veterinarian for the City of Del Mar with authority to enforce and observe within the City of Del Mar the following: 
A.  All orders, quarantine regulations, statutes and rules and regulations issued by the State of California relating to animal control. 
B.  Those portions of the San Diego Code pertaining to animal control as are set forth in this Chapter.  
4.04.050 - Regulations. 
A.  Each applicant for a license or permit required by this Chapter shall apply to the County of San Diego through the City of Del Mar. 
B.  The County of San Diego shall collect and retain for the benefit of the County of San Diego the fees and payments imposed by this Chapter.  
Chapter 4.08 - ANIMALS ON BEACHES AND IN PARKS 
 
4.08.010 - Horses. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to leave or hitch any horse in a public park or public beach except in areas designated by the City for that purpose. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or permit any horse upon the public beach south of a point 2,079 feet (first house at rivermouth) south of the intersection of the northerly boundary of the City with the mean high tide line of the Pacific Ocean. 
(Ord. No. 468; Ord. No. 883)  
4.08.020 - Dogs and Animals. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to bring, allow or permit any dog upon any of the beaches or in any of the waters within the City unless such dog is restrained by a leash not in excess of six feet except as stated in Subsection B. Notwithstanding the exceptions in Subsection B., every owner of a dog shall restrain his dog from running at large on any of the beaches or waters in the City. 
B.  Provided such dogs are under the immediate voice command and control of their owners or keeper, this Subsection shall not prohibit off leash dogs in the following instances: 
1.  Dogs may be off leash on the beaches or waters located northerly of a line being an extension of 29th Street from the day after Labor Day through June 15th, and from dawn to 8:00 a.m. year-round. 
2.  Dogs may be off leash on the beaches or waters between an east-west line which is the westerly prolongation of the center line of 25th Street and an east-west line which is the westerly prolongation of the center line of 29th Street from dawn to 8:00 a.m. from the day after Labor Day through June 15th. 
C.  It shall be unlawful for any person to bring, allow or permit any dog upon the beach or in any adjacent waters between an east-west line perpendicular to the northern end of the Powerhouse Park property and an east-west line which is the westerly prolongation of the center line of 29th Street during the period of June 15th through Labor Day, except as stated in Subsection B. Every owner of a dog shall prevent his dog from being in the area prohibited by this Subsection, whether on a leash or running at large or otherwise, except as stated in Subsection B. 
D.  It shall be unlawful for any person to bring, allow or permit any animal upon the Tot Lot playground or southern turf (grass) portion of Powerhouse Park. Animals are permitted on all walkways and sidewalks but must be restrained by a leash not in excess of six feet and must be restrained so that the animal does not enter the prohibited areas. The prohibited area shall be posted with signage indicating the animal free zone(s). 
1.  For the purpose of this Subsection, the Tot Lot playground also includes the landscape surrounding the play equipment including but not limited to: play sand or dirt, sand boxes, grass, brush, plants, trees, benches, tables, fences, ropes barriers, and concrete hardscape. 
Any person that allows an animal to excessively bark, harass, create a nuisance, or injure a person within the areas covered in this Section, even if the animal is restrained by a leash, shall be in violation of this Section. 
(Ord. No. 684; Ord. No. 787; Ord. No. 883; Ord. No. 940 , § 1, 9-4-2018)  
4.08.030 - Failure to Exchange Information After Animal Incident. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having custody or control of an animal to flee the scene without immediately providing personal identification to the victim if they know, or had reason to know, that the animal bit another person or animal, injured another person or animal, or has caused property damage to another's property. 
B.  For the purpose of this Subsection, an animal bite is defined when the skin of a person or animal is broken, punctured, scratched, or bruised. Animal incidents include contact between an animal, including animals on a leash, and another animal and/or person when either party immediately brings to attention that the bite, injury, or property damage has occurred. 
C.  It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having custody or control of an animal involved in an incident to refuse to provide the following information to the victim, lifeguards, City staff, animal control, or law enforcement who are on-scene of an animal incident: 
1.  Identification indicating full name and date of birth. 
2.  Mailing address. 
3.  Phone number and email. 
4.  Name and license number of animal. 
5.  Animal vaccine information. 
D.  A charge under this Chapter may be prosecuted either as a misdemeanor or an infraction. 
(Ord. No. 940 , § 2, 9-4-2018)  
4.08.040 - Enforcement; Penalty. 
A.  Each violation of this of this Chapter constitutes a separate offense. 
B.  A charge under this Chapter may be prosecuted either as a misdemeanor or an infraction. 
C.  Any person, firm or corporation convicted of a misdemeanor for violating this Chapter may be punished by imprisonment in the County Jail for a period of time not exceeding six months or by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or both. 
(Ord. No. 940 , § 3, 9-4-2018)  
Chapter 4.09 - RETAIL SALE OF DOGS, CATS AND RABBITS 
 
4.09.010 - Purpose. 
A.  It is the purpose and intent of the City Council to promote animal welfare and encourage best practices in the breeding and purchasing of dogs, cats and rabbits if offered for retail sale in the City. 
(Ord. No. 929 , § 1(Exh. A), 8-7-2017)  
4.09.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this Chapter only, the following words and terms shall be deemed to mean and be construed as follows: 
A.  Certificate of Source shall mean any document from the source city or county animal shelter or animal control agency, humane society, or non-profit rescue organization declaring the source of the dog, cat or rabbit on the premises of the pet shop, retail business, or other commercial establishment. 
B.  Commercial Establishment shall mean any business, including a sole proprietorship engaged in retail or wholesale commerce related to dogs, cats or rabbits, including grooming parlors, canine day care, and pet boarding facilities. 
C.  Non-Profit Rescue Organization shall mean any California non-profit corporation that is exempt from taxation under Internal Revenue Code Section 501(c)(3), whose mission and practice is, in whole or in significant part, the rescue and placement of dogs, cats or rabbits; or any non-profit organization that is not exempt from taxation under Internal Revenue Code Section 501(c)(3), but is currently an active rescue partner with City of Del Mar or County of San Diego shelter or humane society, whose mission is, in whole or in significant part, the rescue and placement of dogs, cats or rabbits. 
(Ord. No. 929 , § 1(Exh. A), 8-7-2017)  
4.09.030 - Prohibition of the Sale of Dogs, Cats and Rabbits. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to display, offer for sale, deliver, barter, auction, give away, transfer, or sell any live dog, cat or rabbit in any pet shop, retail business, or other commercial establishment located in the City, unless the dog, cat or rabbit was obtained from a city or county animal shelter or animal control agency, a humane society, or a non-profit rescue organization. All pet shops, retail businesses, or other commercial establishments selling dogs, cats or rabbits shall maintain a certificate of source for each animal offered for sale and make it available upon request to animal control officers, law enforcement, code enforcement officials, or any other City employee charged with enforcing the provisions of this Section. 
(Ord. No. 929 , § 1(Exh. A), 8-7-2017)  
4.09.040 - Exemptions. 
The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to the following: 
A.  The display, offer for sale, delivery, bartering, auction, giving away, transfer, or sale of dogs, cats or rabbits from the premises on which they were born and reared. 
B.  An animal control enforcement agency or animal shelter. 
C.  A private, charitable, nonprofit humane society or animal rescue organization. 
D.  A publicly operated animal shelter, nonprofit animal humane society, or nonprofit animal rescue organization that operates out of or in connection with a pet store, which has received approval from the City to display, offer for sale, deliver, barter, auction, give away, transfer, or sell dogs, cats or rabbits, on a finding by the City that allowing the exemption is consistent with the intent and purpose of this Chapter. The approval and finding shall be made by the City Manager subject to appeal to the City Council pursuant to the process set forth in Chapter 1.12 of this Code or such other procedure specified by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 929 , § 1(Exh. A), 8-7-2017)  
4.09.050 - Adoption of Shelter and Rescue Animals. 
Nothing in this Section shall prevent the owner, operator, or employees of a pet shop, retail business, or other commercial establishment located in the City from providing space and appropriate care for animals owned by a city or county animal shelter or animal control agency, humane society, or non-profit rescue organization and maintaining those animals at the pet shop, retail business, or other commercial establishment for the purpose of public adoption. 
(Ord. No. 929 , § 1(Exh. A), 8-7-2017)  
4.09.060 - Enforcement. 
Enforcement of this Chapter shall be pursuant to Chapter 1.08 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 929 , § 1(Exh. A), 8-7-2017)  
TITLE 5 - BUSINESS LICENSES  
Chapter 5.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
5.04.010 - Purpose. 
This Title is enacted solely to raise revenue for municipal purposes and is not intended for regulation. Through the requirement of a business license, this Title imposes a tax on the transaction and carrying on of business within the City. 
(Ord. No. 388)  
5.04.020 - Scope. 
Unless otherwise expressly exempted, all manner of commercial activities, to include without limitation professions, trades, professions, trades, occupations and callings, whether or not carried on for profit, are subject to the provisions of this Title.  
5.04.030 - Exemption—Charitable. 
A.  This Title is not applicable to institutions or organizations which transact or carry on activities within the City which are conducted, managed or carried on wholly for the benefit of charitable purposes. 
B.  This Title does not apply to any entertainment, concert, exhibition or lecture whenever the receipts of such activity are to be apportioned for any school, religious, benevolent or charitable purpose. 
C.  This Title is not applicable to any entertainment, dance, concert, exhibition or lecture by any religious, charitable, fraternal, educational, military, state, county or municipal organization or association when the receipts of any such activity are to be appropriated for the purposes and objects for which such associations or organizations were formed and from which no profit is derived, either directly or indirectly by any individual, firm or corporation. 
D.  This Title does not apply to any person who has received an honorable discharge or release from active duty from one of the United States armed services and who is physically unable to obtain a livelihood by manual labor. 
E.  Nothing in this Section shall be deemed to exempt any person, firm, organization or association from complying with the provisions of any other ordinance or regulation of the City.  
5.04.040 - Same—General. 
Nothing in this Title shall be deemed or constructed to apply to any persons conducting or carrying on any business exempt by virtue of the Constitution or applicable statues of the United States or the State of California.  
5.04.050 - Same—Dwelling Unit. 
This Title does not apply to a facility licensed under the California Community Care Facilities Act (Health and Safety Code Section 1500, et seq.) to provide care for six or fewer persons, exclusive of members of the household.  
5.04.060 - Additional Tax or Fee. 
The requirement to pay a license tax in accordance with the provisions of this Title is in addition to other taxes or fees required under the provisions of this Code.  
5.04.070 - License Tax Collector. 
The City Manager shall designate, from time to time, a license tax collector who shall be responsible for the administration of this Title. The license tax collector may make rules and regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this Title as may be necessary to aid in the enforcement and administration of the provisions of this Title.  
5.04.080 - Separate/Multiple Licenses. 
A.  A separate license must be obtained for each branch establishment or location of the business transacted and carried on. 
B.  A separate license must be obtained for each separate type of business carried on at the same location. 
C.  If two or more separate types of businesses are carried on at the same location by the same licensee, the licensee shall pay the tax imposed on each type of business.  
5.04.090 - Issuance of Identity Stickers. 
Whenever a tax imposed under the provisions of this Title is measured by the number of vehicles, devices, machines or other pieces of equipment used, or whenever the license tax is measured by the gross receipts from the operation of such items, the license tax collector shall issue only one license, provided that the license tax collector shall issue for each tax period for which the license tax has been paid one identification sticker, tag, plate or symbol for each item included in the measure of the tax or used in a business where the tax is measured by the gross receipts of such items.  
5.04.100 - Confidential Information. 
No person having access to or charge over the information and records obtained in the course of administering this Title shall disclose or release or allow the examination by any unauthorized third person of such information, in whole or in part, in abstract or particulars. However, such information may be used in administering the provisions of this Title. Further, authorization allowing access to the information may be obtained from the City Manager or in accordance with a lawful order of the Court.  
5.04.110 - Apportionment of Tax. 
A tax imposed by this Title on a person whose business activities are conducted both inside and outside of the City shall be fixed in accordance with the following: 
A.  None of the license taxes provided for in this Title shall be so applied as to occasion an undue burden upon interstate commerce or be violative of the equal protection and due process clauses of the Constitutions of either the United States or the State of California. 
B.  A person who transacts business within the City from a fixed place of business or fixed route shall pay a portion of the license tax specified in this Title, regardless of whether such person also conducts business outside the City. 
C.  A person who transacts business within the City but not from a fixed place of business or fixed route shall pay a portion of the license tax specified in this Title computed on the ratio of the gross receipts attributed to business conducted within the City compared to the business's total gross receipts.  
5.04.120 - Effect of Administrative Errors. 
In no case shall any error made in the administration of this Title prevent or prejudice any collection by the City of the amount actually due nor shall any such error prevent or prejudice the prosecution of any person for the violation of any provisions of this Title.  
5.04.130 - Audit. 
A.  All persons subject to the provisions of this Title shall keep complete records of business activities relating to the basis of the license tax imposed on such persons. These records will be retained for no less than three years from the tax period to which they relate and shall be made available for inspection by the license tax collector upon notice. 
B.  The license tax collector may also demand a copy of that portion of the State tax return that contains information relating to the basis of the license tax imposed.  
Chapter 5.08 - DEFINITIONS 
 
5.08.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this Chapter, unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the words, and phrases used herein shall have the following meanings: 
Ambulance means any vehicle specifically equipped or previously used to transport the sick, wounded, handicapped, injured, or deceased. 
Ambulette means any vehicle equipped or primarily used for transporting handicapped persons for nonemergency purposes. 
Animal Racing means every person engaged in the business of conducting, managing, or carrying on any horse race or horse race meet, or other contests of speed or endurance between horses or other animals. 
Annualization shall mean an estimation, extended for a 12-month period, based on reported gross receipts for a prior period of less than 12 months. 
Applicant means any person who applies for a license or a license renewal under the provisions of this Chapter. 
Automobile Dismantler means any person who has an established place of business and is engaged in the business of buying, selling, or dealing in vehicles of a type required to be registered pursuant to Section 220 of the California Vehicle Code, as the same now exists or as hereafter amended, for the purpose of dismantling the same; who buys or sells the integral parts and component materials thereof, in whole or in part, deals in used motor vehicle parts. This Section does not apply to the occasional and incidental dismantling of vehicles by dealers who have secured dealers' plates from the California Department of Motor Vehicles and whose principle business is buying and selling new and used vehicles, or by owners who desire to dismantle not more than three personal vehicles within any 12-month period. 
Builder-owner means any person employing subcontractors, specialty contractors, general engineering contractors, or workers under his or her supervision and direction by the hour or day, for the purpose of constructing improvements on real property owned by him or her within the City; such person shall be charged herein the same as a contractor unless his or her only building activity is constructing on his or her property a single-family dwelling unit or addition thereto which will be used in whole or in part for the purpose of his or her own occupancy for a period of not less than one year. Proof of the sale or offering for sale of any such structure by the builder-owner within one year after completion of same is presumptive evidence that such structure was undertaken for purpose of sale. Provided, however, that any person holding a State contractor's license pursuant to Sections 7056, 7057, and 7058 et seq. of the California Business and Professions Code, as the same now exists or as hereafter amended, shall be considered a contractor. 
Building and Loan shall mean any person who for a fee engages in the loan of money upon personal security, evidences of debt, automobile, or any personal property, or purchases automobile contracts, commercial paper, evidences of debt, assignments of salary, salary warranty, salary demands, time checks, or other evidences of salary due or to become due, or automobile paper. The term building and loan as used in this Chapter includes savings and loans, but does not include pawnbrokers or the holder of a bond brokers license, or any person conducting a banking business under the laws of the State or any person subject to the State Corporate Income Tax as a financial corporation. 
Building-Tradesman (Handyperson) means any person engaged within the City, as an independent contractor in any trade, art, calling, avocation or occupation of the building trades and not licensed as a contractor by the State. 
Business shall include all activities engaged in or caused to be engaged in within the City, including any commercial or industrial enterprise, trade, profession, occupation, vocation, calling, or livelihood, including lease or rental of residential or nonresidential real estate, and every other kind of activity whether or not carried on for gain or profit, and whether or not engaged in as a principal or as an independent contractor, but shall not include the services rendered by en employee to his employer. 
Business by Vehicle means the running, driving or operating of any vehicle, automobile, truck, tank, wagon, or any vehicle for the purpose of transportation, sale, collection, or delivery of goods, wares, merchandise, or other personal property of any kind from a vehicle, either as a principal business or in connection with any other business, or in soliciting for work, labor, or services to be performed upon the public streets on or from a vehicle, or to be performed on goods, wares, merchandise, clothes, or other personal property to be taken for such purpose to a plant or establishment inside or outside the City. 
This definition shall not be deemed to apply to the delivery of goods by persons operating such a vehicle in conjunction with a fixed place of business within the City for which such business a license fee has been paid pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter. 
This definition shall not be construed as imposing a tax upon vehicles, but as a method of classification of businesses and distinguishing between persons maintaining a fixed place of business in the conduct of which a vehicle is used, and persons maintaining a business in the conduct of which vehicles are used, but who do not have a fixed place of business in the City, such as: 
Bus/shuttle services 
Carpet/furniture cleaning 
Caterers 
Catering/ice cream trucks 
Gardening services 
General repair/maintenance 
Installations 
Janitorial services 
Linen services 
Pest control 
Pool cleaning 
Pickup and delivery 
Security alarm company 
Soft water service 
Television/radio repair 
Tow trucks 
Tree trimming and hauling 
Other similar services 
Business License Inspector means the designee of the Finance Director/Treasurer. 
Business License Officer means the Finance Director/Treasurer of the City, or the designee of such person. 
Business License Certificate shall mean the certificate required to be posted or displayed as evidence of a business payment of the tax required by the provisions of this Chapter and shall herein be referred to as "license certificate" or "license" except as otherwise specified. 
Business License Tax shall mean the privilege tax paid as required by the provisions of this Chapter and shall herein be referred to as "business or license tax" except as otherwise specified. 
Charge means any fee fixed herein which is intended solely to cover the reasonable administrative cost incurred in performing any specified act or acts on behalf of the City. 
City means the City of Del Mar. 
Coin and Bullion Dealer means an entity whose business is sales in bulk of "monetized bullion", nonmonetized gold or silver bullion, and numismatic coins which sales are substantially equivalent to transactions in securities or commodities through a national securities or commodities exchange. "Monetized bullion" means coins or other forms of money manufactured of gold, silver, or other metal and heretofore, now, or hereafter used as a medium of exchange under the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign nation and includes gold medallions struck under authority of the American Arts Gold Medallion Act (Title IV of Public Law 95-630). The medium of exchange must have had a legal status equivalent to legal tender. 
Coin-operated Machine or Device means any machine or device that dispenses a product, or provides a service, or utility or amusement, resulting from insertion or use of a coin, slug, toke, plate, disc, plug, key, check or other device, or money, or thing of value. 
Collector means the Finance Director/Treasurer, the Tax and Revenue Inspector or other City officer charged with the administration and enforcement of this Chapter. 
Commercial Service means the running, driving or operating of any vehicle, automobile, truck, tank wagon, or any vehicle for the purpose of transportation, sale, collection or delivery of goods, wares, merchandise, or other personal property of any kind from a vehicle, either as a principal business or in connection with any other business, or in soliciting for work, labor, or services to be performed upon the public streets on or from a vehicle, or to be performed on goods, wares, merchandise, clothes, or other personal property to be taken for such purpose to a plant or establishment inside or outside the City. 
This definition shall not be deemed to apply to the delivery of goods by persons operating such a vehicle in conjunction with a fixed place of business within the City for which such business a license fee has been paid pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter. 
This definition shall not be construed as imposing a tax upon vehicles, but as a method of classification of businesses and distinguishing between persons maintaining a fixed place of business in the conduct of which a vehicle is used, and persons maintaining a business in the conduct of which vehicles are used, but who do not have fixed place of business in the City. 
Commission Agent, Broker or Merchant means any person engaged in the business of buying and selling of goods, wares, or merchandise for the owner or consignee thereof for a fee or commission, whether or not the operation of such business customarily includes the actual possession, custody or control of goods, wares or merchandise to the extent that such person (1) does not engage in the business of manufacturing, refining, fabricating, milling, treating or other processing of the goods, wares or merchandise bought and sold, and does not cause said goods, wares or merchandise to be manufactured, refined, fabricated, milled, treated or otherwise processed; (2) does not obtain or retain title to said goods, wares or merchandise except during one or more of the following situations: while such goods, ware or merchandise are actually in transit, short periods of time before transportation commences or after it ceases; and (3) does not store or warehouse such goods, wares or merchandise except during one or more of the following: while such goods, wares or merchandise are actually in transit, or for short periods of time before transportation commences or after it ceases. 
Conduct. See "Transact and Carry On." 
Consignment. See "Second Hand Dealer." 
Contractor means any person who is licensed as a contractor by the State of California and who undertakes to, or offers to undertake to, or purports to have the capacity to undertake to, or submits a bid to, or does himself or by others, construct, alter, repair, add to, subtract from, improve, move, wreck or demolish any building, highway, road, railroad, excavation or other structure, project, development or improvement, or to do any part thereof, including the erection of scaffolding or other structures or works in connection therewith. The term contractor as used in this Chapter includes general engineering contract-or, general building contractor, specialty contractor and subcontractor except as otherwise specified herein. 
Cost of Doing Business shall mean that amount which is equivalent to the volume of business performed, where the business of any local office, facility, agent, broker, or employee is that of performing administrative or management related services in connection with sales or services performed or rendered elsewhere. Said amount shall be computed by determining the total cost of maintaining said local office, facility, agent, broker or employee. Said total cost of maintaining said local office, facility, agent, broker or employee shall include, but is not limited to the wages, salaries, commissions, bonuses, rent, and/or depreciation, telephone, postage, utilities, janitorial and other expenses allocated for maintenance of said office, facility, agent, broker or employee. 
Disabled Veteran means any honorably discharged member of the Armed Forces of the United States who is physically unable to obtain his livelihood by means of manual labor and who is a qualified voter of the State. (Business and Professions Code § 16001) 
Driver's Permit means the permit issued to any person operating or driving a vehicle for hire. 
Employed means engaged in the operation or conduct of business, or related activity, whether as a proprietor or otherwise. 
Employee means any and all owners, or members of the owner's family, partners, or associates or individuals earning a wage. 
Engaged in Business means the transacting and carrying on, managing or operating of a business whether done as owner, or by means of an officer, agent, manager, employee or lessee. 
Fee means that amount charged to cover administrative and enforcement costs of processing any business license application or renewal. 
Firearms. See Penal Code § 12071. 
Flea Market. See "Swap Meet." 
Fixed Place of Business means the place within the City at which the principal tools, equipment or machinery used in a business are customarily stored or located, or at which are maintained the principal stock of materials or supplies and the books and records used in a business. 
Flat Rate or Flat Rate Tax means a fixed amount assessed per business location, or alternately, a fixed amount or fixed scale of amounts whose sum is variable depending on the number of factors furnishing the basis for determination of the license tax. 
General Contractor means and shall include any general building contractor or general engineering contractor or any other person who is licensed pursuant to Sections 7056 and/or 7057 of the California business and Professions Code as the same now exists or as hereafter amended. 
Garage Sale means the sale, or offering for sale, of personal property in, at or upon any property used or occupied for residential purposes. Garage sales shall include, but not be limited to, any yard sale, home sale, patio sale, or any other sale similarly conducted on any property used or occupied for residential purposes. 
Gross Receipts shall include the total amount of the sale price of all sales and the total amount charged or received for the performance of any act or service of whatever nature it may be, for which a charge is made or credit allowed, whether or not such act or service is done as part of or in connection with the sale of materials, goods, wares, or merchandise. The following shall be included in "gross receipts": all receipts, rents, cash, credits, and property of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom on account of the cost of property sold, the cost of materials used, labor or service cost, interest paid or payable, or loss or other expenses whatsoever. 
The following shall be excluded from "gross receipts": 
A.  Cash discounts allowed and taken on sales; 
B.  Credit allowed on property accepted as part of the purchase price and which property may later be sold; 
C.  Any tax required by law to be included in or added to the purchase price and collected from the consumer or purchaser; 
D.  Such part of the sale price of property returned by purchasers upon recision of the contract of sale as is refunded either in cash or by credit; 
E.  Amounts collected for others where the business is acting as an agent or trustee to the extent that such amounts are paid to those for who collected, provided the agent or trustee has furnished the collector with the names and addresses of the others and the amounts paid to them, other than amounts received as commissions or fees earned, or charges of any character made or compensation of any character received for the performance of any service as agent or trustee; provided that any agent or trustee dealing in stocks or other similar written instruments evidencing a right to participate in the assets of any business, or dealing in bonds or other evidences of indebtedness, who also deals in such property as a principal, shall include in the gross receipts by which the tax is measured the amount of his or her trading profits resulting therefrom. No deduction from receipts attributable to trading as a principle shall be made unless such deduction is provided for in this Section; 
F.  The difference between the balance owed and paid on a defaulted purchase or finance contract upon repossession by seller and the amount received from resale of the repossessed article by the repossessing seller; 
G.  Receipts of refundable deposits, except that refundable deposits forfeited and taken into income of the business shall not be excluded; 
H.  As to alcoholic beverages, that portion of the receipts of a manufacturer, transporter, retailer or wholesale distributor generated or otherwise collected from the manufacture, transport, retail or wholesale of intoxicating liquors within the State pursuant to Article XX, Section 22 of the State Constitution; 
I.  As to a retail gasoline dealer, a portion of his or her receipts from the sale of motor vehicle fuels equal to the motor vehicle fuel license tax imposed by and previously paid under the provisions of Part 2 of Division 2 of the State Revenue and Taxation Code, as the same now exists or as hereafter amended; 
J.  As to a retail gasoline dealer, the special motor fuel tax imposed by Section 4041 of Title 26 of the United States Code, as the same now exists or as hereafter amended, if paid by the dealer or collected by him or her from the purchaser; 
K.  Cash value of sales, trades, transfers, or other transactions as made between separate departments, divisions, or units of any single business entity; 
L.  Sales for convenience where sales of new goods, wares, or merchandise are made by a person engaged in selling such articles to another person engaged in selling like or similar articles: 
1.  Where the primary purpose of the particular transaction of sale is to accommodate the purchaser rather than to make a sale in the ordinary course of business and the price paid is essentially the book value of the article; 
2.  Where, in the particular kind of business involved, a similar manner of dealing is frequent or customary in the circumstances under which the particular sale is made; and 
3.  Where goods, wares, or merchandise of like or similar kind and of substantially equivalent value to that which was sold is received in consideration. 
M.  As to Coin and Bullion Dealers, any individual sale of monetized bullion (legal tender), and nonmonetized gold or silver bullion, and numismatic (collectible) coins which exceeds $1,500.00. 
As to other persons having a fixed place of business within the City and providing a service or plying an occupation or trade, or involved in similar businesses, "gross receipts" shall include the total fees, commissions, or other receipts attributable to that local location and/or employees. 
As to building and loan associations, "gross receipts" shall include: 
1.  Interest on real estate loans; 
2.  Loan fees of various kinds such as: fee for escrow, appraisal drawing papers, and other similar charges; 
3.  Bonuses received for prepayment of loans; 
4.  Penalty charges on delinquent loans; 
5.  Tax service fees; 
6.  Interest on personal loans to depositors and; 
7.  Receipts over and above the recovery of principal from the sale of mortgages or other evidence of money due from loans. 
As to building and loan associations, the following shall be excluded from "gross receipts": 
1.  Interest and dividends earned from the placing of surplus funds in bonds, securities, or federal home loan banks; 
2.  Payments received on the principal amount of outstanding loans; 
3.  Sale of capital assets used in the conduct of the business; 
4.  Payments made to other building and loan associations which represents their share of interest under participation agreements; and 
5.  Gains or losses on the sale of real estate acquired by foreclosure. 
As to a business established outside the City but maintaining an office with the City through an agent, broker, or employee, "gross receipts" shall include the total sales or receipts attributable to the local office or facility, agent, broker or employee. 
In the event separate sales or receipt records are not maintained for said local office or facility, agent, broker or employee, or in the event any retailing, wholesaling, manufacturing, or processing activity conducted thereat does not generate gross receipts as hereinabove defined, or in the event said local office or facility, agent, broker, or employee is engaged in providing administrative or management related services, to include, but not limited to, record keeping, data processing, research and development, advertising, public relations, personnel administration, or legal services, in connection with sales or services performed or rendered elsewhere, the business tax shall be based upon an amount which bears the same proportion to the total gross receipts of the business which cost of maintaining said local office, facility, local agent, broker or employee bears to the total cost of maintaining said business. 
As to a business established within the City but maintaining a local branch office or establishment through an agent, broker, or employee engaged in providing administrative or management related services within the City, the business tax shall be based on an amount equivalent to the cost of doing business. 
As to a business established outside the City but transacting and carrying on business within the City, or otherwise performing or rendering services negotiated, or contracted for within the City, whether or not by a principal or through an agent or employee, "gross receipts" shall include the total fees, commissions, or other receipts attributable to the business activity conducted within the City. 
Gun Dealer. See Penal Code § 12071. 
Handyperson. See "Building Tradesman." 
Horse Race Information means every person conducting or carrying on a business involving the dissemination of horse race information. 
Hotel/Motel. See "Rental of Residential Real Estates." 
Independent Contractor means any natural person other than a State licensed contractor, who is engaged to aid in the business of any other person, whether as a professional as defined herein below, or whether pursuant to any license, certificate or registration authorized by the California Business and Professions Code, as the same now exists or as hereinafter amended, or whether with regard to any other trade, skill or occupation, and who receives enumeration either through commission, or pursuant to any contract of employment which excludes regular wages or salary, or in any other manner other than through regular wages, salary or a direct participation in the profits of the business. 
Insurance Agent means any person, including bail bond agents directly authorized by and on behalf of an insurer, to transact insurance and to bind the insurer in the execution of insurance policies. 
Insurance Broker means any person, including bail bond brokers, who, for compensation and on behalf of another person, transact insurance other than life with, but not on behalf of, an insurer. 
Itinerant Merchant means any person who engages in a temporary or transient business in the City, selling or offering for sale goods, wares, merchandise, or things or articles of value, with the intention of conducting such business in the City for a period of not more than 90 days in any calendar year, and who, for the purpose of carrying on such business, hires, leases, or occupies any room, doorway, vacant lot, building or structure, for the exhibition or sale of goods, wares or merchandise, or who associates temporarily with any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer, or who conducts such temporary or transient business in connection with or as a part of or in the name of any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer. 
Junk Collector means any person not having a fixed place of business in the City engaged in the business of buying or selling, either at wholesale or retail, any rags, bottles, papers, cans, metals or other junk. 
Junk Dealer means any person having a fixed place of business in the City engaged in the business of buying or selling, either at wholesale or retail, any rags, bottles, papers, cans, metals or other junk. 
Junk Salvager or Junk Recycler means any person, at a fixed place of business in the City engaged in the business of carrying on or collecting, buying or selling at either retail or wholesale or otherwise dealing in junk and/or rubbish, waste material, refuse and/or any rags, sacks, bottles, papers, cans, metals, rubber, cordage, tires and other like articles, whether the same can be sold or otherwise disposed of for the purpose of being treated, repaired or prepared so as to be used again in some other form. 
Junk Yards, Automobile Wrecking Yards and Salvage Yards means any space of 200 square feet or more of area of any lot used for the storage, sale, keeping or abandonment of inoperable vehicles, junk or waste material, including scrap metal or other scrap materials, or for the dismantling, demolition or abandonment of automobiles, other vehicles, machinery or parts thereof, other than an impound yard. 
License means a license issued pursuant to this Chapter. 
Licensee means any person who holds a valid, current business license issued to that person under this Chapter. 
Life Agent means any insurance agent authorized by, and on behalf of, a life, disability or life and disability insurer, to transact life, disability or life and disability insurance. 
Life and Disability Insurance Analyst means a person who, for a fee or compensation of any kind, paid by or derived purports to advise, or offers advice to any person insured under, named as a beneficiary of, or having an interest in, a life or disability insurance contract, in any manner concerning that contract or his or her rights in respect thereto. 
Manufacture or Process shall embrace all the activities of a commercial or industrial nature wherein labor or skill is applied, by hand or machinery, to materials so that as a result thereof, a new, different or useful article of tangible personal property or substance of trade or commerce is produced and shall include the production or fabrication of specially made or custom made articles. 
Manufacturer means any person who, directly or by contracting with others for the necessary labor or mechanical services, manufactures for sale or for commercial or industrial use from his or her own materials or ingredients any articles, substances or commodities. 
Mobile Vending means the conduct of a business by means of an automobile, truck, wagon, motorcycle or any other vehicle which may be used to transport, sell, collect or deliver goods, wares, merchandise or property of any kind from a vehicle, either as a principal business or in connection with any other business, or in the solicitation of work, labor or services to be performed on the public streets or private places in or from a vehicles. (See Chapter 6.48 Commercial Use of Public Property). 
Motor Bus means any motor vehicle used in the business of carrying passengers for hire which receives and discharges passengers along a fixed route traversed by it, except any intercity bus regulated by the Public Utilities Commission. 
Nonprofit Organization means an institution, corporation, organization, or association organized or conducted for charitable, religious, political or other nonprofit purposes only, where the receipts derived from peddling or soliciting activities are to be used wholly for the benefit of such entity and, except for wages paid to employees of such entity, are not used in whole or in part for the private gain of any person. Such organizations shall have State of California and United States government tax exempt status. 
Within the meaning of this Chapter, solicitors and peddlers who are paid for such services by a nonprofit organization are not employees of the nonprofit organization. All other organizations shall be termed "for profit organizations." 
Out-of-Town means the conducting of a business within the City, but not having a fixed place of business within the City. 
Owner as applied to any building or land shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety, co-partnerships of the whole or of a part of such building or land, or a person having an interest in community property as a member, or former member, of the community. 
Pawnbroker means a person employed in the business of loaning money upon personal property, personal security, pawns or pledges, or the business of purchasing articles of personal property and reselling, or agreeing to resell, such articles to the vendors or their assignees at prices agreed upon at or before the time of such purchase. (Business and Professions Code § 21626) 
Pawnshop means a room, store, or place in which the business of a pawnbroker is conducted. 
Peddler means a hawker, vendor, or other person who, without appointment thereat, goes from house to house, place to place, or in or along the streets of the City selling and making immediate delivering, or offering for sale and immediate delivery, any goods, wares, merchandise, or anything of value in the possession of the peddler to persons other than manufacturers, wholesalers, jobbers, or retailers in such commodities. 
Permit means a written authorization, or permission, to conduct a business within the City. A business license issued pursuant to this Chapter does not constitute a "permit." 
Person means a domestic or foreign corporation, an association, a syndicate, a joint-stock corporation, a partnership of any kind, a club, business or common-law trust, a society or an individual conducting any business in the City. 
Pickup means to take into a vehicle. 
Premises means all lands, structures, places, and also the personal property, equipment, and appurtenances connected or used therewith in any business. 
Processor means any person engaging in the business of converting an article, substance or commodity into marketable form for the purpose of resale by changing its physical form or chemical composition. 
Professional Corporation means any corporation organized under the California General Corporation Law which is engaged in rendering professional services in a single profession, or as hereafter amended, and which in its practice or business designates itself as a professional or other corporation as may be required by stature. 
Pushcart means any wagon, cart, or similar wheeled container, not a "vehicle" as defined in the Vehicle Code of the State of California, from which food, beverage, or product is offered for sale to the public. (See Chapter 6.48, Commercial Use of Public Property) 
Real Estate Agent means any person licensed as such by the State and engaged wholly or in part in transacting and carrying on the sale of real estate. 
Real Estate Broker means any person licensed as such by the State and engaged wholly or in part in transacting and carrying on the sale of real estate including soliciting or offering to buy, sell, or lease real property for others; negotiating and collecting loans for borrowers or lenders; dealing in real property sales contracts and promissory notes; receiving advance fees for real estate listings; and dealing in real estate syndicate securities. 
Real Estate Developer means any person conducting, managing, or transacting and carrying on the business of acquiring, subdividing, improving, selling, renting and otherwise dealing in and disposing of or developing real property, for commercial, industrial, residential, or nonresidential purposes including, but not limited to, one who constructs improvements upon real property for commercial, industrial, residential, or nonresidential purposes with the object of selling, renting or developing it for his or her own use. 
Rental of Nonresidential Real Estate shall include every person engaged in the business of renting, leasing, providing, exchanging or trading, without loss of ownership, any land, dwelling, building, premises or portion thereof for industrial, commercial, office, warehouse or other entrepreneurial uses or purposes other than dwelling, sleeping or lodging. The license tax for the rental of such properties shall be assessed per property and liability for said tax shall be determined by ownership of the property. Agents acting for property owners are responsible for payment of the license tax on the rental of such property, if the owner of said property has not paid the tax when due and payable, and in addition, are subject to the license tax as a separate business. 
Rental of Residential Real Estate shall include every person engaged in the business of renting, leasing, providing, exchanging or trading, without the loss of ownership, any land, dwelling, building, premises or portion thereof for the purpose of occupancy, sleeping, lodging, boarding, or other use and accommodation. The license tax for the rental of such properties shall be assessed per property and liability for said tax shall be determined by ownership of the property. Agents acting for property owners are responsible for payment of the license tax on the rental of such property, if the owner of said property has not paid the tax when due and payable, and in addition, are subject to the license tax as a separate business. 
Recreational Services means any person engaged in the business of providing facilities for recreational use. Such services include but are not limited to: amusement machine arcades, bowling alleys, driving ranges, golf courses (including miniature), motion picture theaters (including drive-in), pool halls (including billiards and snooker), riding stables, skating rinks, social clubs, sports clubs (including spas, health clubs, and conditioning gyms), swimming pools, and tennis and racket clubs. 
Retailer means any person engaging in the business of selling goods, wares, or other merchandise to consumers or users thereof. 
Revocation means the act of revoking, or the condition of being revoked; canceled; repealed. 
Safety Inspection Sticker means a sticker affixed to a vehicle for hire or ambulance evidencing that it has been inspected by the San Diego County Sheriff Department, or the California Highway Patrol, and found to be in safe operating condition. 
Sale means the transfer, in any manner or by any means whatsoever, of title to property for a consideration; the serving, supplying, or furnishing for a consideration of any property; and a transaction whereby the possession of property is transferred and the seller retains the title as security for the payment of the price shall likewise be deemed to exclude any transaction which is or which, in effect, results in a sale within the contemplation of law. 
Sale at Retail and Retail Sale means every sale of tangible personal property (including articles produced, fabricated or imprinted) other than sale to one who (1) purchases for the purpose of resale as tangible personal property in the regular course of business, or (2) purchases for the purpose of consuming the property purchased in producing for sale a new article of tangible personal property or substance, of which such property becomes an ingredient or component, or as a chemical used in processing, when the primary purpose of such chemical is to create a chemical reaction directly through contact with an ingredient of a new article being produced for sale. 
Sale at Wholesale and Whole Sale means any sale of tangible personal property which is not a "sale at retail." Sales otherwise classified hereinabove as "retail sales," may, nevertheless be classified as "wholesale sales" under this Section, if the vendor can establish to the satisfaction of the collector that the sale was made to a government agency, public utility, manufacturer, processor or contractor who consumed the articles in the course of his or her own operations and did not offer the articles for resale to the general public except as an integral part of manufacturing, construction or service. 
Second Hand Dealer. See Business and Professions Code § 216265. 
Services means the business of providing, maintaining, or performing labor for the benefit of another within the City; of supplying some general demand for the benefit of another within the City which does not produce a tangible commodity; or furnishing of services and all activities in which any person, for any other person performs any personal service and all services in which any real or personal property, stocks or bonds, other financial instruments, or evidences of debt, or contacts of insurance or any money or credits are exchanged, leased, transferred, or loaned; as well as every business of maintaining, storing, cleaning, improving or repairing tangible commodities within the City whether or not such business is conducted from a premises, vehicle, or mobile location within or outside the City. Services include recreations services but do not include theatrical performances, exhibitions, or temporary amusements nor do they include professional services, or telephone services within the terms of this Chapter. 
Solicitor means a person engaged in soliciting, canvassing, or taking orders from house to house, or from place to place, or by telephone, or by any other means of communication for any goods, wares, merchandise, or any article to be delivered in the future, or for services to be performed in the future, or making, manufacturing, or repairing any article whatsoever for future delivery, or subscriptions to periodicals or tickets of admission or entertainments, or memberships in any club. Solicitor includes persons soliciting funds for organizations which are not nonprofit organizations as defined herein. Solicitor also includes those receiving donations in public places or places open to the public who do not accost or approach persons for the purpose of soliciting or begging alms. 
Stock Broker and Bond Broker means any person engaged in the business of buying or selling federal, state, county or municipal stocks or bonds, or stocks or bonds of partnerships or other incorporated entities, or evidences of indebtedness of private persons, partnerships or of incorporated entities, for a free or commission. 
Subcontractor. See "Contractor." 
Swap Meet mans any event where the place or location at which the event is held has been advertised by any means whatsoever as a place or location to which members of the public at large, during a specified period of time, may bring identifiable, tangible property and exhibit the same for sale or exchange. 
Swap Meet Exhibitor means any person exhibiting, displaying, selling, exchanging, offering for sale or exchange, any property at a swap meet. 
Swap Meet Operator means any person or organization conducting or operating the business of a swap meet on any premises in the City, excluding, however, swap meet exhibitors. 
Sworn Statement means an affidavit sworn to before a person authorized to take oaths, or a declaration, certification, or verified affidavit made under penalty of perjury. 
Tax shall be that amount collected for the privilege of engaging in a business or occupation. 
Tax and Revenue Inspector means the duly authorized agent of the Collector charged with assisting the Collector in the exercise of the duties imposed upon him or her hereunder. 
Taxicab means any motor vehicle used in the business of transportation of passengers for hire, where transportation is not over a fixed and definite route, but is under the control, as to the destination and/or route, of the passenger or passengers being carried therein. 
Taximeter means any mechanical instrument, appliance, device or machine by which the charge for hire of a motor vehicle is mechanically calculated, whether for distance traveled or time consumed, or both, and on said instrument is indicated by figures. 
Tax Period. Unless otherwise expressly provided, all licenses shall be issued on an annual basis and shall expire December 31st of the year in which such license is issued. 
Telephone Services shall mean any person engaged in the business of providing telephone services as a "telephone company" pursuant to Article XIII, Section 19 of the State Constitution. 
Transact and Carry On means to repeat, or intend to repeat, or to continue, and includes: 
A.  The maintaining, operating, managing, or being in control of, any office, store, warehouse, factory, establishment, location or place: 
1.  Having one or more telephones listed for any business, activity in any classified telephone director or in the classified section of any consolidated telephone directory. 
2.  Having in use in connection with any business, one or more counters, desks, chairs, tables, filing cabinets, typewriters, adding or calculating machines, or other articles of office equipment. 
3.  At, from, or in which, any processing, supervising, administration, research, sales promotion, solicitation, distributing, routing, delivery, dispatching, billing, collection, accounting, record keeping, or other activity is conducted in connection with any business. 
4.  In, or at which, one or more persons may, for any valuable consideration intended to result, or that results, in any livelihood, financial profit or commercial gain to any person, receive any instruction, advice, treatment or examination, or any service upon their person, or any repair, refinishing, renewing, cleaning, or other improvement to, or of, any personal property. 
5.  In which any letter, announcement, advertisement, circular, handbill, newspaper, agreement, contract, instruction, legal instrument, financial statement, statement of account, financial record, or any other instrument or record, is written, printed, reproduced, published, prepared or kept, in connection with any business. 
6.  From which any circular, handbill, newspaper, announcement, statement of account, card or letter is sent, or distributed, in writing, or any contract is made, in person or by telephone, in connection with any business. 
7.  Upon any exterior side, wall, window, door, roof or other portion, or in the proximity of which, there is maintained any sign, lettering, announcement or advertisement indicating that such office or place is one in, at or from, which any article exists, or any act is performed, in connection with any business. 
B.  The repeated or continuous offering, or contracting, orally or in writing in connection with any business: 
1.  To sell or rent one or more articles, or one or more rooms, apartments, portions or parcels, of any real or personal property, or 
2.  To transport any person or personal property, or 
3.  To perform any service. 
C.  In connection with any business, the repeated or continuous: 
1.  Sale or renting of one or more articles or parcels of real or personal property; 
2.  The transporting of any person or property; or 
3.  The performance of any service. 
D.  The performance, in connection with any business, of any single act, with intent to repeat or continue the performance of such act. 
Utility and Public Utility means any person furnishing the public with communication, water, light, heat or power, subject to regulation by the Public Utilities Commission of the State of California. 
Vehicle means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or maybe transported or drawn upon a public street or highway, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
Vehicle for Hire means any motor bus, taxicab, limousine, tow truck or any other motor vehicle offered in the CITY OF DEL MAR for the transportation of passengers for compensation or used or engaged in the soliciting or pickup of passengers for hire in the CITY OF DEL MAR, exclusive of any vehicle for which a certificate of public convenience is needed and has been granted by the Public Utilities Commission of the State of California. "Vehicle for hire" shall not mean an ambulance, ambulette or other vehicle equipped or previously used for transporting the wounded, injured, sick, handicapped or deceased. See "Ambulance" and "Ambulette." 
Vending Operations means any business conducted or carried on by any person engaged in the business of operating coin-operated machines or devices on the premises of another or in the business of owning, renting, leasing, lending, or otherwise distributing or supplying coin-operated machines or devices while retaining title thereto. Such machines include, but are not limited to, vending, amusement, service and telephone machines. 
Vendor means any individual, sole proprietor, f corporation, or business entity engaged in the conduct of business as defined by this Chapter. 
Wholesaler means any person engaging in the business of selling goods, wares, merchandise or other products for the purpose of resale and not to consumers or users thereof. 
Yard Sale. See "Garage Sale." 
(Ord. No. 617; Ord. No. 880)  
Chapter 5.12 - PROCEDURES 
 
5.12.010 - Application. 
A person applying for a business license shall furnish to the license tax collector a sworn statement, upon a form provided by the collector, setting forth without limitation the following information: 
A.  The exact nature or kind of business for which a license is requested. 
B.  The place where such business is to be carried on, and if the same is not to be carried on at any permanent place of business, a description of the route and the places of residence of the owners of the business. 
C.  In the event that the application is made for the issuance of a license to a person doing business under a fictitious name, the application shall set forth the names and places of residence of those owning said business. 
D.  In the event that the application is made for the issuance of a license to a corporation or a partnership, the application shall set forth the names and places of residence of the officers or partners thereof. 
E.  Sufficient information as may be required by the license tax collector to determine the amount of the license tax to be paid by the applicant. 
F.  Any further information which the license tax collector may require to allow the issuance of the type of license applied for. 
(Ord. No. 388)  
5.12.020 - Proof of Other Authority. 
A.  The applicant must submit with his application proof of obtaining such other City permits, approvals and certificates as are necessary for the conduct of the applicant's business. 
B.  If the applicant's business requires a license, approval or permit from some public or private entity or person, other than the City, then proof thereof must be submitted at the time of filing the application for the business license.  
5.12.030 - Term of License. 
Unless otherwise expressly provided, all licenses shall be issued on an annual basis and shall expire December 31st of the year in which such license is issued.  
5.12.040 - Determination of Tax. 
A.  The license tax collector shall determine the amount of the license tax or estimated license tax to be paid. 
B.  If the license tax collector is not satisfied with the information supplied in statements or applications filed, and after the collector has demanded additional information from the applicant, the license tax collector may determine the amount of license tax due by means of such information as the collector may be able to obtain. 
C.  When the collector makes a determination, the collector shall give a notice of the amount to the applicant by either serving it personally or by depositing the notice in the United States Post Office at the City of Del Mar, California, postage prepaid, addressed to the person applying for the license at the address noted on the application.  
5.12.050 - Payment of Tax. 
All persons who are required to be licensed by this Title shall see that the proper tax as required is paid to the license tax collector, in advance of the issuance of the license. All license taxes shall be paid in the lawful money of the United States at the office of the license tax collector. There shall be no refund of a license tax paid.  
5.12.060 - License Tax—Deemed a Debt. 
The amount of any license tax and penalty imposed by the provisions of this Title shall be deemed a debt to the City. An action may be commenced in the name of the City in any court of competent jurisdiction for the City in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of any delinquent license tax and penalties, with costs of suit, including reasonable attorney's fees to be fixed by the court.  
5.12.070 - Contents of License. 
The business license issued by the license tax collector shall contain without limitation the following information: 
A.  The name of the person to whom the license is issued; 
B.  The business licenses; 
C.  The place where such business is to be transacted and carried on; 
D.  The date of expiration of such license; 
E.  A statement to the effect that the license authorizes the licensee to transact and carry on only the business licensed thereby at the location or in the manner designated in such license; 
F.  A statement of the amount of the license tax paid; and 
G.  Such other information as may be necessary for the enforcement and administration of this Title.  
5.12.080 - Replacement License. 
A replacement license may be issued by the license tax collector to replace any license previously issued hereunder which has been lost or destroyed. The licensee shall file a statement justifying the issuance of a replacement license together with a replacement fee of $1.00.  
5.12.090 - License Renewal. 
An application for the renewal of an existing license shall be treated as an application for a new license. Except, no license shall be issued to any person who, at the time of applying therefore, is indebted to the City for any delinquent license taxes.  
5.12.100 - Denial, Suspension, Revocation of License. 
The issuance of a business license in accordance with this Title shall be denied, suspended or revoked upon one or more of the following grounds: 
A.  The application has not been made as prescribed; or 
B.  The prescribed tax has not been paid; or 
C.  The applicant is indebted to the City for a delinquent license tax or penalty; or 
D.  The activity for which the license is sought is contrary to local, state or federal law.  
5.12.110 - Claim of Exemption. 
A.  Any person claiming an exemption pursuant to the provisions of this Title shall file a sworn statement with the license tax collector stating the facts upon which the exemption is claimed. In the absence of such statement substantiating the claim, such persons shall be liable for the payment of the license tax imposed by this Title. 
B.  The license tax collector shall, upon a proper showing contained in a sworn statement, issue a license to such person claiming an exemption under this Section without payment to the City of the license tax. 
C.  Upon giving proper notice and a reasonable opportunity for response to the licensee, the license tax collector may revoke any license exemption granted in accordance with this Title upon finding that the licensee is not entitled to the exemption as provided.  
5.12.120 - Adjustment of Burden on Interstate Commerce. 
A.  In any case, where a license tax is believed by the licensee or applicant for a license to place an undue burden upon interstate commerce or be violative of such constitutional clauses, the licensee or applicant may apply to the license tax collector by a sworn, written statement for an adjustment of the tax setting forth the reasons therefore. 
B.  Such application must be made within six months after the subject license tax became due. 
C.  The license tax collector shall give notice of the amount assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States Post Office at the City of Del Mar, California, postage prepaid, addressed to the person so assessed at the address shown in the application.  
5.12.130 - Appeal. 
A final decision by the license tax collector may be appealed to the City Council in accordance with the provisions of this Code.  
5.12.140 - License Nontransferable. 
No license issued in accordance with this Title shall be transferable. Except upon application of the licensee and the paying of a transfer fee established by resolution of the City Council, a license may be amended to indicate the transferee as the subsequent licensee if: 
A.  The existing licensee intends to move the business to a new location not designated in the existing license but which is a lawful site for the conduct of such business; or 
B.  The existing licensee intends to transfer the ownership of the business, the existing licensee is not indebted to the City for any delinquent license taxes and the license is presently in effect.  
Chapter 5.16 - LICENSE TAX BASED UPON BUSINESS VOLUME 
 
5.16.010 - Purpose. 
This Chapter is intended to set out the procedures to be used when the basis for the license tax is the volume of business activity occur-ring after the issuance of the license. 
(Ord. No. 388)  
5.16.020 - Applicant's Estimate of Basis. 
Where the amount of the license tax is based on volume of business activity, the applicant shall include with the application an estimate of such basis for the period covered by the license for which the application is made.  
5.16.030 - Determination of Estimated Tax Due. 
The license tax collector shall determine the amount of estimated tax to be paid and may base that determination upon the volume of business accruing during the period preceding the issuance of the license for which the application is made.  
5.16.040 - End of Term Adjustment. 
A.  At the end of the license period or upon the sooner cessation of business within the City, the licensee shall file with the license tax collector a declaration under oath stating the actual basis for the tax occurring during the license term. 
B.  The license tax collector shall determine the license tax then owing. 
C.  If the estimated tax paid is less than the license tax determined, the deficiency shall be immediately due and payable from the licensee. If the estimated tax paid is more than the license tax determined, the licensee may request a cash refund or an adjustment of the estimated license tax due for a renewal. 
D.  In the event that the actual volume exceeds the applicant's estimate by more than 30 percent, the licensee shall pay an administrative penalty fixed by resolution of the City Council.  
Chapter 5.20 - GENERAL LICENSE TAX 
 
5.20.010 - General Tax. 
Unless otherwise provided for under this Title, every person conducting or carrying on a commercial activity within the City from a fixed place of business shall pay an annual license tax as follows: 
Annual Gross Receipts 	Annual License Tax 
First $15,000.00 	$30.00 
Next 10,000 or portion thereof 	$1.20/K or 
Next 300,000 or portion thereof 	.90/K or 
Next 100,000 or portion thereof 	.80/K or 
Next 100,000 or portion thereof 	.70/K or 
Next 100,000 or portion thereof 	.50/K or 
Balance of gross receipts 	.30/K 
 
(Ord. No. 595)  
5.20.020 - Procedure. 
The general license tax based upon gross receipts shall be administered in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 5.16 of this Title.  
Chapter 5.24 - SPECIFIED LICENSE TAX 
 
5.24.010 - Specified Daily Tax. 
Every person conducting or carrying on one or more of the commercial activities specified in this Section shall pay a daily license tax as follows: 
A.  Advertising by circular, posting or delivery, $20.00 per day. 
B.  Advertising with motor vehicles using signs or broadcasting, $40.00 per day. 
C.  Auctioneers, $100.00 per day. 
D.  Carnivals, $300.00 per day. 
E.  Peddlers, $20.00 per day. 
F.  Solicitors, $20.00 per day per person. 
G.  Any person owning, renting, leasing or licensing a totalizer machine on a rental, royalty or other basis to persons owning or operating race courses shall pay a daily tax of $200.00 for each day during which such machine is in operation; provided that a person to be charged with such license tax is not the owner or operator of the race course at which such machine is in operation. 
H.  Concessions and exhibitors at fairs, festivals, fiestas, et cetera, $6.00 per booth or stand for the first day and $4.00 per booth or stand for each day there-after up to a maximum of $40.00. 
(Ord. No. 617)  
5.24.020 - Swap meets and Swap Lots. 
A.  Every person conducting or carrying on a swap meet or swap lot business shall pay an annual license tax of $6.00 per stall available for rental to persons bringing merchandise to the swap lot or $1,000.00 whichever is less.  
5.24.030 - Animal Racing. 
Every person engaged in the business of conducting, managing, or carrying on any horse race or horse race meet, or other contests of speed or endurance between horses, or other animals, shall pay a daily license fee of $200.00 for each day of racing unless such person is exempt from this business license tax as a result of the provisions of Chapter 4, Division 8 of the Business and Professions Code § 19690.3.  
5.24.040 - Horse Race Information. 
Every person conducting or carrying on a business involving the dissemination of horse race information shall pay an annual license tax of $1,200.00.  
Chapter 5.28 - DISPLAY OF LICENSE 
 
5.28.010 - Posting of License. 
Every licensee transacting and carrying on a business at a fixed place of business within the City shall keep the license posted, while in force, in some conspicuous place upon the premises where the business is carried on. 
(Ord. No. 388)  
5.28.020 - Carrying License. 
Any licensee transacting and carrying on business but not operating at a fixed place of business within the City shall keep the license upon his person at all times while transacting and carrying on the business for which it is issued.  
5.28.030 - Display of Identifying Stickers. 
Whenever identifying stickers, tags, plates or other symbols have been issued for each vehicle, device, machine or other piece of equipment included in the measure of the license tax, the person to whom such stickers, tags, plates or symbols have been issued shall keep firmly affixed upon each vehicle, device, machine or piece of equipment the identifying sticker, tag, plate or symbol which has been issued therefore at such locations as are designated by the license tax collector. Such sticker, tag, plate or symbol shall not be removed from any vehicle, device, machine or piece of equipment kept in use during the period for which the sticker, tag, plate or symbol is used.  
5.28.040 - Exhibiting Licenses Upon Request. 
A licensee shall produce and exhibit the license whenever requested to do so by any officer or employee of the City authorized to issue licenses, inspect premises or collect license taxes.  
Chapter 5.32 - ENFORCEMENT OF BUSINESS LICENSE TAX 
 
5.32.010 - License Required, Penalty. 
A.  Any person who transacts or carries on any commercial activity within the City without first having procured a license from the City in accordance with this Title to include paying the license tax thereon or who knowingly and intentionally misrepresents to any officer or employee of this City any material fact in procuring such license or regarding the operation of the business in accordance with such license shall be deemed guilty of an infraction. 
B.  This Title shall not be construed to require any person to obtain a license prior to doing business within the City if such requirement conflicts with applicable statutes of the United States or the State of California. 
(Ord. No. 388)  
5.32.020 - Continuing Violation. 
The carrying on of a commercial activity without having first procured a license, including payment of the license tax thereon, or conducting a commercial activity in light of a material misrepresentation of fact knowingly made to an officer or employee of the City regarding such commercial activity shall constitute a separate violation of this Title for each and every day that the same is so carried on.  
5.32.030 - Effect of Conviction. 
A.  A conviction and punishment of any person for conducting a commercial activity in violation of this Title shall not excuse or exempt such person from the payment of any license tax and penalty due and unpaid at the time of such conviction. 
B.  A conviction shall be prima facie evidence in any action to collect any tax or penalty that such tax and penalty are due under this Title. 
C.  A conviction shall be prima facie evidence toward a revocation of an existing license and the denial of an application for license. 
D.  Nothing in this Section shall prevent a criminal prosecution for any violation of the provisions of this Title.  
5.32.040 - Evidence of Conducting Commercial Activity. 
When any person represents that he is in business in the City, or when any person holds an active license or permit issued by a governmental agency indicating that he is in business in the City, and such person fails to deny by sworn statement given to the license tax collector that he is conducting a business in the City, after being requested to do so by the license tax collector, then these facts shall be considered prima facie evidence that such person is conducting a commercial activity within the City.  
5.32.050 - Penalty for Nonpayment. 
Where a person has failed to pay a business license tax, in part or in whole, for a period of 30 days, such person shall pay a civil penalty equal to 20 percent of the tax assessed for each additional 30-day period, or portion thereof, that the tax remains delinquent, in part or in whole. However, the cumulative amount of the civil penalty shall in no event exceed 100 percent of the tax assessed.  
5.32.060 - Display after Revocation. 
It is unlawful for any person to conduct a commercial activity under any license which has been suspended or revoked. No license or evidence thereof shall be exhibited or kept in a conspicuous place by any licensee when the license tax or estimated license tax for such license is delinquent or the license has been revoked or the license has expired.  
5.32.070 - Enforcement Officer. 
It shall be the duty of the license tax collector to enforce the provisions of this Title.  
5.32.080 - Investigation of Applicant. 
The license tax collector may direct that an investigation be conducted of any applicant and the applicant's contemplated business prior to the issuing of any license.  
TITLE 6 - OPERATIONS PERMITS  
Chapter 6.02 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
6.02.010 - Purpose. 
In addition to any other licenses or permits required by this Code, an operations permit is required for those activities set forth in this Title. The described activities require regulation by the City to protect and promote the health, safety, and public peace of the community. It is the purpose of this Chapter to provide a standard procedure for the administration of such operations permits. 
(Ord. No. 381)  
6.02.020 - Definitions. 
A.  As used in this Title, Director shall mean the City Manager. 
B.  An Issuing Authority is the individual designated to exercise the specific authority relating to an operations permit in accordance with the general authority granted to all issuing authorities by this Chapter. 
C.  Notice to Permittee includes notice to a responsible employee or agent of the permittee conducting the activity. 
D.  Person includes an individual, associate, partnership, or corporation.  
6.02.030 - Permit Required. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to commence, conduct, manage, participate in, or sponsor any activity regulated by this Title without an operations permit. 
B.  When an operations permit has been issued, it is unlawful for any person to conduct the identified activity: 
1.  When that permit is suspended, expired, or revoked; or 
2.  Contrary to the provisions of the permit. 
C.  This Title shall not be construed to require any person to obtain an operations permit if such requirement conflicts with the Constitutions or applicable statutes of the United States or the State of California.  
6.02.040 - Claim of Exemption. 
A.  Any person claiming an exemption from the provisions of this Title shall file a statement under penalty of perjury with the director, stating the facts upon which the exemption is claimed. 
B.  The director shall approve, disapprove or conditionally approve the claim of exemption and notify the applicant.  
6.02.050 - Fees. 
Fees for this Title may be established, from time to time, by resolution of the City Council as follows: 
A.  An application fee based upon the costs of processing application, payable at the time of application. 
B.  A permit issuance fee based upon the costs of issuing the permit and enforcing the applicable provisions, payable as a condition to the issuance of the permit. 
C.  A permit replacement fee based upon the costs of replacing a lost or destroyed permit, payable at the time of application. 
D.  A permit renewal fee based upon the costs of processing the application, payable at the time of the application.  
6.02.060 - Application. 
A.  The director and each issuing authority shall prepare and have available application forms calling for such information as is necessary to accomplish the purposes of this Title. 
B.  Applications for initial, renewal, and replacement permit shall be submitted under penalty of perjury to the director and referred to the appropriate issuing authority for action. 
C.  If the application is submitted by an agent, then the agent shall file (with the application) written evidence that the principal has authorized the agent to apply for the permit on the principal's behalf. 
D.  If the application is not filed within the specified time, the director may still accept the application for processing provided that the application can be thoroughly analyzed for purposes of approving the issuance of the permit.  
6.02.070 - Investigation. 
The issuing authority shall conduct an investigation for the purpose of reaching a determination as to whether to approve, conditionally approve, or deny the application for permit. As part of the investigation, the issuing authority may conduct a background investigation and may publish notice in a local newspaper, including the name of the applicant, the permit applied for, the proposed location of the activity, and a date before which interested persons may file written statements, under penalty of perjury, with the issuing authority regarding the application.  
6.02.080 - Confidential Information. 
No person having access to or charge over the information or records obtained in the course of administering this Title shall disclose or release, or allow the examination by any unauthorized third person of such information and records, in whole or in part, in abstract or particulars. Authorization to access the information and records may be obtained from the City Manager or in accordance with a lawful court order.  
6.02.090 - Approval for Issuance. 
The issuing authority shall approve or conditionally approve the issuance of the permit unless one or more of the following conditions is found to exist: 
A.  The applicant or persons having a direct influence on the conduct of the activity are not qualified in terms of skill or experience to carry on the proposed activity, or have been convicted of an offense related to the conduct of the same or similar type of activity, and has not shown a significant and material change in circumstances since the conviction. 
B.  The activity at the location proposed will endanger the public peace, health, or safety. 
C.  The proposed manner for conducting the activity will endanger the public peace, health, or safety, or will not comply with all the requirements, policies, standards or laws applicable to such activity, or adversely impact on the aesthetic quality of the community. 
D.  The applicant or any Person connected or associated with the applicant has knowingly made a false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of a material fact: 
1.  In the application for permit; 
2.  In a report or record required to be filed with the City; or 
3.  In response to inquiries by the City. 
E.  The applicant has had the same or similar type of permit previously revoked or denied and has not shown significant and material change in circumstances since the date or revocation or denial. 
F.  The applicant fails to meet the requirements for the issuance of the particular permit set forth in this Title. 
G.  The applicant has not submitted (in a timely and complete manner) the application and all other documents required for the issuance of the permit. 
H.  The request for City personnel, property, or equipment will require the diversion of City resources so as to inhibit the normal level of protection and service provided to the City. 
I.  The activity will interfere with the fire protection, police protection, ambulance service, or other public services provided to the City.  
6.02.100 - Hearing on Denial or Conditional Approval. 
If the issuing authority denies or conditionally approves the issuance of the permit, the applicant shall be notified in writing and provided an opportunity to present further information to the issuing authority within two working days of receipt of such notice.  
6.02.110 - Preparation of Permit. 
A.  If the application for permit is approved or conditionally approved for issuance, the issuing authority shall prepare a permit containing, without limitation, the following: 
1.  The name and address of the permittee to whom the permit is issued; 
2.  The name under which the activity is to be conducted; 
3.  A description of the activity permitted; 
4.  The location or locations where such activity is to be conducted; 
5.  The date of expiration of such permit; 
6.  The amount of the permit issuance fee; 
7.  A statement for signature by the permittee whereby the permittee agrees: 
a.  To abide by each and every term and condition imposed on the activity and further agrees to reimburse the City for all costs incurred, including attorney's fees in enforcing those terms and conditions against the permittee. 
b.  To hold the City harmless and indemnify the City and each and every one of its employees and officials from and against all claims, demands, costs, losses, damages, injuries, litigation, and liability arising out of or related to the activity for which the permit is issued. 
c.  To post evidence of liability insurance in favor of the City in an amount to be determined by the issuing authority, equal to the anticipated maximum amount of potential liability that could arise out of the activity for which the permit is issued. The policy shall contain an expressed requirement that the insurance company notify the City 30 to 60 days prior to any termination, cancellation, suspension, or expiration of the policy of insurance. In lieu of liability insurance, the permittee may post a bond with similar provisions. 
8.  Such additional conditions and restrictions as are necessary for the enforcement and administration of this Title to protect the public peace, health, and safety. 
B.  The issuing authority shall forward the completed permit to the director.  
6.02.120 - Issuance of Permit. 
A.  Upon receipt of the completed permit from the Issuing Authority, the director shall issue the operations permit to the applicant when: 
1.  The prescribed issuance fee is paid; 
2.  The permittee has signed the permit; and 
3.  All other preconditions to the issuance of the permit have been satisfied. 
B.  On issuance of the permit, the director shall notify: 
1.  All interested City department heads; 
2.  Any public entity that will be affected by the conduct authorized by the permit; 
3.  Any person requesting notification and who has paid to the City the costs involved in providing such notice.  
6.02.130 - Term of Permit. 
A.  Unless otherwise prescribed, the term of an operations permit shall be concurrent with the term of business license required for such activity. 
B.  The issuing authority may establish a specific term for a permit to accomplish the purpose of this Title.  
6.02.140 - Replacement Permit. 
Upon application by a permittee, a replacement permit may be issued by the director to replace a permit which has been lost or destroyed.  
6.02.150 - Permit Nontransferable. 
A permit issued in accordance with this Title shall be nontransferable.  
6.02.160 - Display of Permit. 
An issued permit shall be displayed in accordance with the provisions applicable to the display of business licenses as specified in Title 5 of this Code.  
6.02.170 - Revocation/Additional Conditions. 
A.  An operations permit may be revoked or additional conditions may be imposed by the issuing authority upon five working days' written notice to the permittee, setting forth the basis of the intended action and giving the opportunity to present responding information to the issuing authority. 
B.  After the five-day period, or the presentation of responding information, whichever shall first occur, the issuing authority shall determine whether to revoke the permit or impose additional conditions upon the permit and thereafter give written notice to the permittee and to the director. 
C.  A revocation shall become effective two working days after notice unless a timely appeal is made to the City Council.  
6.02.180 - Grounds for Revocation/Additional Conditions. 
After issuance of the permit, the imposition of additional conditions or revocation may take place only upon one or more of the following grounds: 
A.  The applicant or any person connected or associated with the applicant has knowingly made a false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of a material fact: 
1.  In the application for permit; 
2.  In information required to be submitted to the City; or 
3.  In response to inquiries by the City. 
B.  License taxes required by the City have not been paid; 
C.  The conduct of the activity: 
1.  Has resulted in a conviction against any principal or employee of the activity; 
2.  Is contrary to local, state or federal laws; 
3.  Constitutes a public nuisance; or 
4.  Is contrary to any condition or restriction previously established in the operations permit.  
6.02.199 - Emergency Suspension. 
A.  When the conduct of the activity immediately threatens the public peace, health, or safety, any City official responsible for enforcing this Code may immediately suspend the operations permit by serving notice to the permittee. 
B.  The City official suspending the permit shall reinstate the permit when the threat is removed. The permittee may request that the City Manager determine whether an existing threat requires the continuation of the suspension. 
C.  A reinstatement of the permit after an emergency suspension shall not preclude an action to revoke the permit.  
6.02.200 - Appeal. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided, a permittee or applicant may appeal, in accordance with this Section, any final determination taken under the authority of this Title. 
B.  An appeal must be initiated by submitting a written statement (signed under penalty of perjury) to the office of the City Manager with two working days of receipt of notice of the appealed determination. The statement shall set forth all facts and arguments upon which the appellant relies. 
C.  The City Manager shall review the record of the matter and determine whether to affirm, set aside, or modify the determination and thereafter notify the appellant. 
D.  Within two working days of notice of the City Manager's determination, the appellant may appeal the City Manager's determination by orally requesting that the City Manager file the previously submitted statement with the City Clerk who shall set the matter for administrative hearing at the next available city Council meeting. 
E.  The action of the City Council shall be final as to all issues involved.  
6.02.210 - Enforcement. 
A.  The issuing authority, director, and any other authorized officer or employee of the City may enforce the provisions of this Title. 
B.  During hours of operation at the location for which an operations permit has been issued, the permit-tee shall allow authorized officers and employees of the City to enter the premises, free of charge or restraint, for the purpose of ascertaining compliance with the provisions of this Title.  
6.02.220 - Violation. 
A.  Any Person who violates a regulatory provision of this Title, or who knowingly misrepresents to any officer or employee of the City, any material fact either in procuring an operations permit or in reference to the activity for which the permit is issued, shall be guilty of an infraction. 
B.  Commencing, conducting, managing, participating in, or sponsoring an activity in violation of this Title or commencing, conducting, managing, participating in or sponsoring a permitted activity in light of a material misrepresentation of fact knowingly made to an officer or employee of the City regarding such activity, shall constitute a separate violation of this Title for each and every day that the activity is carried on.  
Chapter 6.08 - HORSE RACE INFORMATION 
 
6.08.010 - Purpose. 
Without first having obtained an Operations Permit: Horse Race Information, it shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a business involving the distribution, either orally or otherwise, of information regarding any horse race which is to take place. 
(Ord. No. 382)  
6.08.020 - Definitions. 
Horse Race Information includes, without limitation, advice on possible race results, conditions of contestants or race surface, or wagering odds.  
6.08.030 - Issuing Authority. 
The Director of Finance is the issuing authority for the Operations Permit: Horse Race Information.  
6.08.040 - Fees. 
An investigation fee and a permit issuing fee shall be fixed by resolution of the City Council.  
6.08.050 - Regulations. 
A.  The permittee may utilize no more than four sales persons for information dissemination. 
B.  The permittee shall maintain on file with the director one current photograph of each of the persons employed by permittee who will be distributing information.  
6.08.060 - Exceptions. 
The provisions of this Chapter do not apply to: 
A.  A newspaper of general circulation. 
B.  Dissemination by a person who conducts business within the City year-round from a fixed and permanent place of business when the information is disseminated only inside the building in which such business is conducted.  
Chapter 6.12 - SWAP MEETS 
 
6.12.010 - Purpose. 
Without first having obtained an Operations Permit: Swap Meet, it shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or carry on a swap meet. 
(Ord. No. 383)  
6.12.020 - Definitions. 
A.  Owner or Operator means a person who controls the admission, directly or through agents, of persons or merchandise into the swap meet area.  
6.12.030 - Issuing Authority. 
The Director of Finance shall be the issuing authority for the Operations Permit: Swap Meet.  
6.12.040 - Fees. 
The applicant shall pay an investigating fee and a permit issuing fee as established by resolution of the City Council.  
6.12.050 - Regulations. 
A.  The owner or operator of a swap meet shall comply with Article 6, Division 8 of the Business and Professions Code, §§ 21660 et seq. 
B.  A swap meet shall be conducted only in a building, structure, or other area enclosed by a permanent fence which is sufficient to enable the owner or operator to control effectively the ingress and egress of persons and merchandise. 
C.  Swap meet facilities and merchandise shall be so arranged that health and safety inspections can be made by City and state officials at all times during the hours of operation. 
D.  A swap meet shall be operated only between 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. 
E.  The owner or operator of the swap meet shall insure that no person shall exchange, barter, trade, or sell firearms or explosives in the swap meet. 
F.  The owner or operator of a swap meet shall take reasonable steps to notify all participants of the regulations and prohibitions contained in this Chapter and in the operations permit. At a minimum, such information shall be posted in conspicuous places on the premises where the swap meet is conducted.  
Chapter 6.16 - SECONDHAND DEALER 
 
6.16.010 - Purpose. 
Without first having obtained an Operations Permit: Secondhand Dealer, it shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or carry on business as a secondhand dealer. 
(Ord. No. 384)  
6.16.020 - Issuing Authority. 
The County Sheriff shall be the issuing authority for the Operations Permit: Secondhand Dealer.  
6.16.030 - Regulations. 
The Operations Permit: Secondhand Dealer shall be administered in accordance with the provisions of Article 4, Division 8 of the Business and Professions Code regulating Secondhand Dealers. (Business and Professions §§ 21625 et seq.)  
Chapter 6.20 - COMMERCIAL FILMING 
 
6.20.010 - Purpose. 
Without first having obtained an Operations Permit: Commercial Filming, it shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, manage, participate in, or sponsor any commercial filming or photography on public property. Without first having obtained an Operations Permit: Commercial Filming, it shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, manage, participate in, or sponsor any commercial filming or photography on private property that is likely to affect the public. 
(Ord. No. 385)  
6.20.020 - Definitions. 
A.  Affects the public means that the commercial filming will, by reason of the spectacle that such filming creates, or the devices and conduct which it involves: 
1.  Disrupt the normal flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic; 
2.  Is likely to cause five or more persons to congregate at any one time and place on public property; or 
3.  Expose property or persons to the risk of physical damage.  
6.20.030 - Issuing Authority. 
The City Manager shall be the issuing authority for the Operations Permit: Commercial Filming.  
6.20.040 - Fees. 
An investigation fee and a permit issuing fee shall be adopted by resolution of the City Council.  
6.20.050 - Regulations. 
A.  To be processed, the application must be filed with the City Manager no later than noon, five working days prior to the proposed date of filming. 
B.  Based upon the nature of the proposed activity, the City Manager shall impose such conditions as are reasonably necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public, and to insure the safe and orderly movement of the public within the City. 
C.  The permit issuing fee shall include full reimbursement to the City for the cost of public services that must be provided in order to allow the conduct of the filming, in excess of the normal level of protection provided by the City. 
D.  The permittee shall sign an indemnification and hold harmless agreement in favor of the City. 
E.  The permittee shall provide liability insurance in favor of the City in an amount determined to be the anticipated maximum amount of potential liability that could arise out of the conduct of the filming. A bond may be posted in lieu of liability insurance.  
Chapter 6.24 - DOOR-TO-DOOR SOLICITATIONS 
 
6.24.010 - Purpose. 
Without first having obtained an Operations Permit: Door-to-Door Solicitations, it shall be unlawful for any person to go door to door within the City. 
(Ord. No. 386)  
6.24.020 - Reserved.  
6.24.030 - Issuing Authority. 
The Director of Finance is authorized to issue Operations Permit: Door-to-Door Solicitation.  
6.20.040 - Fees. 
The applicant shall pay an investigation fee and permit issuing fee as established by resolution of the City Council.  
6.24.050 - Regulations. 
A.  Unless previously and expressly invited to come upon the premises, it shall be unlawful for a person to go upon private residential property in defiance of a sign displayed to public view which indicates that the occupant refuses to allow persons coming upon the property for purposes specified in such sign. 
B.  Every person required by this Chapter to obtain a permit shall carry the permit when engaged in the activity covered by such permit. 
C.  The permittee shall agree to hold the City harmless and indemnify the City from and against all claims, demands, costs, losses, damages, injuries, litigation, and liability arising out of or related to activity of the permittee, or permittee's agents, employees, or contractors related to such permit.  
6.24.060 - Exemption. 
Any person who conducts the solicitation or sales solicitation for charitable purposes as defined by Section 17510.2 of the Business and Professions Code shall be exempt from the fees made applicable by this Chapter. However, 
A.  The permit shall be issued only upon delivery to the Director of Finance of an example of the card or printed material the permittee intends to utilize in complying with Section 17510.3 of the Business and Professions Code. 
B.  The permittee shall comply with the provisions of Sections 17510 et seq. of the Business and Professions Code regulating charitable solicitations. 
C.  This Chapter shall take precedence over and supersede any other provisions of this Title which appear to regulate solicitations for charitable purposes as defined herein.  
Chapter 6.28 - TEENAGE DANCE 
 
6.28.010 - Purpose. 
Without first having obtained an Operations Permit: Teenage Dance, it shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a teenage dance. 
(Ord. No. 398)  
6.28.020 - Definitions. 
A.  Adult means a person 21 years of age or over. 
B.  Adult Sponsoring Group means a nonprofit organization which has as one of its objectives, the sponsorship, regulation, and control of youth activities and child welfare, and which agrees to assume full and complete responsibility for the conduct of a teenage dance. 
C.  Private Teenage Dance means a closed dance for members of an organization and their guests. 
D.  Police or Policeman means a private police officer, any peace officer, whether on duty or off duty, a reserve deputy or special deputy, employed by any public agency or political subdivision. 
E.  Teenager is any person 13 or more years of age but under 20 years of age. 
F.  Teenage Dance means a dance attended by teenage persons, unaccompanied by the teenager's parent or guardian. 
G.  Youth Service Organization means any bona fide organization whose primary purpose is to provide moral or spiritual development, education, or recreation for teenagers. 
H.  Club means and includes only corporations or associations created by competent authority, which are the owners, lessees, or occupants of premises operated solely for objects of national, social, fraternal, patriotic, political, or athletic nature, membership in which is by application and for which regular dues are charged, and the advantages of which club belong to members, and the operation of which is not primarily for pecuniary gain.  
6.28.030 - Issuing Authority. 
The City Manager is the issuing authority for the Operations Permit: Teenage Dance.  
6.28.040 - Fees. 
The applicant shall pay an investigating fee and permit issuing fee as established by resolution of the City Council for the following types of permits: 
A.  A Class "A" Permit, which is issued for a period of one year for a location where a teenage dance is conducted more than three days or nights in any calendar week. 
B.  A Class "B" Permit, which is issued for any fiscal year for a location where a teenage dance is not conducted more than three days or nights in any calendar week. 
C.  A Class "C" Permit, which is required for a teenage dance that is conducted only once at the particular location. 
D.  A Class "D" Permit which is required where a teenage dance is conducted in a bona fide club.  
6.28.050 - Regulations. 
A.  The County Sheriff's Department will determine whether the applicant and the proposed location satisfies the requirements for the issuance of the permit. 
B.  The applicant must be an adult or an adult sponsoring group. 
C.  The premises shall be adequately chaperoned and supervised, and shall be adequately lighted at all times during the conduct of the teenage dance. The intensity of illumination shall not be less than one foot candle in all parts of the premises accessible to the participants. 
D.  All off-street parking facilities made available for participants of the teenage dance shall be adequately lighted and supervised. 
E.  The applicant shall establish procedures to insure that no teenager admitted to the teenage dance shall be permitted to reenter the premises after leaving the premises. 
F.  No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, consumed, or be available on the premises, and the applicant shall establish procedures to insure that all persons who have been drinking any alcoholic beverages or who have alcoholic beverages in their possession are denied entrance to the teenage dance. 
G.  All teenage dances shall be closed and the premises cleared of participants prior to 12:00 midnight. 
H.  It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct themselves in an immoral, obscene manner while on the premises of a teenage dance and it shall be further unlawful to disturb the peace on the premises of a teenage dance. 
I.  The applicant shall establish procedures to insure that no person 20 years of age or over is admitted to the teenage dance as a participant, except an individual 20 years of age or less may enter as a guest and companion of a teenage participant. 
J.  The applicant shall establish procedures to insure that no person is allowed to loiter around or about the premises at which the teenage dance is being conducted. 
K.  The applicant shall insure that at all times during the conduct of the teenage dance, any law enforcement officer or fire department officer shall have free access to the premises for which the permit is issued. 
L.  The applicant shall employ at least one policeman for every 100 participants with a minimum of one policeman for every exit and entrance, except the applicant may, upon the satisfaction of the County Sheriff's office, dispense with the employment of a policeman where the applicant demonstrates that there will be present a sufficient number of adult persons to maintain order. 
M.  No teenage dance shall be advertised by the use of any media of public communication until a permit has been issued for such teenage dance.  
6.28.060 - Exceptions. 
The provisions of this Chapter do not apply to any teenage dance conducted or sponsored: 
A.  By any agency or department of any city, political subdivision, school district, or other governmental agency; 
B.  In a private home in a noncommercial manner; or 
C.  By any recognized youth service organization for its members and guests only, provided that the number of guests shall not exceed the number of members present.  
Chapter 6.32 - TAXICABS AND TAXICAB OPERATORS 
 
6.32.010 - Purpose. 
A.  Without first having obtained the permit required by this Chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to carry on a business utilizing taxicabs within the City. 
B.  Without first having obtained the permit required by this Chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a taxicab for the purpose of soliciting passengers within the City. 
(Ord. No. 419; Ord. No. 531; Ord. No. 750; Ord. No. 860; Ord. No. 868)  
6.32.020 - Issuing Authority. 
The City Manager or his/her designee shall be the issuing authority for the permits required by this Chapter. The City Council shall, by Resolution, establish the amount of the operating permit fee and an administrative fee for processing the application, to be paid to the City of Del Mar. 
(Ord. No. 750)  
6.32.030 - General Regulations. 
In addition to the provisions of this Title applicable to this Chapter, there is hereby adopted, by reference, by the City of Del Mar, for the purpose of prescribing rules and regulations for the protection of the public health and safety, Chapter 3 of Division 1 of Title 2 of the San Diego County Code, together with such secondary references as are included in those portions, effective as of May 1, 2012. The provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the City to include without limitation, the fees, regulatory provisions, and definitions, but excluding the procedural provisions beyond those required for processing applications, conducting investigations, issuing permits, and enforcing regulatory provisions. In the event of a conflict between this Chapter and those requirements, duties, liabilities, or powers, of the San Diego County Code, this Chapter shall control.  
6.32.040 - Specific Regulations and Permit Standards. 
A.  In order to obtain the permit required by this Chapter the following equipment and vehicle standards are required: 
1.  Vehicles must be a State of California registered commercial vehicle. 
2.  Vehicles must hold a minimum of three passengers. 
3.  Vehicles must display company name, telephone number and vehicle ID number. The information must be clearly displayed on outside doors of vehicle. 
4.  Vehicle windows may not be tinted except as permitted by law. 
5.  Vehicles must have in service/out of service signs which are visible to pedestrians. 
6.  County of San Diego Taxi driver I.D. must be displayed and must be visible to passengers. City of Del Mar permit must be displayed on the back left rear window. 
7.  The current Posted Rate must be displayed on the outside of the rear passenger side door. 
8.  GPS must be installed in each vehicle and must be visible to passengers. 
9.  Vehicles must be equipped with a communication device. Acceptable communication devices are: 
a.  Two-way radios. 
b.  Cell phones. 
10.  Vehicles must carry credit card readers. 
11.  Each vehicle must be equipped with a fire extinguisher, red signal flares, first aid kit and flashlight which must be maintained and in working order. 
12.  Each vehicle must be equipped with an emergency trunk release system. 
B.  The following operator/driver standards shall be conditions of the permit as required by this Chapter: 
1.  All drivers must dress in a neat and clean fashion. 
2.  No smoking is allowed in the vehicle at any time, whether or not it is in-service. 
C.  In order to obtain and as a condition of the permit required by this Chapter the following operations standards are required: 
1.  Vehicles must follow all current City of Del Mar regulations and Municipal Codes. Failure to comply may result in the revocation of the taxicab permit for the remainder of the calendar year. 
2.  Vehicles must be attended at all times except as necessary for the driver to eat or use sanitary facilities, and at no time in excess of 30 minutes. 
3.  Vehicles must drive the most direct route to passenger(s) destination. 
4.  Operators with more than five vehicles must have at least one vehicle that complies with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). 
D.  All Operators with environmentally friendly vehicles will have the taxi operations permit fee and taxicab sticker fee waived for two years. The following California Air Resources Board (ARB) vehicle emission ratings are considered to be environmentally-friendly vehicles: 
ZEV: Zero Emission Vehicles have zero tailpipe emissions and are 98 percent cleaner than the average new model year vehicle. 
AT PZEV: Advanced Technology PZEVs meet Super Ultra Low Emission Vehicles (SULEV) tailpipe emission standards, have a 15-year/150,000 mile warranty, have zero evaporative emissions and include advanced technology components. (i.e. a plug-in hybrid or a compressed natural gas vehicle). 
PZEV: Partial Zero Emission Vehicles meet SULEV tailpipe emission standards, have a 15-year/150,000 mile warranty and have zero evaporative emissions. 
SULEV: Super Ultra Low Emission Vehicles are 90 percent cleaner than the average new model year vehicle.  
6.32.050 - Procedure. 
A.  Each applicant for a permit required by this Chapter shall apply to the City of Del Mar's Finance Department. 
B.  A violation of the provisions of this Chapter shall constitute an infraction.  
6.32.060 - Taxicab Stand Zones. 
A.  The City shall designate taxicab stand zones, by appropriate markings and signs, at which taxicabs may be parked in accordance with the regulations, set forth herein. 
B.  No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand zone established pursuant to this Chapter when there are in place adequate signs designating such taxicab stand zone, except that the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter such zone. 
(Ord. No. 860)  
6.32.070 - Restricted Use of Taxicabs. 
Except when parking, stopping or standing in a taxicab stand zone established pursuant to this Chapter, it shall be unlawful for the owner, driver or operator of any taxicab, while available for hire, to allow such taxicab to remain stopped, parked or otherwise standing between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., at the curb or edge of any roadway in the City of Del Mar; provided, however, that taxicabs may stop or stand in any available parking space when actually loading or unloading passengers. 
(Ord. No. 860)  
6.32.080 - Enforcement. 
A.  Safety Checks. All operators and/or drivers must allow the City and/or the County of San Diego Sheriff officers to perform random safety checks of taxicabs and driver qualifications while operating within the City. 
B.  Failure to comply with the requirements of this Chapter and any other provision of this Code may result in an administrative citation. The operations permit for the cited vehicle may be revoked for the calendar year after the receipt of the second administrative citation regardless of the infraction. 
C.  Appeal of citations may be submitted in writing within ten working days of receipt of the administrative citation to the Finance Department. All appeals will be heard by the City Manager or City Manager's designee.  
Chapter 6.40 - CABLE TELEVISION 
 
6.40.010 - Purpose. 
Without first having obtained a franchise, as provided in this Chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or carry on a cable television system. 
(Ord. No. 410)  
6.40.020 - Definitions. 
Whenever in this Chapter the words or phases hereinafter in this Section defined are used, they shall have the respective meanings assigned to them in the following definitions (unless, in the given instance, the context wherein they are used shall clearly impart a different meaning): 
A.  The phrase Basic Service or Regular Subscriber Service is that service regularly provided to all subscribers. It includes all broadcast signal carriage. 
B.  The phrase Cable Television System or CATV System shall mean a system employing antennae, microwave, wire, wave-guides, coaxial cables, or other conductors, equipment, or facilities, designed constructed, or used for the purpose of: 
1.  Collecting and amplifying local and distant broadcast television or radio signals and distributing and transmitting them; 
2.  Transmitting original cablecast programming not received through television broadcast signals; 
3.  Transmitting television pictures, film video tape programs, not received through broadcast television signals, whether or not encoded or processed to permit reception by only selected receivers; 
4.  Transmitting and receiving all other signals: digital, voice, and audio-visual. 
C.  The word Channel is a band of frequencies six megahertz wide in the electromagnetic spectrum capable of carrying either one audio-visual television signal and a few nonvideo signals. 
D.  The word City shall mean the City of Del Mar, a municipal corporation of the State of California, in its present incorporated form or in any later reorganized, consolidated enlarged or reincorporated form. 
E.  The phrase City Council or word Council shall mean the legislative body of the City of Del Mar. 
F.  The phrase City Manager shall mean the City Manager of the City of Del Mar. 
G.  The phrase Federal Communications Commission or FCC is the present federal agency of that name as constituted by the Communications Act of 1934, or any successor agency created by the United States Congress. 
H.  The word Franchise shall mean and include any authorization granted hereunder in terms of a franchise, privilege, permit, or license to construct, operate, and maintain a cable television system within the City of Del Mar. Any such authorization, in whatever form granted, shall not mean and include any license or permit required for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the City as required by other ordinances and laws of this City. 
I.  The word grantee is a holder of a cable television franchise issued by the City. 
J.  The phrase gross revenues as used in the definitions set forth in Subsections 1. through 4. hereof, mean any and all compensation in whatever form, directly or indirectly received by a grantee, from the source specified, not including any taxes on services furnished by the grantee, which taxes are imposed directly on a subscriber or user by a city, county, state, or other governmental unit, and collected by the grantee for such entity. 
1.  The phrase gross annual basic subscribe revenues shall mean any and all compensation and other consideration received directly or indirectly by the grantee from subscribers or users in payment of the regularly furnished service of the cable television system, in the transmission of broadcast television, radio signals, and original cablecast programming of the grantee. 
2.  The phrase gross annual nonbasic service revenues shall mean any and all compensation and other consideration received directly or indirectly by the grantee from subscribers or users in payment for the receipt of signals other than broadcast television, radio, or original cablecast programming of the grantee, whether for "pay television", facsimile transmission, "return" or "response" communication, and whether or not transmitted encoded or processed to permit reception by only selected subscribers. 
3.  The phrase gross annual advertising revenues shall mean any income, compensation, and other consideration received by the grantee derived from any form of advertising. 
4.  The phrase gross annual lease revenues shall mean any fees or income received by the grantee for the lease or rental and compensation for any service in connection therewith, such as studio and equipment rental and production costs of any channel permitted or designated by the Federal Communications Commission to be so leased or rented. 
K.  The phrase non-basic service means any communications service in addition to "regular subscriber services" including but not limited to access channel carriage including origination programming, pay TV, burglar alarm service, fire alarm service, data transmission, facsimile service, home shopping service, etc. 
L.  The word street is the surface of and the space above and below any public street, avenue, highway, boulevard, concourse, driveway, bridge, tunnel, park, parkway, waterway, dock, bulkhead, wharf, pier, alley, right-of-way, public utility easement, and any other public ground or water within or belonging to said City. 
M.  The word subscriber means any person receiving regular subscriber service. 
(Ord. No. 300, § 2)  
6.40.030 - Issuing Authority. 
A.  By resolution, the City Council may award a franchise to construct, operate, and maintain a cable television system within all or any portion of the City to any person, whether operating under an existing franchise or not, who makes application for authority to furnish a cable television system which complies with the terms and conditions of this Chapter. Provided that this Section shall not be deemed to require the grant of a franchise to any particular person or to prohibit the City Council from restricting the number of grantees should it determine such restriction would be in the public interest. 
B.  Any franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter shall authorize and permit the grantee to engage in the business of operating and providing a cable television system in the City, and for that purpose to erect, install, construct, repair, replace, reconstruct, maintain, and retain in, on, over, under, upon, across, and along any street, such poles, wires, appliances, attachments, and other property as may be necessary and appurtenant to the cable television system; and, in addition, so to use, operate, and provide similar facilities, or properties rented or leased from other persons, firms, or corporations, including, but not limited to, any public utility or other grantee franchised or permitted to do business in the City. 
(Ord. No. 300, § 3)  
6.40.040 - Term of Franchise. 
A.  Any franchise granted by the City Council shall be for a term of 15 years following the date such franchise is accepted by the grantee, and, upon application of the grantee and review of the performance of grantee in a public proceeding, the City Council may renew the franchise for successive 15-year periods, with such modification of the terms as the City Council may determine in each instance. 
B.  The City Council may terminate any franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter in the event of the willful failure, refusal, or neglect by grantee to do or comply with any material requirement or limitation contained in this Chapter, or any rule or regulation of the Council or City Manager validly adopted pursuant to this Chapter. 
C.  The City Manager may make written demand that the grantee comply with any such requirement, limitation, term, condition, rule, or regulation. If the failure, refusal or neglect of the grantee continued after notice for an unreasonable period of time, determined as such by the City Manger, following such written demand, the City Manager may place his request for termination of the franchise upon the next regular Council meeting agenda. The City Manager shall cause to be served upon such grantee, at least 20 days prior to the date of such Council meeting, a written notice of his intent to request such termination, and the time and place of the meeting. 
D.  The Council shall consider the request of the City Manager and shall hear any persons interested therein, and shall determine, in its discretion, whether or not any failure, refusal, or neglect by the grantee was with just cause. 
E.  If such failure, refusal, or neglect by the grantee was with just cause, the Council shall direct the grantee to comply within such time and manner and upon such terms and conditions as are reasonable. 
F.  If the Council shall determine such failure, refusal or neglect by the grantee was without just cause, then the Council may, by resolution, declare that the franchise of such grantee shall be terminated and forfeited. In the event of termination, the City agrees to purchase, or to require any successor grantee to purchase, grantee's facilities at a cost not to exceed its then fair market value, with a reduction for uncompensated damages incurred by the City in connection with grantee's operation. 
G.  The termination and forfeiture of any franchise shall in no way affect any of the rights of the City under the franchise or any provision of law. 
H.  In the event of any holding over after expiration or other termination of any franchise granted hereunder, without the prior consent of the City, expressed by resolution, the grantee shall pay to the City reasonable compensation and damages of not less than 100 percent of its gross revenue derived from all sources within the City during said period. 
(Ord. 300, § 4)  
6.40.050 - Limitations of Franchise. 
A.  Unless an exclusive franchise shall be expressly granted, any franchise granted under this Chapter shall be nonexclusive and nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the City from granting identical or similar franchises to more than one person, within all or any portion of the City. 
B.  A grantee shall, at all times during the life of its franchise, be subject to the lawful exercise of the City's police power and such reasonable regulations as the City Council may subsequently promulgate thereunder. 
C.  Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be deemed to prohibit in any way the right of the City to levy nondiscriminatory occupational license taxes on any activity conducted by grantee. 
D.  No privilege or exemption shall be granted or conferred by any franchise granted under this Chapter except those specifically prescribed herein, and/or in the ordinance granting the franchise. 
E.  Any privilege claimed under any such franchise by the grantee in any street shall be subordinate to City's use thereof, and to any other prior lawful occupancy of the streets. The City reserves the right to reasonably designate where a grantee's facilities are to be placed within the public ways. 
F.  Transfer or assignment of franchise. 
1.  Any such franchise shall be a privilege to be held in personal trust by the grantee. It cannot in any event be sold, transferred, leased, assigned, or disposed of, in whole or in part, either by forced or involuntary sale, or by voluntary sale, merger, consolidation, or otherwise, without prior consent of the Council expressed by resolution, and then only under such conditions as may therein be prescribed. 
2.  Consent of the City Council shall not be granted until it has examined the proposed assignee's legal, financial, technical, character, and other qualifications to construct, operate, and maintain a cable television system in the City, and has afforded all interested parties notice and an opportunity to be heard on the question. 
3.  The consent of the Council may not be unreasonably refused; however, the proposed assignee must show financial responsibility as determined by the Council and must agree to comply with all provisions of the franchise and of this Chapter; and provided, further, that no such consent shall be required for a transfer in trust, mortgage, or other hypothecation, in whole or in part, to secure an indebtedness, except that when such hypothecation shall exceed 50 percent of the market value of the property used by the grantee in the conduct of the cable television system, prior consent of the Council shall be required for such a transfer. Such consent shall not be withheld unreasonably. 
4.  In the event that grantee is a corporation, prior approval of the City Council shall be required where there is an actual change in control or where ownership of more than 50 percent of the voting stock of grantee is acquired by a person or group of persons acting in concert, none of whom already own 50 percent or more of the voting stock, singly or collectively. Any such acquisition occurring without prior approval of the City Council shall constitute a failure to comply with a provision of this Chapter within the meaning of Section 31-4 of this Chapter. 
G.  Any such transfer or assignment shall be made only by an instrument in writing, which shall include an acceptance of all terms and conditions of the franchise by transfer of a duly executed copy of which shall be filed with the City Clerk within 30 days after any such transfer or assignment. 
H.  Time shall be of the essence of any such franchise granted hereunder. The grantee shall not be relieved of his obligation to comply promptly with any of the provisions of this Chapter by any failure of the City to enforce prompt compliance. 
I.  Any such franchise granted shall not relieve the grantee of any obligations involved in obtaining pole or conduit space from any department of the City, utility company, or from others maintaining utilities in streets. 
J.  Any franchise granted hereunder, shall be in lieu of any and all other rights, privileges, powers, immunities, and authorities owned, possessed, controlled, or exercisable by grantee, or any successor to any interest of grantee, of or pertaining to the construction, operation, or maintenance of any cable television system in the City; and the acceptance of any franchise hereunder shall operate, as between grantee and the City, and all construction, operation, and maintenance by any grantee of any cable television system in the City shall be, and shall be deemed and construed in all instances and respects to be, under the pursuant to said franchise, and not under or pursuant to any other right, privilege, power, immunity, or authority whatsoever. 
K.  No franchise shall authorize the use of any public property other than public streets and public utility easements owned by the City, unless such franchise or subsequent resolution of the City Council, expressly authorizes such other public property. 
L.  No franchise granted under this Chapter shall ever be given any value by any court or other authority, public or private, in any proceeding of any nature or character, wherein or whereby the City shall be a party or affected therein or thereby. 
M.  Grantee shall be subject to all provisions of the other ordinances, rules, regulations, and specifications of the City heretofore or hereafter adopted, including but not limited to those pertaining to works and activities in, on, over, under, and about streets. 
Any privilege claimed under any franchise granted pursuant to this Chapter in any street or other public property shall be subordinance to the public use and any other lawful use thereof. 
Grantee also shall be subject to the provisions of general laws of the State of California, or as hereafter amended, when applicable to the exercise of any privilege contained in any franchise granted under this Chapter, including but not limited to those pertaining to works and activities in and about state highways. 
N.  Grantee shall be prohibited from directly or indirectly doing any of the following: 
1.  Engaging in the business of selling at retail, leasing, renting, repairing, or servicing of television sets or radios; 
2.  Imposing a fee or charge for any service or repair to subscriber-owned receiving devices except for the connection of its service or for the determination by grantee of the quality of its signal to the recipients thereof; 
3.  Soliciting, referring, or causing or permitting the solicitation or referral of any subscriber to persons engaged in any business herein prohibited to be engaged in by grantee; 
4.  Providing information concerning the viewing patterns of identifiable individual subscribers to any person, group, or organization for any purpose. 
O.  If the Federal Communications Commission or the Public Utilities Commission of the State of California, or any other federal or state body or agency shall now or hereafter exercise any paramount jurisdiction over the subject matter of any franchise granted under this Chapter, then to the extent such jurisdiction shall preempt or preclude the exercise of like jurisdiction by the City, the jurisdiction of the City shall cease and no longer exist. 
The preemption or preclusion of the exercise by the City of any of its police power shall not diminish, impair, alter, or affect any contractual benefit to the City or grantee nor any contractual benefit to the City or grantee nor any contractual obligation of the grantee under any franchise issued hereunder. 
Any and all minimum standards governing the operation of grantee and any and all maximum rates, ratios, and charges specified herein or in any franchise issued hereunder, existing now and at any time in the future, including such time as any paramount jurisdiction shall preempt or preclude that of the City, and any and all rights, powers, privileges, and authorities of the City to determine, establish, or fix any of the same, are each and all hereby declared by the City and by any grantee accepting any franchise hereunder to be contractual in nature and to be for the benefit of the City. 
P.  No person, firm, or corporation within the service area of the grantee, shall be refused service provided, however, that the grantee shall not be required to provide service to any subscriber who does not pay the applicable connection fee or service charge. 
Q.  Before providing cable television service to any subscriber, the grantee shall provide a written notice to the subscriber substantially as follows: 
"Subscriber is hereby notified that in providing cable television service, the grantee is making use of public rights-of way within the City of Del Mar, and that the continued use of such rights-of-way is in no way guaranteed. In the event the continued use of such rights-of-way is denied to grantee for any reason, grantee will make every reasonable effort to provide service over alternate routes. By accepting cable television service, subscriber agrees he will make no claim nor undertake any action against the City of Del Mar, its officers, or its employees if the service to be provided hereunder is interrupted or discontinued." 
R.  The form of the grantee's contract with the subscriber shall also be subject to approval of the City. 
S.  It is not necessarily the City's intention to prohibit erection or continued use of individual television antennas, and no one is or will be required to receive cable television service or connect with a cable television system. 
T.  Should the grantee ever fail to pay any sum of money to the City owing to the City under provisions of this Chapter and/or Section 31-12 hereof when such sum becomes due and payable, grantee shall pay interest to the City on the delinquent sum, until it is fully paid at two interest points above the prime rate of interest charged in the San Diego area as calculated by the City. 
U.  "The CATV system herein franchised shall be used and operated solely and exclusively for the purpose expressly authorized by ordinance of the City of Del Mar and no other purpose whatever." Inclusion of the foregoing statement in any such franchise shall not be deemed to limit the authority of the City to include any other reasonable condition, limitation or restriction which it may deem necessary to impose in connection with such franchise pursuant to the authority conferred by provisions of this Chapter. 
V.  In addition to all other provisions of this Chapter, the Del Mar Municipal Code and the general law, the following specific requirements shall apply to each and every cable franchise granted, or to be granted, by the City: 
1.  Without prior written authorization, neither the franchisee nor any other person shall activate, utilize, or operate any channel from a subscriber's location. 
2.  Every subscriber shall have the absolute right to deactivate the return path from his or her receiver at the franchisee's sole cost. 
3.  The franchisee shall not tabulate any test results nor permit the use of its cable communication system for such tabulation which would reveal the commercial product preferences or opinions of subscribers, members of their families or their guests, licensees, or employees without prior written consent. 
4.  Each compilation, publication, tabulation, or other dissemination of each piece of information made in violation of this Section shall be considered a separate violation of the franchise ordinance. 
5.  A subscriber may revoke any authorization previously made by delivering to the franchisee in writing a substantial indication of his or her intent to so revoke. 
6.  Authorization as required by this Section from a subscriber shall be in writing, shall be revocable at any time without penalty or cost by the subscriber, may not be a condition for receiving cable service, and shall be for no longer than one year. The authorization shall contain a written disclosure to the subscriber advising the subscriber of his or her privacy rights. The only exception to the requirement for written authorization shall be when a franchisee engages in data collection solely for the purposes of billing or verifying system integrity. In all other cases, the actual subscriber must give a written authorization for a tenant even if the landlord otherwise qualifies as the subscriber. 
7.  Notwithstanding Section 657.5(b) of the California Penal Code, no list or other tabulation of the names and addresses of subscribers may be distributed without the prior written consent of each subscriber proposed to be included on such list. The request for consent shall disclose to the subscriber the purpose for which and to whom the list is proposed to be distributed. 
(Ord. No. 300, § 5; Ord. No. 345)  
6.40.060 - Franchise Application Procedures. 
A.  This Chapter itself grants no authority to operate a cable television system to any person. Such grants are only made by the adoption of a separate ordinance awarding a specific franchise to an applicant who has complied with the provisions of this Chapter. 
B.  Each application for a franchise to construct, operate, or maintain any cable television systems in this City shall be filed with the City Clerk and shall contain or be accompanied by the following: 
1.  The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant; 
2.  A detailed statement of the corporate or other business entity organization of the applicant, including, but not limited, to the following and to whatever extent required by the City. 
a.  The names, residence, and business addresses of all officers, directors, and associates of the applicant. 
b.  The names, residence, and business addresses of all officers, persons, and entities having, controlling, or being entitled to have or control of five percent or more of the ownership of the applicant and the respective ownership share of each such person or entity. 
c.  The names and addresses of any parent or subsidiary of the applicant, namely, any other business entity owning or controlling applicant in whole or in part or owned and controlled in whole or in part by the applicant, and a statement describing the nature of any such parent or subsidiary business entity, including but not limited to cable television systems owned or controlled by the applicant, its parent and subsidiary and the areas served thereby. 
d.  A detailed description of all previous experience of the applicant in providing cable television system service and in related or similar fields. 
e.  A detailed and complete financial statement of the applicant. 
f.  A statement identifying, by place and date, any other cable television franchises awarded to the applicant, or its parent or subsidiary; the status of the franchises with respect to completion thereof; the total cost of completion of such systems, and the amount of applicant's and its parent's or subsidiary's resources committed to the completion thereof. 
3.  A thorough, detailed description of the proposed cable television system and plan of operation of the applicant which shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
a.  A detailed map indicating all areas proposed to be served, and a proposed time schedule for the installation of all equipment necessary to become operational throughout the entire area to be served. 
b.  A detailed, informative, and referenced statement describing the actual equipment and operational standards proposed by the applicant. In no event shall the operational and performance standards be less than those adopted by the Rules and Regulations of the Federal Communications Commission (contained in Title 47, Subpart K, Sections 76.601 et seq. 9). 
c.  A detailed estimate of the cost of constructing the applicant's proposed system. 
d.  A copy of the form of any agreement, undertaking, or other instrument proposed to be entered into between the applicant and any subscriber. 
e.  A detailed statement setting forth in its entirety any and all agreements and undertakings, whether formal or informal, written, oral, or implied, existing or proposed to exist, between the applicant and any person, firm, or corporation which materially relate or pertain to or depend upon the application and the granting of the franchise. 
f.  A statement or schedule setting forth all proposed classifications of rates and charges to be made against subscribers and all rates and charges as to each of said classifications, including installation charges and service charges. 
4.  A copy of any agreement existing between the applicant and any public utility subject to regulations by the California Public Utilities Commission providing for the use of any facilities of the public utility, including but not limited to poles, lines, or conduits, within the City and/or adjacent areas. 
5.  Any other details, statement, information, or references pertinent to the subject matter of such application which shall be required or requested by the Council, or by any provision of any other ordinance of the City (and of its Charter). 
6.  An application fee in a sum to be set by the City Manager which shall be in the form of cash, certified or cashier's check, or money order, to pay the costs of studying, investigating, and otherwise processing such application, and which shall be in consideration thereof and not returnable or refundable in whole or in part, except to the extent that such fee exceeds the actual costs incurred by the City in studying, investigating, and otherwise processing the application, provided that any applicant who shall deliver to the City Clerk a written withdrawal of or cancellation of any application hereunder, not later than the seventh day next following the day such application is received by the City Clerk, shall b entitled to have returned and refunded the sum of 50 percent of the fee less any actual costs or expenses incurred by the City by reason of such application. 
C.  The Council may, by advertisement or otherwise, solicit for any other applications for cable television system franchises, and may determine and fix any date upon or after which the same shall be received by the City, or the date before which the same shall not be received, and may make any other determinations and specify any other times, terms, conditions, or limitations respecting the soliciting, calling for, making, and receiving of such applications. 
D.  Upon receipt of any application for franchise, the Council shall refer the same to the City Manager who shall prepare a report and make his recommendations respecting such application, and cause the same to be completed and filed with the Council with 45 days. 
E.  In making any determination hereunder as to any application, the Council shall give due consideration to the quality of the service proposed, rates to subscriber, income to the City, experience, character, background, and financial responsibility of any applicant, and its management and owners, technical and performance quality of equipment, willingness and ability to meet construction and physical requirements, and to abide by policy conditions, franchise limitations and requirements, and any other considerations deemed pertinent by the Council for safeguarding the interest of the City and the public. The Council, in its discretion, shall determine the award of any franchise on the basis of such considerations and without competitive bidding. 
F.  If the Council shall determine to reject such application, such determination shall be final and conclusive, and the same shall be deemed rejected. 
G.  If the Council shall determine to further consider the application, the following shall be done: 
1.  The Council shall decide and specify the terms and conditions of any franchise to be granted hereunder and as herein provided. 
2.  The Council shall pass its resolution of intention to consider the granting of such a franchise, giving notice of receipt of the application(s), and describing the character of the franchise desired, stating the name of the proposed grantee, the character of the franchise, the terms and conditions upon which such franchise is proposed to be granted, including but not limited to, the rates proposed to be charged; that copies of the proposed franchise may be obtained at the office of the City Clerk, fixing and setting forth a time and public place certain when and where interested parties may inspect all the bona fide applications, fixing and setting forth a day, hour, and place certain when and where any persons having any interest therein or objection to the granting thereof may file written protests and appear before the Council and be heard, and the directing of the City Clerk to publish the resolution at once within ten days of the passage thereof in a newspaper of general circulation within the City. 
H.  At the time set for the hearing, or at any adjournment thereof, the Council shall proceed to hear all written protests. Thereafter, the Council shall make one of the following determinations: 
1.  That such franchise be denied; or 
2.  That such franchise be granted upon such conditions as the Council deems appropriate, which conditions may include, on a not-to-exceed basis: 
a.  Charges for installation; 
b.  Subscriber rates; 
c.  Service rates for separate classifications of service such as additional connections. 
I.  If the Council shall determine that a franchise be denied, such determination shall be expressed by resolution; if the Council shall determine that franchise be granted, such determination shall be expressed by ordinance granting a franchise to the applicant. The action of the Council shall be final and conclusive. 
J.  The grantee shall pay to the City a sum of money sufficient to reimburse it for all expenses incurred by the provisions of this Chapter. Such payment shall be made within 30 days after the City furnishes the grantee with a written statement of such expenses. 
(Ord. No. 300, § 6)  
6.40.070 - Applications for Franchise Renewal. 
A.  Any franchise may be renewed for a term not to exceed 15 years, at any time prior to the expiration of the same. An application therefore shall be submitted to the City Manager containing the following information: 
1.  The information required pursuant to Section 6.40.060 hereof; 
2.  A map of the area proposed to be included in the franchise service area; 
3.  A schedule of rates and charges proposed; 
4.  A narrative and/or pictorial description of the facilities in place, and a narrative description of proposed additions and/or replacements thereto, if any. 
B.  Upon receipt of such an application, the City Manager shall review the same and forward to the City Council a report containing the recommendation as to whether the renewal franchise should be granted or not. Upon receipt of such a report, the City Council shall conduct a public hearing, noticed as is provided in Section 6.40.060 hereof. At the time of such hearing, or continuance thereof, the City Council shall, based upon the application, report, and relevant evidence received, determine whether the public interest, convenience, and necessity require the issuance of such franchise. If the City Council determines to deny the application for renewal, it shall do so by resolution. If it determines that the franchise should be granted, it shall do so in the manner provided in Section 6.40.060 hereof. In the event of nonrenewal or termination of a franchise, the City hereby agrees to purchase or to require any successor grantee to purchase grantee's facilities at a cost not to exceed its then fair market value, with a reduction for any uncompensated damages incurred by the City in connection with the grantee's operation. If such fair market value cannot be agreed upon by the parties, it shall be determined by a three-member arbitration panel, one member to be selected by the City Council, one by the franchisee, and the third member by the two members first named. The parties shall divide the expenses of arbitration evenly among themselves. 
(Ord. No. 300, § 7)  
6.40.080 - Acceptance of the Franchise. 
A.  No franchise granted under this Chapter shall become effective for any purpose unless and until written acceptance thereof shall have been filed with the City Clerk. Written acceptance, which shall be in the form and substance approved by the City Attorney, shall also be and operate as an acceptance of each and every term and condition and limitation contained in this Chapter, or in such franchise or otherwise specified as herein provided. 
B.  The written acceptance shall be filed by the grantee not later than 12:01 p.m. of the 40th day next following the effective date of the ordinance granting such franchise. 
C.  In default of the filing of such written acceptance as herein required, the grantee shall be deemed to have rejected and repudiated the franchise. Thereafter, the acceptance of the grantee shall not be received nor filed by the City Clerk. The grantee shall have no rights, remedies, or redress in the premises, unless and until the Council, by resolution, shall determine that such acceptance be received or filed, and then upon such terms and conditions as the Council may impose. 
D.  In any case, and in any instance, all rights, remedies, and redress in these premises which may or shall be available to the City, shall at all times be available to the City, and shall be preserved and maintained and shall continuously exist in and to the City, and shall not be in any manner or means modified, abridged, altered, restricted, or impaired by reason of any of these premises, or otherwise. 
E.  Any franchise granted and accepted under this Chapter shall be in lieu of any and all other rights, privileges, powers, immunities, and authorities owned, possessed, controlled, or exercisable by the grantee, of or pertaining to the construction, operation, or maintenance of any cable television systems in the City. 
(Ord. No. 300, § 8)  
6.40.090 - Cable Television Service. 
A.  Basic Service. The cable television system to be installed and operated pursuant to a franchise granted hereunder shall: 
1.  Be operationally capable of relaying to subscriber terminals those television and radio broadcast signals for the carriage of which the grantee is now or thereafter authorized by the Federal Communications Commission. 
2.  Distribute color television signals which it received in color. 
3.  Provide channel capacity and basic equipment for program production in cablecasting for educational and public access uses, and for use of the City. Until there is demand for full channel time use, such may be combined on one or more channels. 
4.  Have a minimum capacity of 20 channels. 
5.  As a minimum, have the capability of being converted at any time to provide full reverse transmission (two-way transmission) in any portion of the system or trunk by changing filter modules and adding appropriate reverse amplifiers. Further, the two-way capability shall be fully activated from production facilities in those schools and colleges specified in the franchise ordinance(s) granted hereunder. 
B.  Non-basic Services. The cable television system permitted to be installed and operated hereunder, may also engage in the business of: 
1.  Transmitting original cablecast programming not received through television broadcast signals; 
2.  Transmitting television pictures, film and video tape programs, not received through broadcast television signals; whether or not encoded or processed to permit reception by only selected receivers or subscribers; 
3.  Transmitting and receiving all other signals: digital, voice, and audio visual, etc. 
C.  Public Service. With respect to both the basic and non-basic services, the grantee shall provide all basic subscriber services, those non-basic services so stipulated in the franchise granted, and a tie-in connection; 
1.  Without costs to public schools and community colleges within the City; 
2.  Without costs as designated by the City Council, to buildings owned and controlled by the City, used for public purposes but not for residential use (fire and police stations excepted for basic subscriber services); and 
3.  As stipulated by the franchise(s) granted hereunder, and with the approval of the City of San Diego, to those public schools, colleges and universities outside the City's territorial limits and concurrently within the Del Mar Union School District, San Dieguito Union High School District, and the City of San Diego's territorial limits. 
(Ord. No. 300, § 9)  
6.40.100 - Technical Requirements. 
A.  The CATV system to be constructed by the grantee shall be installed, maintained, and operated at all times in full compliance with the technical and channel capacity standards of the FCC. The results of annual performance tests conducted in accordance with Section 76.601(c), FCC rules (or such other section of the rules as shall incorporate its substance) shall be retained for at least five years and available for inspection by the City. 
B.  It is the desire of the City that all cable televisions systems franchised hereunder shall, insofar as financially and technically possible, be compatible one with another and with systems adjacent to the City. 
(Ord. No. 330, § 10)  
6.40.110 - Service Standards. 
A.  Throughout the life of its franchise and in addition to other service regulations adopted by the Council, and excepting circumstances beyond grantee's control, such as acts of God, riots, and civil disturbances, and in providing the foregoing services, the grantee shall: 
1.  Maintain all parts of its system in good condition and in accordance with standards generally observed by the cable television industry. Sufficient employees shall be retained to provide safe, adequate, and prompt service for all its facilities. 
2.  Limit system failures to minimum time duration by locating and correcting malfunctioning as promptly as is reasonably possible, irrespective of holidays or other nonbusiness hours. 
3.  Maintain a conveniently located business office and service center to which subscribers may telephone without incurring added message units or toll charges. This office shall be open during all usual business hours, with its telephone listed in directories of the telephone company serving the City, and be so operated that complaints and requests for repairs or adjustments may be received by telephone at any time when any television signals are being broadcast. 
4.  Dispatch personnel to investigate all service complaints and equipment malfunctions within 24 hours and strive to render efficient service to resolve such complaints as promptly as possible. Planned interruption of service shall be only for good cause. Insofar as possible, planned service interruptions shall be preceded by notice, be of brief duration, and occur during minimum viewing hours. 
5.  Maintain a data base, or "log," listing date of consumer complaints, identifying the subscriber, and describing the nature of the complaint and when and what action was taken by the grantee in response thereto. From the date the system is first energized, said record shall be kept accessible via the grantee's local office for a period of three years or as long as a customer is active, whichever occurs first, and shall be available for inspection during regular business hours without further notice or demand by the City Manager or any other duly authorized representative of the City. 
6.  Upon recurring or unresolved complaint by subscriber(s), make a demonstration satisfactory to the City Manager that a signal is being delivered which is of sufficient strength and quality to meet the standards set forth in the regulations of the Federal Communications Commission, or in regulations hereafter adopted by the City. 
7.  Permit the City Engineer or his designated representative to inspect and test the system's technical equipment and facilities upon reasonable (12—24-hour's) notice. 
8.  Upon termination of service to any subscriber, a grantee shall promptly remove all its facilities and equipment from the premises of such subscriber upon his request. 
B.  Responsibility for the administration of any franchise granted hereunder and for the resolution of all complaints against a grantee regarding the quality of service, equipment malfunctions, and similar matters, is hereby delegated to the City Manager who is empowered, among other things, to adjust, settle, or compromise any controversy arising from operations of the grantee either on behalf of the City, the grantee, or any subscriber, in accordance with the best interest of the public, provided that any person aggrieved by a decision of the City Manager may appeal the matter to the City Council for hearing and determination. The City Council may accept, reject, or modify the decision of the City Manager, and may adjust, settle, or compromise any controversy arising from the operations of the grantee under any franchise grated pursuant to this Chapter. No adjustment, settlement, or compromise, whether instituted by the City Manager or by the City Council, shall be contrary to the provisions of this Chapter or of the franchise agreement, and neither the City Manager nor the City Council, in the adjustment, settlement, or compromise of any controversy shall have the right or authority to add to, modify, or delete any provision of this Chapter or of the franchise. The grantee shall notify subscribers at the time of initial subscription to the system of the procedure for reporting and resolving complaints by delivering to each subscriber a notice in form approved by the City Manager. 
(Ord. No. 300, § 11; Ord. No. 320, § 12)  
6.40.120 - Safety Requirements. 
A grantee shall, at all times: 
A.  Install and maintain its wires, cables, fixtures, and other equipment in accordance with the requirements of the City's building code and electrical safety ordinances, and in such manner that they will not interfere with any installations of the City. 
B.  Keep and maintain in a safe, suitable, substantial condition, and in good order and repair, all its structures, lines, equipment, and connections in, over, under, and upon the streets, sidewalks, alleys, and public ways or places of the City, wherever situated or located. 
(Ord. No. 300, § 12)  
6.40.139 - Conditions on Street Occupancy. 
A.  Any pavements, sidewalks, curbing, or other paved area taken up or any excavations made by a grantee shall be done under permits issued for the work by the proper officials of the City, and under their supervision and direction, and shall be done in such manner as to give the least inconvenience to the inhabitants of the City. A grantee shall, at its own cost and expense, and in a manner approved by the proper City officials, replace and restore any such pavements, sidewalks, curbing or other paved areas in as good a condition as before the work involving such disturbance was done, and shall also make and keep full and complete plats, maps, and records showing the exact locations of its facilities located within the public streets, ways, and easements of the City. These maps shall be available for inspection at any time during business hours by City officials. 
B.  A grantee shall, at its expense, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate, or remove any of its property when required by the City by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, road construction, change of street grade, installation of sewers, drains, water pipes, power lines, signal lines, tracks, or any other type of municipal improvements, provided, however, that the grantee shall, in all cases, have the privilege of abandoning any property in place. If the City requests substantial relocating, it shall compensate grantee in the amount of its relocation costs. 
C.  A grantee shall, on the request of any person holding a building moving permit issued by the City, temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of buildings. The expense of such temporary removal or raising or lowering of wires shall be paid by the person requesting same, and the grantee shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. The grantee shall be given not less than 48 hours advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes. 
D.  A grantee shall have authority to trim the trees upon and overhanging the public streets so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires and cables of the grantee, except that, at the option of the City Council, such trimming may be done by it or under its supervision and direction at the expense of the grantee. 
E.  In all sections of the City where the cable, wires, or other similar facilities of public utilities are placed underground, the grantee shall place its cables, wires or other like facilities underground to the maximum extent that existing technology reasonably permits the grantee to do so. 
F.  In all sections of the City where wires, cables, and other system appurtenances are mounted above ground, every reasonable effort shall be made to minimize obstruction of the view of residents, and every reasonable effort shall be made to preclude an unsightly system installation. 
(Ord. No. 300, § 13)  
6.40.140 - Indemnifications. 
A.  Upon being granted a franchise, and upon filing of the acceptance required, the grantee shall, at his sole expense, obtain, file with the City Clerk, and thereafter maintain during the full term of such franchise or any renewal thereof plus an additional six months thereafter, a corporate surety bond or other adequate surety agreement in such amount and form as shall have been approved by the City Manager. 
B.  By accepting a franchise, each grantee shall be deemed to have agreed to indemnify and hold harmless the City, its offices, boards, commissions, agents, and/or employees against and from any and all claims, demands, causes of actions, actions, suits, proceedings, damages (including costs or liabilities of the City with respect to its employees), of every kind and nature whatsoever, including but not limited to damages for injury or death or damage to person or property, and regardless of the merit of any of the same, and against all liability to others, and against any loss, cost, and expense resulting or arising out of any of the same, including any attorney fees, accountant fees, expert witness or consultant fees, court costs, per diem expense, travelling and transportation expense, or other costs or expense arising out of or pertaining to the exercise or the enjoyment of any franchise hereunder by grantee, or the granting thereof by the City. 
C.  The grantee shall, at the sole risk and expense of grantee, upon demand of the City, made by and through the City Attorney, appear in and defend any and all suits, actions, or other legal proceedings, whether judicial, quasi-judicial, administrative, legislative, or otherwise brought or instituted or had by third persons or duly constituted authorities, against or affecting the City, its officers, boards, commissions, agents, or employees, and arising out of or pertaining to the exercise or the enjoyment of such franchise, or the granting thereof by the City. 
Alternatively, in the discretion of the City Manager, the City may, on behalf of itself, and/or any of its officers, agents, or employees, elect to employ, at grantee's expense, attorneys to appear and defend such actions. 
The grantee shall pay and satisfy and shall cause to be paid and satisfied any judgement, decree, order, directive, or demand rendered, made or issued against grantee, the City, its officers, boards, commissions, agents, or employees in any of these premises; and such indemnity shall exist and continue without reference to or limitation by the amount of any bond, policy of insurance, deposit, undertaking or other assurance required hereunder, or otherwise, provided that neither grantee nor City shall make or enter into any compromise or settlement of any claim, demand, cause of action, action, suit or other proceeding, without first obtaining the written consent of the other. 
D.  Upon being granted a franchise, and upon the filing of the acceptance required under Section 31-8 hereof, the grantee shall file with the City Clerk and shall thereafter, during the entire term of such franchise, maintain in full force and effect each of the following policies of insurance: 
1.  General comprehensive liability insurance in a form satisfactory to and an amount approved by the City Attorney, together with bodily injury and property damage liability insurance with such limits as may be required by the City Council but not less than $1,000,000.00 for each person injured and $2,000,000.00 aggregate per single accident or occurrence, and $1,000,000.00 for property damage. The City shall be named as an additional insured on all such insurance policies and such policies shall provide they cannot be cancelled unless at least 30 days prior written notice of intent to terminate or cancel has been given to the City. 
a.  The City shall be named as an additional insured in any of the insurance policies. 
b.  Where such insurance is provided by a policy which also covers grantee or any other entity or person, it shall contain the standard cross-liability endorsement. 
2.  Workers compensation insurance coverage in at least the minimum amounts required by law. If a grantee fails to obtain or maintain such required insurance coverage, City may without notice to grantee, obtain, at grantee's sole expense, such coverage, or forthwith terminate, without prior notice, the franchise as granted. 
(Ord. No. 300, § 14)  
6.40.150 - Franchise Payments. 
A.  In consideration of the granting and exercise of a franchise to use the streets, as herein defined, for the operation of a cable television system, any grantee shall pay to the City during the life of the franchise the following: 
1.  A percentage of its gross annual basic subscriber revenues; 
2.  A percentage of its gross annual non-basic service revenues; 
3.  A percentage of its gross annual advertising revenues; 
4.  A percentage of its gross annual lease revenues. 
B.  The percentage payments shall be made in the manner, amounts, and at times directed in the franchise or in a Council resolution fixing franchise fees and adopting rules for service and rate regulation. 
C.  At the discretion of the City Council, a percentage or portion of the franchise payments may be earmarked to assist in the funding of certain non-basic services, e.g., local and educational access, etc. 
D.  A grantee shall file with the City Clerk, within 90 days after the expiration of any calendar year or portion thereof during which its franchise is in force, a financial statement certified by a responsible officer of the grantee, showing in detail the gross subscriber revenues, as defined herein, of the grantee during the preceding calendar year or portion thereof. Additionally, grantee shall submit to the City copies of all FCC Forms 325 and 326 reports (and any future revisions or replacements thereof) within ten days after submission to the FCC. 
E.  The City shall have the right to inspect the grantee's local records to determine if proper payments have been made to the City. The cost of such audits shall be borne by grantee if the same results in increasing, by more than two percent, the grantee's annual payment to the City. 
F.  No acceptance of any payment shall be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim the City may have for further or additional sums payable under this Chapter or for the performance of any other obligation hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 300, § 15)  
6.40.160 - Rates and Charges. 
Once established, the City Council may determine, at its discretion, that no rate or charge shall be increased at any time after granting of a franchise, without prior approval of the City Council. 
A.  Should the grantee desire to change any rate or charge, it shall file a petition with the City Council at least 90 days prior to the proposed date of change. The petition shall detail the proposed changes and set forth the reason changes are desired. The petition shall include system historical financial data (balance sheets and detailed profit and loss statements) for the period since commencement of system operations or the previous five years whichever is the lesser. 
B.  Council determination of proper rates and charges shall be based on factors considered important by Council, which shall include, but are not limited to: the quality of signal delivered to subscribers, the quality of service provided to subscribers, channel capacity, number and quality of service provided to subscribers, channel capacity, number and quality of programming sources, and underlying economics of the system (system cash flow, grantee's return on investment, etc.). In this regard, the City reserves the right to inspect all of the grantee's property and records in adjudging the merits of a request for increase in rates and/or charges. 
C.  In connection with any proposed increase in any rate or charge, the Council may direct the City Manager to conduct a hearing on the matter. If so directed, the City Manager shall set the day, hour, and place certain when and where any person having any interest therein may appear and be heard. This hearing should normally be conducted within 60 days from date of receipt of petition. The notice of a public hearing on the matter should be published at least ten days before the date of the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the City. 
D.  At the time set for such hearing, or at any adjournment thereof, the City Manager shall hear the matter. Following the close of such hearing, the City Manager shall prepare and file with the City Council a report of the hearing, and his recommendations and the reasons therefor. After receipt of the City Manager's report, the Council shall determine whether to adopt the report or to hold a further hearing. If the Council elects to adopt the recommendations of the City Manager, it shall do so by resolution. If it elects to conduct a hearing thereon, it shall adopt a resolution of intention to do so, describing and stating the proposed increase or decrease in rates or charges; fixing and setting forth a day, hour, and place certain when and where any persons having any interest therein may appear before the Council and be heard. Such resolution shall direct the City Clerk to publish the same resolution at least once within ten days of the passage thereof in a newspaper of general circulation within the City. The City Clerk also shall cause a copy of such resolution to be mailed to the grantee at least ten days prior to the date specified for hearing thereon. At the time set for such hearing, or at any adjournment thereof, the Council shall hear and decide the matter. 
E.  No rate established shall afford any undue preference or advantage among subscribers, but separate rates may be established for separate classes of subscribers and rates may reflect the increased cost of providing service to isolated or sparsely populated areas. 
(Ord. No. 300, § 16)  
6.40.170 - Permits and Construction. 
A.  Within 30 days after acceptance of any franchise, the grantee shall proceed with due diligence to obtain all necessary permits and authorizations which are required in the conduct of its business, including, but not limited to, any utility joint use attachment agreements, microwave carrier licenses, and any other permits, licenses, and authorizations to be granted by duly constituted regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the operation of cable television systems, or associated microwave transmission facilities. 
In connection therewith, copies of all petitions, applications, and communications submitted by the grantee to the Federal Communications Commission, Securities and Exchange Commission, or any other Federal or State regulatory commission or agency having jurisdiction in respect to any matters affecting grantee's cable television operations, shall also be submitted simultaneously to the City Manager. 
B.  Within 90 days after obtaining all necessary permits, licenses, and authorizations, including right of access to poles and conduits, grantee shall commence construction and installation of the cable television system. 
C.  Within 180 days after the commencement of construction and installation of the system, grantee shall proceed to render service to subscribers, and the completion of the installation and construction shall be pursued with reasonable diligence thereafter, so that service to all of the areas designated and scheduled on the map and plan of construction made part of the franchise shall be provided as set forth therein. 
D.  Failure on the part of the grantee to commence and diligently pursue each of the foregoing requirements and to complete each of the matters set forth herein, shall be grounds for termination of such franchise. By resolution, the Council, in its discretion, may extend the time for the commencement and completion of installation and construction for additional periods in the event the grantee, acting in good faith, experiences delays by reason of circumstances beyond his control. 
E.  Grantee shall utilize existing poles, conduits, and other facilities, or whenever existing conduits and other facilities shall be located beneath the surface of the streets, or whenever the City shall undertake a program designated to cause all conduits and other facilities to be located beneath the surface of the streets in any area or throughout the City, in the exercise of its police power or pursuant to the terms hereof, upon reasonable notice to grantee, the City may require any such to be constructed, installed, placed, or replaced beneath the surface of the streets. Any construction, installation, placement, replacement, or changes which may be so required shall be made at the expense of grantee, whose costs shall be determined as in the case of public utilities. 
F.  The City shall have the right, free of charge, to make additional use, for any public or municipal purpose, whether governmental or proprietary, of any poles, conduits, or other similar facilities erected, controlled, or maintained exclusively by or for grantee in any street, provided such use by City does not interfere with the use by grantee. 
G.  In those areas of the City where the transmission or distribution facilities of the respective public utilities providing telephone, communication, and electric services are underground, or hereafter are placed underground, the grantee likewise shall construct, operate, and maintain all of his transmission and distribution facilities underground. 
The term underground shall include a partial underground system, provided that upon obtaining the written approval of the City Manager, amplifiers in the grantee's transmission and distribution lines may be placed in appropriate housing upon the surface of the ground. 
H.  The grantee, at his expense, shall protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate, or remove any property of grantee when, in the opinion of the City Manager the same is required by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street vacation, freeway or street construction; change or establishment of street grade, installation of sewers, drains, water pipes, power line, signal line, transportation facilities, tracks, or any other types of structure or improvements by governmental agencies whether acting in a governmental or a proprietary capacity, or any other structure or public improvement, including but not limited to movement of buildings, urban renewal and redevelopment, and any general program under which the City shall undertake to cause all such properties to be located beneath the surface of the ground. The grantee shall in all cases have the privilege, subject to the corresponding obligations, to abandon any property of grantee in place, as herein provided. Nothing hereunder shall be deemed a taking of the property of grantee, and grantee shall be entitled to no surcharge by reason of anything hereunder. 
I.  Upon the failure, refusal, or neglect of grantee to cause any work or other act required by law or hereunder to be properly completed in, or over, or under any street within any time prescribed therefor, or upon notice given, where no time is prescribed, the City Manager may cause such work or other act to be completed in whole or in part, and upon so doing shall submit to grantee an itemized statement of the costs thereof. The grantee shall, within 30 days after receipt of such statement, pay to the City the entire amount thereof. 
J.  In the event that: 
1.  The use of any part of the system of grantee is discontinued for any reason for a continuous period of 30 days, without prior written notice to and approval by the City; 
2.  Any part of such system has been installed in any street or other area without complying with the requirements hereof; or 
3.  Any franchise shall be terminated, cancelled, or shall expire, then the grantee shall, at the option of the City, and at the expense of grantee and at no expense to the City, and upon demand of the City, promptly remove from any streets or other area all property of grantee, and grantee shall promptly restore the street or other area from which such property has been removed to such condition as the City Manager shall approve. 
The Council may, upon written application therefor by grantee, approve the abandonment of any of such property in place by grantee. Upon abandonment of any such property in place, grantee shall cause to be executed, acknowledged, and delivered to the City such instruments as the City Attorney shall prescribe and approve, transferring and conveying the ownership of such property to the City. 
(Ord. No. 300, § 17)  
6.40.180 - Rights Reserved to the City. 
A.  Nothing herein shall be deemed or construed to impair or affect, in any way, to any extent, the right of the City to acquire the property of the grantee, either by purchase or through the exercise of the right of eminent domain, at a fair and just value, which shall not include any amount for the franchise itself or for any of the rights or privileges granted thereby, and nothing herein contained shall be construed to contract away or to modify or abridge, whether for a term or in perpetuity, the City's right of eminent domain. 
B.  There is hereby reserved to the City every right and power which is required to be herein reserved or provided by any law, and the grantee, by its acceptance of the franchise, agrees to be bound thereby and to comply with any action or requirements of the City in its exercise of such rights or power, heretofore, or hereafter enacted or established. 
C.  Neither the granting of any franchise nor any provision hereof shall constitute a waiver or bar to the exercise of any governmental right or power of the City. 
D.  The City hereby reserves to itself the right to intervene in any suit, action, or proceeding involving any provision of this Chapter. The Council may do all things which are necessary and convenient in the exercise of its jurisdiction under this Chapter and may determine any question of fact which may arise during the existence of any franchise granted hereunder. The City Manager, with the approval of the City Attorney, is hereby authorized and empowered to adjust, settle, or compromise any controversy or charge arising from the operations of any grantee under this Chapter, either on behalf of the City, the grantee, or any subscriber, in the best interest of the public. 
E.  The City, at its option, when for sufficient cause as deemed by the City Manger, may require that the annual performance test, addressed in Section 31-10(a), supra, be conducted or observed by a qualified member of the City's staff or its designated representative. The City reserves the right to have the measurements associated with City-observed performance tests, conducted at City-selected test points and to a greater number of test points than the minimum required by Section 76.601, FCC Rules. Additionally, the grantee shall reimburse the City for all expenses incurred by it in connection with the City conducting or observing the annual performance tests, when the results of those tests are deemed by the City to fall below a 90 percent level of compliance with the minimum technical standards set forth by Section 76.605 of FCC Rules. 
F.  Any delegable right, power, or duty of the City Council, the City, or any official of the City, may be transferred or delegated by resolution to an appropriate officer, employee, or department of the City. 
(Ord. No. 300, § 18)  
6.40.190 - Rules and Regulations. 
The Council shall adopt rules and regulations relating to standards of operation. 
A.  At any time, the Council may adopt reasonable rules, regulations, and standards governing the operation of cable television systems in the City, consistent with the provisions of this Chapter and the franchise. Such rules, regulations, and standards shall apply to and shall govern the operations of the grantee of any franchise hereunder, and are expressly declared to be a part of any franchise hereunder. 
B.  Prior to adopting any such rule, regulation, or standard, the City Council shall conduct a duly noticed hearing thereon. 
At the time set for such hearing, or at any adjournment thereof, the Council shall proceed to hear any relevant evidence relating to the matter. Thereafter, the Council, by its resolution, may adopt, amend, or modify such rules and regulations. 
C.  The standards adopted may govern the engineering, construction, installation, service, and maintenance of all cable television systems in the City, including but not limited to standards governing carrier levels, signal-to-noise ratios, hum modulation, distortion levels, channel interactions and inter-reactions. 
(Ord. No. 300, § 19)  
6.40.200 - Amendment of Chapter and Franchise. 
The City Council shall amend this Chapter and any franchise issued hereunder, upon its own motion or the application of a grantee whenever amendment is necessary to enable a grantee to utilize new developments in television or radio signal transmission which would improve and update cable television service in the City, or to comply with any modifications in the Rules of the FCC. Amendments to Section 76.31 of the FCC Rules will be incorporated into this Chapter within one year of their adoption or at the time of franchise renewal, whichever comes first. No amendment shall be adopted except after full, open public hearing affording due process, and no amendment substantially amending the existing rights and obligations of the grantee shall be adopted without grantee's consent. 
A.  A franchise granted to provide service within the City shall authorize and permit the grantee to solicit, sell, distribute, and make a charge to subscribers within the City for connection to the cable television system of grantee, and shall also authorize and permit the grantee to traverse any portion of the City in order to provide service outside the City. 
B.  A franchise, easement, license, or other permit to anyone other than a grantee to traverse any portion of the City in order to provide service outside the City shall not authorize nor permit said person to solicit, sell, distribute, or make any charge to subscribers within the City, nor to render any service or connect any subscriber within the City to the cable television service system of grantee. 
C.  When not otherwise prescribed herein, all matters herein required to be filed with the City shall be filed with the City Clerk. 
(Ord. No. 300, §§ 20, 21)  
6.40.220 - Equal Opportunity Employment and Affirmative Action Plan. 
In the carrying out of the construction, maintenance, and operation of the cable television system, the grantee shall not discriminate against any employee or applicant for employment because of race, creed, color, sex, or national origin. 
The grantee shall take affirmative action to ensure that applicants are employed, and that employees are treated during employment, without regard to their race, creed, color, sex, or national origin. Such action shall include, but not be limited to, the following: employment upgrading, demotion, or transfer, recruitment or recruitment advertising, layoff or termination, rate of pay or other form of compensation, and selection for training, including apprenticeship. 
The grantee shall post in conspicuous places, available to employees and applicants for employment, notices setting forth the provisions of this nondiscrimination clause. 
The grantee shall, in all solicitations or advertisements for employees placed by or on behalf of the grantee, state that all qualified applicants will receive compensation for employment without regard to race, creed, color, sex, or national origin. 
The grantee shall incorporate the foregoing requirements in all of its contracts for work relative to construction, maintenance, and operation of the cable television system, other than contracts for standard commercial supplies or raw materials, and shall require all of its contractors for such work to incorporate such requirements in all subcontracts for such work. 
(Ord. No. 300, § 22)  
6.40.230 - Violations. 
A.  From and after the effective date of this Chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install, or maintain within any public street in the City, or within any other public property of the City, or within any privately owned area within the City which has not yet become a public street but is designated or delineated as a proposed public street on any tentative subdivision map approved by the City, any equipment or facilities for distributing any television signals or radio signals through a cable television system, unless a franchise authorizing such use of such street or property or area has first been obtained pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, and unless such franchise is in full force and effect. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to make or use any unauthorized connection, whether physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively or otherwise, with any part of a franchised cable televisions system within this City for the purpose of enabling himself or others to receive or use any television signal, radio signal, picture, program, sound, or other system service without payment to the owner of the system. 
C.  It shall be unlawful for any person, without the consent of the owner, to willfully tamper with, remove, or injure any cables, wires, or equipment used for distribution of television signals, radio signals, pictures, programs, sound, or other system service. 
(Ord. No. 300, § 23)  
6.40.240 - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Chapter is for any reason held illegal, invalid, or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof. The Council hereby declares that it would have passed this Chapter and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase hereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phases be declared illegal, invalid, or unconstitutional. The invalidity of any portion of this Chapter shall not abate, reduce, or otherwise affect any consideration or other obligation required of the grantee of any franchise granted hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 300, § 24)  
6.40.250 - Notices. 
Every direction, notice, or order to be served upon a grantee shall be sent to the local office described in Section 31-11(a), supra. Every notice to be served upon the City shall be delivered or sent by certified mail to the City Clerk at 1050 Camino del Mar, California 92014. The delivery of such notice shall be deemed to have been at the time of receipt. 
(Ord. No. 300, § 25)  
Chapter 6.41 - VIDEO SERVICE FRANCHISE FEES, CUSTOMER SERVICE AND OTHER VIDEO SERVICE-RELATED MATTERS 
 
6.41.010 - Regulation of State Video Service Franchises and City Cable Franchises. 
Under State law effective January 1, 2007, the California Public Utilities Commission ("PUC") has the authority to grant state video service franchises. The City of Del Mar ("City") will acquire certain rights and responsibilities with respect to state video service franchise holders. These include the receipt of a franchise fee and a fee for Public, Educational and Government ("PEG") purposes, both based on a percentage of the gross revenues of state franchise holders, as well as the establishment and enforcement of penalties for violations of customer service rules. The City will retain authority, without change, over all City cable franchisees until such time as they no longer hold a valid City cable franchise, or are no longer operating under a current or expired City cable franchise. The City may continue to grant, modify, renew, extend or terminate City cable franchises for cable service until January 1, 2008. After January 1, 2008 the City may modify, renew, extend or terminate existing City cable franchises, whether current or expired. 
(Ord. No. 797)  
6.41.020 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this Chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
A.  Cable franchise has the same meaning as the term "franchise" in Subsection 6.40.020.H. 
B.  Cable franchisee has the same meaning as "grantee" in Subsection 6.40.020.I. 
C.  Cable service means service provided through a "cable television system," as that term is defined in Subsection 6.40.020.B. 
D.  State franchise holder has the same meaning as "state video service franchise holder."  
6.41.030 - State Video Service Franchise and PEG Fees. 
A.  For any state franchise holder operating within the boundaries of the City, there shall be a fee paid to the City equal to five percent of the gross revenue of that state franchise holder. 
B.  For any state franchise holder operating within the boundaries of the City, there shall be an additional fee paid to the City equal to two percent of the gross revenue of that state franchise holder, which fee shall be used by the City for PEG purposes consistent with state and federal law. 
C.  Gross revenue, for the purposes of Subsections A. and B. above, shall have the definition set forth in California Public Utilities Code § 5860, as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 874) 
Editor's note— Sections 1 and 2 of Ord. No. 938 , adopted July 2, 2018, state the following: "Section One: Reauthorization. The City's PEG fee imposed in Chapter 6.41, Section 6.41.030(B) of the Del Mar Municipal Code is reauthorized and readopted to the extent required by California Public Utilities Code section 5870(n). All state-franchised video service providers operating within the City, shall continue to be subject to the PEG fee required by Chapter 6.41 of the Del Mar Municipal Code, which fee shall remain unchanged and in full effect as to all state-franchised video service providers operating within the City. 
 Section Two: Automatic Reauthorization. Commencing from, and after, the effective date of this Ordinance, the City's PEG fee set forth in Chapter 6.41, Section 6.41.030(B) of the Del Mar Municipal Code shall continue to apply to any new or existing franchisee operating in the City and shall automatically be reauthorized upon the expiration of any existing or future state video franchise(s) held by any state-franchised video service provider operating within the City. This Ordinance shall so renew until such time that the City Council takes formal affirmative action to cease the renewals.  
6.41.040 - Audit Authority. 
Not more than once annually, the City Manager or his or her designee may examine and perform an audit of the business records of a state franchise holder to ensure compliance with Section 6.41.030.  
6.41.050 - Customer Service Penalties Under State Video Service Franchises. 
A.  The holder of a state video service franchise shall comply with all applicable state and federal customer service and protection standards pertaining to the provision of video service. 
B.  The City Manager or his or her designee shall monitor the compliance of state franchise holders with respect to state and federal customer service and protection standards. The City Manager or his or her designee will provide the state franchise holder written notice of any material breaches of applicable customer and service standards, and will allow the state franchise holder 30 days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach. Material breaches not remedied within the 30-day time period will be subject to the following penalties to be imposed by the City: 
1.  For the first occurrence of a violation, a fine of $500.00 shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed $1,500.00 for each occurrence of the violation. 
2.  For a second occurrence of a violation of the same nature within 12 months, a fine of $1,000.00 shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed $3,000.00 for each occurrence of the violation. 
3.  For a third or further occurrence of a violation of the same nature within 12 months, a fine of $2,500.00 shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed $7,500.00 for each occurrence of the violation. 
C.  A state franchise holder may appeal a penalty assessed by the City Manager or his or her designee to the City Council within 60 days of the initial assessment. After relevant speakers are heard, and any necessary staff reports are submitted, City Council will vote to uphold, modify or vacate the penalty. The City Council's decision on the imposition of a penalty shall be final.  
6.41.060 - City Response to State Video Service Franchise Applications. 
A.  Applicants for state video service franchises within the boundaries of the City must concurrently provide complete copies to the City of any application or amendments to applications filed with the PUC. One complete copy must be provided to the City Clerk, and one complete copy to the City Manager. 
B.  Within 30 days of receipt, the City Manager will provide any appropriate comments to the PUC regarding an application or an amendment to an application for a state video service franchise.  
6.41.070 - Extension of Existing City Cable Franchises. 
Any entity providing cable service under an expired City cable franchise on January 1, 2007, shall hereby have the terms of its City cable franchise extended on the same terms and conditions until January 2, 2008. The extension of a City cable franchise does not preclude the City from further modifications, renewals, extensions or termination of that City cable franchise.  
Chapter 6.44 - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT 
 
6.44.010 - Purpose. 
A.  Without first having obtained an Operations Permit: Adult Entertainment Establishment, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate an adult entertainment establishment. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an adult entertainment establishment in violation of any of the regulations contained in this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 425)  
6.44.020 - Definition—Adult Entertainment Establishment. 
For purposes of this Chapter, adult entertainment establishment shall mean any commercial activity in which more than 15 percent of the total floor area of such commercial activity is utilized for one or more of the following: 
A.  The presentation of material which has as a substantial component of its theme, the depiction, illustration, or description of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities. 
B.  The presentation of a live performance which has as a substantial component of its presentation, the depiction, illustration, or description of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities. 
C.  The display or exposure of specified anatomical areas. 
D.  The display or exposure of specified sexual activities.  
6.44.022 - Same—Specified Anatomical Areas. 
For purposes of this Chapter, "specified anatomical areas" shall mean: 
A.  Less than completely or opaquely covered human genitalia, pubic region, anus, mature buttocks, or mature female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
B.  Human male genitalia in a discernible turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.  
6.44.024 - Same—Specified Sexual Activity. 
For purposes of this Chapter, specified sexual activity shall mean: 
A.  The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, anus, or female breasts. 
B.  Sex acts, either actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, sodomy, bestiality, necrophilia, or masturbation. 
C.  Sexually oriented torture, flagellation, or infliction of pain. 
D.  Human excretory functions.  
6.44.030 - Issuing Authority. 
The issuing authority for the Operations Permit: Adult Entertainment Establishment shall be the Planning Commission, after noticed public hearing.  
6.44.040 - Fees. 
An investigating fee and a permit fee shall be paid by the applicant in an amount fixed by resolution of the City Council.  
6.44.050 - Regulations. 
The issuing authority shall grant the application for an Operations Permit: Adult Entertainment Establishment if the following standards have been satisfied: 
A.  The site of the activity will be within either the North Commercial Zone or the Central Commercial Zone. 
B.  The site of the activity shall be no closer than 1,200 feet from an existing site for which an Operations Permit: Adult Entertainment Establishment has been issued and is then currently in effect. 
C.  The site of the activity shall be no closer than 500 feet from any property then zoned for residential use. 
D.  The site of the activity shall be no closer than 600 feet from the site of the existing church, public playground, public park, public recreation area, or school. 
E.  The proposed site of the adult entertainment establishment complies with all requirements of the Municipal Code. 
F.  The presentation or display of specified anatomical areas and specified sexual activities shall be entirely within the adult entertainment establishment and positioned, covered, or screened in such a manner as to prevent a view of the specified anatomical areas or the specified sexual activities by a member of the public in a public or semi-public area, including without limitation, sidewalks, streets, arcades, hallways, or passageways. 
G.  The presentation or display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities shall be positioned, covered, or screened in such a manner as to prevent an unwarned view by a member of the public within the adult entertainment establishment. There must be sufficient notice to allow members of the public to avoid viewing the specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.  
6.44.052 - Measurement of Regulator Distances. 
The regulatory distances shall be measured as follows: 
A.  Commencing at the closest exterior structural wall of the proposed adult entertainment establishment or the closest property line if the adult entertainment establishment does not have an exterior structural wall; then 
B.  In a straight line; 
C.  To the closest exterior wall of an existing adult entertainment establishment or the closest property line of an adult entertainment establishment without an exterior structural wall, or to the closest property line of property zoned for residential use or being utilized for a church, public playground, public park, public recreation area, or school.  
6.44.060 - Additional Regulation: Film and Printed Materials. 
If the adult entertainment establishment involves the preview of films, cassettes, slides, or other visual depictions as part of its operation, sound proof booths or rooms shall be made available, at no charge, for use by customers who desire such preview. Each booth or room shall have: 
A.  One clear window, visible immediately upon entering the premises, covering not less than one-fourth of the wall area into which the window is set, which window shall not be covered or obscured in any manner when the booth or room is in use. 
B.  Sufficient seating to accommodate the expected number of persons who will occupy the booth or room at any one time. 
C.  The number of persons who shall occupy the booth or room at any one time shall be clearly stated on or near the door to the booth or room, and no more than the posted number shall be permitted inside the booth or room at any one time; and 
D.  The door or doors opening into such booth or room shall be incapable of being locked or otherwise fastened from the inside of such booth or room. 
E.  No more than 20 percent of the floor area of an adult entertainment establishment shall be used for soundproof booths or rooms.  
6.44.070 - Notice of Decision. 
The issuing authority shall provide notice of the decision to grant an application by publishing such notice in a newspaper of local circulation and posting the notice at City Hall.  
6.44.080 - Exemption. 
In the event that the Constitution of the United States or the Constitution of California renders a particular adult business establishment exempt from the permit requirements of this Chapter, such exempt adult business establishment is nonetheless required to comply with the other regulations contained in this Chapter.  
Chapter 6.48 - COMMERCIAL USE OF PUBLIC PROPERTY 
 
6.48.010 - Purpose. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to use public property as a site for the conduct of a commercial activity without first having obtained an Operations Permit: Use of Public Property, together with any other licenses or permits required by this Code. Uses of public property subject to the regulations of this Chapter, include, without limitation, the following: 
1.  The standing or parking of any motor vehicle, wagon, display, or pushcart on a sidewalk, street, or other public property from which commercial transactions are conducted. 
2.  Remaining at a fixed site on public property to conduct commercial transactions. 
3.  Use of public property for the location of signs, tables, chairs, or other business related items. 
B.  The following commercial activities are exempt from the provisions of this Chapter: 
1.  Newsracks. 
2.  Commercial filming. 
3.  Driving schools. 
4.  Persons delivering articles or services upon order of, or by agreement with, a recipient purchaser. 
5.  Charitable solicitations. 
(Ord. No. 424)  
6.48.020 - Issuing Authority. 
The City Manager is authorized to issue Operations Permit: Use of Public Property, and to regulate activities related thereto.  
6.48.030 - Fees. 
The applicant shall pay the fees set, from time to time, by resolution of the City Council.  
6.48.040 - Regulations. 
A.  The permittee shall use only those locations designated in the permit. 
B.  The permittee shall use the designated property only for the purposes specified in the permit. 
C.  The permittee shall agree to hold the City of Del Mar harmless and indemnify the City of Del Mar from and against all claims, demands, costs, losses, damages, injuries, litigation, and liability arising out of or related to the use of the public property by the permittee or permittee's agents, employees, contractors, or guests. 
D.  The permittee shall give evidence of liability insurance in an amount determined by the issuing authority to be sufficient to deal with the maximum amount of potential liability related to permittee's use of the public property, on such additional terms as the issuing authority deems appropriate. 
E.  The issuing authority may require an additional bond to be posted as security for the performance of permittee's obligation to repair all public property damaged as a result of permittee's use of the public property. 
F.  Improvements to the public property shall become the property of the City at the expiration, abandonment, or termination of the permit, except, the permittee shall agree to restore the public property to its pre-permit condition, upon request of the issuing authority, in the event of the expiration, abandonment or termination of the permit.  
Chapter 6.50 - MOBILE VENDING 
 
6.50.010 - Purpose. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to conduct the act of mobile food vending, as defined by DMMC Section 9.26.020, without first having obtained an Operations Permit: Mobile Vending pursuant to the provisions of this Title, together with any other licenses or permits required by the provisions of DMMC Chapter 9.26. 
(Ord. No. 882)  
6.50.020 - Issuing Authority. 
The City Manager or his/her designee shall be the issuing authority for the Operations Permit required by this Chapter. The City Council shall, by Resolution, establish a fee for the Operations Permit and a fee to cover the administrative costs of processing such applications.  
6.50.030 - Procedure. 
A.  Each applicant for a permit required by this Chapter shall submit an application to the City of Del Mar's Planning and Community Development Department a minimum of 30 days prior to the desired date of commencement of operations. 
B.  The applicant for a permit to conduct mobile food vending on private property shall be the owner of said property. 
C.  The applicant for a permit to conduct mobile food vending upon the public right-of-way or public property shall be the mobile vendor or owner of a Mobile Food Truck.  
6.50.040 - Application. 
Any person desiring to obtain a permit to engage in mobile food vending shall make application to the Director, or his or her designee. Any such application shall be renewed annually. 
A.  Each applicant for a permit to conduct mobile food vending on a private property for purposes other than catering, shall furnish the following information and documentation as part of the required application: 
1.  The name, mailing address and phone number of the applicant, and the name mailing address and phone number of the Mobile Food Truck owner, if other than the applicant; 
2.  The address and Zoning designation of the private property to be used for mobile food vending or a Mobile Food Truck event; 
3.  The proposed number of mobile vendors/Mobile Food Trucks to be operated on the property; 
4.  The proposed day and hours of operation; 
5.  The business hours of primary uses on the property; 
6.  A site plan depicting the following information: 
a.  Property boundaries of the event site; 
b.  Demarcation of the required 1,500 square feet of paved, level parking area for each proposed mobile vendor/Mobile Food Truck; 
c.  The location of required customer vehicle parking; 
d.  The location of required fixed-location bicycle parking; 
e.  The location of accessible restroom on-site. 
f.  The location of uncovered seating area (200 square feet maximum); and 
g.  The location of required refuse and recycling containers. 
B.  Each applicant for a permit to conduct mobile food vending within the Public Right-of-Way shall furnish the following information and documentation as part of the required application: 
1.  The name, mailing address and phone number of the applicant, and the name mailing address and phone number of the Mobile Food Truck owner, if other than the applicant; 
2.  A specific description of the Mobile Food Truck including the type of food, beverages or merchandise to the sold; 
3.  The proposed hours of operation; 
4.  A description of the proposed area of operation (street and block); 
5.  A specific description of the refuse and recycling containers to be used and their locations; 
6.  A letter of agreement that grants access to sanitary facilities for Mobile Food Truck employees and customers. The facilities shall be located within 200 feet of the applicant's proposed area of operations; and 
7.  Proof of commercial general and automobile liability insurance, as required by the City of Del Mar. 
C.  Each applicant for a permit to conduct a non-profit fundraising Mobile Food Truck Event shall furnish the following information and documentation as part of the required application: 
1.  The name of the non-profit organization benefitting from the Mobile Food Truck Event and documentation/evidence of its 501(c)3 tax exempt status; 
2.  The name, mailing address and phone number of the applicant or representative of the non-profit organization; 
3.  The proposed location of the event and business hours of the site's primary uses; 
4.  Copies of agreements or contracts with each proposed Mobile Food Truck indicating that a minimum of a ten percent donation of all event sales will be donated to the non-profit organization; 
5.  A site plan depicting the following information: 
a.  The property boundaries of the event site; 
b.  A demarcation of the required 1,500 square feet of paved, level parking area for each proposed mobile vendor/Mobile Food Truck; 
c.  The location of required customer vehicle parking; 
d.  The location of required fixed-location bicycle parking; 
e.  The location of accessible restroom on-site; 
f.  The location of uncovered seating area (200 square feet maximum); and 
g.  The location of required refuse and recycling containers. 
D.  Each applicant for a permit to conduct mobile food vending on a private property for catering purposes with more than one Mobile Food Truck, shall furnish the information and documentation as required in Subsection 6.50.040.A of this Chapter.  
6.50.050 - Regulations. 
A.  Permits for mobile food vending shall be subject to all regulatory provisions, standards and conditions of DMMC Chapter 9.26 applicable to the proposed type and location of said mobile food vending. 
B.  A permittee desiring to conduct mobile food vending operations on public property or public right-of-way shall agree to hold the City of Del Mar harmless and indemnify the City of Del Mar from and against all claims, demands, costs, losses, damages, injuries, litigation, and liability arising out of or related to the use of the public property by the permittee or permittee's agents, employees, contractors, or guests.  
Chapter 6.52 - LARGE ASSEMBLAGE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 926 , §§ 1—4, adopted January 3, 2017, amended Chapter 6.52 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, Chapter 6.52 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from original codification and Ord. No. 490. 
 
6.52.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish a process to accommodate requests for approval of "Large Assemblage" on public property and on private property located in a residential zone where without conditions of approval, the event may have the potential to adversely impact the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
(Ord. No. 926 , § 1, 1-3-2017)  
6.52.020 - When an Operations Permit is Required for Large Assemblage. 
A.  An Operations Permit shall be required for Large Assemblage on public property or Large Assemblage on a private property located in a residential zone, unless otherwise exempted per Subsection C. Where required, it shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, manage, participate in, advertise or sponsor any large event without first having obtained an Operations Permit for Large Assemblage. 
B.  For the purpose of Chapter 6.52, "Large Assemblage" shall mean any large event to which members of the public are invited or admitted for a charge or free of cost and which is attended or expected to be attended by more than 50 persons. 
C.  The following shall be exempt from an Operations Permit for Large Assemblage: 
1.  An event which is held in a permanent facility for which a use permit has been issued pursuant to the appropriate sections of this Code for the operation of an amusement park, open air theater, racetrack, commercial sport or recreational enterprise, circus, carnival, or fairground; or 
2.  An event which is held on property owned by or under the control of a public agency and which is held pursuant to a permit, license, or lease approved by the governing board of said public agency, which permit, license, or lease contains specific authorization for said event. 
3.  A special event or other type of temporary public assembly and entertainment activity with more than 50 participants on private property that is subject to a temporary use permit pursuant to Section 30.73.020. 
4.  Where it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the City Manager that the event is not likely to: 
a.  Disrupt the normal flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic; 
b.  Cause unreasonable noise, light, or other disturbance; or 
c.  Expose property or persons to the risk of physical damage. 
(Ord. No. 926 , § 2, 1-3-2017)  
6.52.030 - How to Apply for an Operations Permit for Large Assemblage. 
An application for an Operations Permit for Large Assemblage shall be filed with the City Manager at least 14 business days prior to the proposed date for the Large Assemblage. 
(Ord. No. 926 , § 3, 1-3-2017)  
6.52.040 - Decision Process for an Operations Permit for Large Assemblage. 
A.  A decision shall be made by the City Manager on an application for an Operations Permit for Large Assemblage that is required in accordance with Section 6.52.020. 
B.  Based upon the nature of the proposed activity, the City Manager shall impose such conditions as are reasonably necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, and minimize disturbances to surrounding properties. 
(Ord. No. 926 , § 4, 1-3-2017)  
Chapter 6.60 - MASSAGE BUSINESS 
 
6.60.010 - Purpose. 
A.  It is the purpose of this Chapter to provide for the orderly regulation of massage businesses. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person (including without limitation, a corporation, partnership, group or association) to commence, conduct, own, manage, operate, be in charge of, participate in, or sponsor a massage business in violation of any of the requirements of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 661; Ord. No. 672; Ord. No. 862)  
6.60.020 - Exemption for Individuals. 
A.  An exempt individual may commence, conduct, own, manage, operate, be in charge of, participate in, or sponsor a massage business without having an Operations Permit: Massage Business and without complying with the regulations of the other Sections of this Chapter, so long as all massages that are part of the individual's massage business: 
1.  Are administered under the control and direction of such exempt individual; 
2.  Are part of the performance of the exempt individual's profession or activity; 
3.  Are administered by a person who possesses a valid State Massage License or is exempt from such requirement; and 
4.  Are administered by a person who has obtained a Certificate of Registration: Massage Technician from the City pursuant to Chapter 6.61. 
B.  Exempt Individuals. So long as the requirements of Subsection A. are being met, for purposes of this Chapter, an "exempt individual" is one who is within one or more of the following categories: 
1.  Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths or physical therapists who are duly licensed to practice their respective professions in the State of California; 
2.  Registered Nurses, Practical Nurses and Licensed Vocational Nurses who are licensed to practice under the laws of this State; 
3.  Trainers of any amateur, semiprofessional or professional athlete or athletic team; 
4.  Barbers and beauticians who are duly licensed under the laws of this State; 
5.  Holistic health practitioners, while engaging in practices within the scope of their practice. "Holistic health practitioner" is a non-medical health care therapist who uses massage in a therapeutic approach to caring for patrons. The practice of such health care therapist may include other services such as nutritional assistance or counseling as long as all massage activities are directed toward health care. To qualify for this exemption, the person, prior to initiating the conduct of a massage business within the City, must first present themselves to the Issuing Authority to be registered and provide proof of: 
a.  Satisfactory completion of no less than 1,000 hours of instruction in such specialty or therapeutic approach at a school whose curriculum is accredited by the State of California; 
b.  Membership in a State or nationally chartered organization devoted to the specialty of therapeutic approach whose members are subject to a code of behavior that is effectively enforced against members by the organization and which requires participation in continuing education; 
c.  Evidence of passing a qualified written examination prepared by the Health Department and administered by the Sheriff establishing competency and ability of the applicant to engage in the practice of massage; and 
d.  Evidence of passing an examination prepared and conducted by the Health Department wherein the applicant shall be required to demonstrate a basic knowledge of anatomy, physiology, hygiene, and manual and mechanical massage; 
6.  Hospitals, nursing homes, sanitariums, or other health care facilities duly licensed by the State of California, while engaging in practices within the scope of their licenses; or 
7.  Employees of an accredited high school, junior college or college, while engaging in practices within the scope of their employment.  
6.60.030 - Denial/Revocation of Exempt Status. 
A.  Upon giving the individual or entity notice, and an opportunity to be heard, an exemption specified in this Chapter may be denied or revoked by the City if the individual or entity: 
1.  Loses the license required to qualify for the exemption; or 
2.  There is a criminal conviction that, in accordance with the express provisions of this Chapter, authorizes the denial or revocation of an operations permit. 
B.  An exemption, which is denied or revoked due to a loss of a qualifying license, shall not be reinstated until one year after the full, unconditioned license is reobtained. 
C.  An exemption, which is revoked due to a criminal conviction, shall not be reinstated for a period of ten years. 
D.  An individual or entity whose exemption is denied or revoked is subject to all of the regulations in this Chapter.  
6.60.040 - Definitions. 
A.  Applicant means, in the case of: 
Sole proprietor: The individual; 
Partnership: Each individual partner; 
Association: Each individual member; and 
Corporation: Each officer, director, and holder of five percent or more of the corporation's stock. 
B.  Health Department means the Department of Environmental Health of the County of San Diego which serves as the City's Health Department. 
C.  Health Officer means the Health Officer of the County of San Diego, or his/her designees, that serves as the City's Health Officer. 
D.  Massage means any method of pressure on or friction against, or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating, or stimulating of the external parts of the body with the hands or other parts of the body: (1) with or without the aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliances; and (2) with or without such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powder, creams, lotions, ointments, or other similar preparations. 
E.  Massage Business means a commercial activity involving, in whole or in part, the recurring giving or administering of massages. A massage business may involve, among other things: 
1.  A Massage Establishment which means a fixed location at which a massage business engages in or carries on a commercial activity involving, in whole or in part, the recurring giving or administering of massages on the premises; or 
2.  Off-Premises Massage Service which means the commercial activity of giving or administering massages other than at a massage establishment. 
F.  Massage Certificate of Registration means a Certificate of Registration issued to a Massage Technician by the City pursuant to Chapter 6.61 of this Code, also referred to as "Certificate of Registration: Massage Technician." 
G.  Massage Technician means any person who, for commercial purposes, gives or administers a massage to another person. 
H.  Massage Business Operator means any person (including without limitation, a corporation, partnership, group or association) who commences, conducts, owns, manages, is in charge of, participates in, or sponsors a massage business doing business within the City. 
I.  Patron means a person who is seeking or receiving a massage. 
J.  Recognized School of Massage means any school or institution of learning which teaches the theory, ethics, practice, profession, or work of massage, which school or institution has been approved pursuant to the California Education Code, and which requires a resident course of study of not less than 100 hours to be given in not less than six calendar months before the student shall be furnished with a diploma or a certificate of graduation. A school offering a correspondence course, but not requiring attendance, is not a "recognized school of massage." 
K.  Sheriff means the Sheriff of the County of San Diego which serves as the City's law enforcement agency. 
L.  Specified Anatomical Areas means pubic region, human genitals, perineum, anal region and the area of the female breast that includes the areola and the nipple. 
M.  State Massage License means a State of California license issued by the California Massage Therapists Council (CAMTC).  
6.60.050 - Issuing Authority. 
The City's Director of Finance is the Issuing Authority for Operations Permit: Massage Business.  
6.60.060 - Application. 
A.  An application shall be filed with the Issuing Authority no less than 45 days prior to the proposed date for the commencement of the massage business. 
B.  If, during the processing of the application, there is any change in information contained in the application, the applicant shall notify the Issuing Authority, in writing, within two days of such change.  
6.60.070 - Contents of Application. 
The application for an Operations Permit: Massage Business shall set forth the exact nature of the massage services to be offered, the proposed place of business, the proposed massage establishment if any, and the name and address of each applicant. In addition to the foregoing, the applicant shall furnish the following information: 
A.  The two previous addresses of the applicant immediately prior to the present address of the applicant; 
B.  Written proof satisfactory to the Sheriff that the applicant is over the age of 18 years; 
C.  Applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair; 
D.  Two portrait photographs of the applicant, at least two inches by two inches; 
E.  Business, occupation, or employment history of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of application; 
F.  The business license or permit history of the applicant: whether such person, in previously operating in this or another county, city or state, under license or permit, has had such license or permit suspended or revoked, the reason therefore, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such suspension or revocation; 
G.  Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of any crime, except misdemeanor traffic violations. If any person mentioned in this subsection has been so convicted, a statement must be made giving the place and court in which such conviction occurred, the specific charge under which the conviction was obtained, the sentence imposed as a result of such conviction and the circumstances surrounding the crime for which the applicant was convicted; 
H.  Such other identification and information reasonably necessary for the City to discover the truth of the matters required to be set forth in this Section; 
I.  The Sheriff may take the fingerprints and additional photographs of the applicant, and may confirm the height and weight of the applicant; and 
J.  If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its Articles of Incorporation, together with the names and residence addresses of each of its current officers, directors, and each stockholder holding more than five percent of the stock of the corporation, one of whom must be the applicant. If the applicant is a partnership, the application shall set forth the name and residence address of each of the partners, including limited partners, one of whom must be the applicant. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this section pertaining to corporate applicants apply.  
6.60.080 - Processing an Application. 
Upon receipt of the application, the Issuing Authority shall collect the authorized processing fee. The Issuing Authority shall retain one photograph of the applicant to be attached to the permit. Then, the Issuing Authority shall deliver a copy of the application to the following: 
A.  To the Health Department to conduct an inspection of the premises of any proposed massage establishment and report on compliance with health related regulations. 
B.  To the Sheriff's Department to conduct a review and background check and report on the applicant's suitability under this Chapter. The Issuing Authority shall send one photograph of the permittee to the Sheriff. 
C.  To the Planning Department: 
1.  To determine the proposed activity's conformance to the City's land use regulations; and 
2.  To conduct an inspection of the premises of any proposed massage establishment and report on compliance with the facilities requirements of this Chapter and the Code.  
6.60.090 - Fees. 
A.  The City Council, by resolution, shall establish application fees to cover the cost of processing applications and conducting pre-issuance inspections and investigations; and permit issuance fees for post issuance inspections and the enforcement of the provisions of this Chapter. 
B.  The amount of the fees shall include the charges fixed by the Health Department and Sheriff's Department for providing services to the City in the administration of this Chapter.  
6.60.100 - Issuing of Operations Permit: Massage Business. 
A.  The Operations Permit: Massage Business shall: 
1.  Identify the permittee; 
2.  Identify the place of business; 
3.  Specifically permit off-premises massage service, if appropriate; 
4.  Impose conditions that are reasonable and necessary to the business's compliance with the regulations of this Code; 
5.  Specify a permit expiration date, one year from the date of issuance; 
6.  Expressly state that while the Operations Permit: Massage Business authorizes the business to be conducted, each person who gives or administers a massage as part of that business is required to have a State Massage License and Massage Certificate of Registration; 
7.  Require that the business maintain on its premises, for review upon request by the City or its designee, evidence that demonstrates that all persons providing massage services possess a State Massage License and Massage Certificate of Registration; and 
8.  Identify the massage establishment, if any, and state: 
a.  The maximum number of patrons for which the massage establishment can render on-site, simultaneous massages; 
b.  Whether the Operations Permit allows male and female patrons to be served simultaneously; 
c.  The number of employees needed to serve the maximum number of patrons for which the massage establishment can render on-site, simultaneous massages; and 
d.  Whether the Operations Permit allows for male and female employees to be on premises simultaneously. 
B.  No Operations Permit: Massage Business shall be issued until the Issuing Authority has been notified in writing by the Health Department, the Sheriff, and the Planning Department that the applicant has fulfilled the requirements of this Title.  
6.60.110 - Denial of Application/Revocation of Permit. 
A.  In addition to failing to comply with any standard stated in this Chapter and Title, the Issuing Authority may deny the application for a permit or revoke an issued permit if it is found that: 
1.  Within five years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application, the applicant, or when the applicant is a corporation, partnership, or other entity any of its officer, directors, holders of five percent or more of the corporation's stock or partners has been, or during the term of an issued permit is: 
a.  Adjudged to be a mentally disordered sex offender with a duty to register with the Sheriff or Chief of Police under Section 290 of the Penal Code; 
b.  Convicted of a crime related to the conduct of a massage business or which is not consistent with satisfying the obligation of creating and maintaining a safe and healthy environment for administering massages; 
c.  Convicted of a violation of Section 314 (Indecent Exposure), 315 (Keeping or Residing in a House of Ill-Fame), 316 (Keeping a Disorderly House—Disturbing the Peace), 647(a) (Soliciting or Engaging in Lewd or Dissolute Conduct in a Public Place), or 647(b) (Soliciting or Engaging in Prostitution) of the Penal Code, or convicted in another state of any offense which, if committed or attempted in this State, would have been punishable as one or more of the heretofore mentioned offenses; or 
d.  Shown, by a preponderance of the evidence, to have violated the elements of one or more of the crimes listed in the previous Subsection; 
2.  In applying for the permit, the applicant provided false or materially misleading information or concealed information relevant to the City's decision to issue the permit; 
3.  The applicant or permittee is not in compliance with the regulations of this Code; 
4.  An employee of the applicant/permittee is, or within five years has been, convicted of a crime identified in Subsection 1. above; or 
5.  The applicant or permittee has had a permit or license for a massage business, or similar type of business, revoked or denied by a government agency and has not shown a significant and material change in circumstance since the revocation or denial. 
B.  An application for a permit may be denied if there is a criminal charge pending against the applicant, unless the applicant has been previously operating a massage business in accordance with a permit issued under this Chapter and is applying for a subsequent permit to continue operating such business.  
6.60.120 - Regulations—Massage Establishment. 
It is unlawful for any person (including without limitation, a corporation, partnership, group or association) to commence, conduct, own, manage, operate, be in charge of, participate in, or sponsor a massage establishment which is not in full compliance with the following regulations: 
A.  Permit. 
1.  A Massage Business Operator shall only operate a massage establishment that is identified in, and in full compliance with, the terms of a validly issued, unexpired, and unrevoked Operations Permit: Massage Business held by the Massage Business Operator. 
2.  No massage establishment shall be open for business without at least one massage technician holding a current, unrevoked State Massage License and Massage Certificate of Registration being on the premises. 
B.  Establishment Not a School. A massage establishment shall not be operated as a school of massage, or use the same facilities as that of a school of massage. 
C.  Alcohol or Drugs. 
1.  No Massage Business Operator shall permit a person to be or remain in any part of a massage establishment while such person is in the possession of, consuming, using or under the influence of any alcoholic beverage or drug, except pursuant to a doctor's prescription. 
2.  It is unlawful for any person to be or remain in any part of a massage establishment while in the possession of, consuming, using or under the influence of any alcoholic beverage or drug, except pursuant to a doctor's prescription. 
D.  Access To Establishment. 
1.  Each entrance to the massage establishment, regularly used by the public for ingress or egress to such establishment, shall remain unlocked during business hours unless all clients and staff are behind closed doors and no staff are available to assure security for those clients and staff. 
2.  The Massage Business Operator, as a condition of applying for a Massage Business Operator permit, shall allow City Officials to enter the massage establishment from time to time for the purpose of making reasonable inspections to observe and enforce compliance with applicable regulations, laws and the provisions of this Chapter and Code. 
E.  Facilities To Serve Patrons. Based upon the maximum number of patrons for which the massage establishment can simultaneously render on-premises massages, there shall be: 
1.  One or more dressing rooms for the exclusive use of patrons with sufficient capacity to serve the maximum number of patrons; 
2.  A minimum of one separate locker for each patron, capable of being locked by the patron, with sufficient size and strength to protect the clothing and valuables of the patron; 
3.  A minimum of one shower or tub for each six patrons, or portion thereof; 
4.  A separate massage room for each patron; 
5.  In those establishments where steam room or sauna baths are provided, if the Operations Permit allows male and female patrons to be served simultaneously, separate steam rooms or sauna rooms shall be provided to each sex. Each steam room and sauna shall be clearly designated as being for a particular sex; and 
6.  For every six patrons, or portion thereof: one toilet and one wash basin located together, within or as close as practicable to the area devoted to giving or administering the massage. 
a.  If the Operations Permit allows male and female patrons to be served simultaneously, separate toilets shall be provided to each sex. Each toilet shall be clearly designated as being for a particular sex. 
b.  The provision of each required wash basin shall include, at all times: (1) hot and cold running water provided through a mixing faucet; (2) hand washing soap or detergent immediately available in a permanent, wall mounted dispenser; and (3) sanitary towels immediately available in a permanent, wall mounted dispenser. 
F.  Facilities for Employees. Based upon the number of employees needed to serve the maximum number of patrons for which the massage establishment can render on-site, simultaneous massages, there shall be, for the exclusive use of massage establishment employees: 
1.  One or more dressing rooms with sufficient capacity to serve the employees; 
2.  A minimum of one separate locker for each employee, capable of being locked by the employee, with sufficient size and strength to protect the clothing and valuables of each employee; 
3.  A minimum of one shower or tub for each six employees, or portion thereof; 
4.  A minimum of one separate wash basin for each four employees. This wash basin shall be separate from wash basins located in toilet rooms. The provision of each required wash basin shall include, at all times: (a) hot and cold running water provided through a mixing faucet; (b) hand washing soap or detergent immediately available in a permanent, wall mounted dispenser; and (c) sanitary towels immediately available in a permanent, wall mounted dispenser; and 
5.  For every six employees, or portion thereof: one toilet and one wash basin located together, within or as close as practicable to the area devoted to giving or administering the massage. 
a.  If the Operations Permit allows for male and female employees to be on premises simultaneously, separate toilets shall be provided to each sex. Each toilet shall be clearly designated as being for a particular sex. 
b.  The provision of each required wash basin shall include, at all times: (1) hot and cold running water provided through a mixing faucet; (2) hand washing soap or detergent immediately available in a permanent, wall mounted dispenser; and (3) sanitary towels immediately available in a permanent, wall mounted dispenser. 
G.  Lighting. 
1.  At a minimum, lighting shall be provided in accordance with Article 220 of the National Electric Code. 
2.  During the operation of the massage business, a light level of no less than five foot candles shall be maintained at every point within in each room or enclosure where massage services are given or administered. 
3.  At least one artificial light of not less than 40 watts shall be provided in each room or enclosure of the establishment capable of being occupied by a person. 
H.  Maintenance. 
1.  All walls, ceilings, floors and facilities for the establishment shall be in good repair and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. 
2.  At least twice each day that the establishment is in operation, wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor rooms, steam or vapor cabinets, shower compartments and toilet rooms, shall be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected with a disinfectant approved by the Health Department. 
3.  After each use, before the next use, showers and bathtubs shall be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected with a disinfectant approved by the Health Department. 
4.  At least twice each day that the establishment is in operation, the entire premises shall be cleaned with a disinfectant approved by the Health Department. 
5.  The Massage Business Operator shall prepare or cause to be prepared a written record of the cleaning and disinfecting, using a form which has first been approved by the Issuing Authority. Entries shall be made into the record within five minutes of the completion of the cleaning or disinfecting event being recorded. 
The Massage Business Operator shall maintain such records for a period of no less than one year from the date of the entry; and shall make these records available for inspection, on demand, by City officials charged with enforcement of this Chapter. The City shall keep the furnished information confidential for use only in enforcement. Any unauthorized disclosure or use of such records is unlawful. It is unlawful to place false information into the records required to be kept by this subsection. 
I.  Massage Service Area. 
1.  No massage service shall be rendered within any cubicle, room, booth or any area within a massage establishment which is fitted with a door capable of being locked. 
2.  Surfaces upon which massage service is rendered shall be covered in a workmanlike manner with durable washable plastic or other waterproof material acceptable to the Health Department as being safe for public use. 
3.  No person other than the patron receiving a massage and a massage technician who possesses a current and unrevoked certificate, shall be within a room wherein a massage is being given. 
J.  Rooms Containing Steam Room, Tub, Shower, or Toilet. In rooms containing a steam room, tub, shower, or toilet: 
1.  A waterproof floor covering shall be provided which extends up the walls at least six inches and shall be covered at the floor-wall juncture with at least a 3/8 -inch radius; and 
2.  Walls shall be: (a) smooth; (b) waterproof; and (c) colored so as to provide a light reflectance value of no less than 70 percent. 
K.  Signs. 
1.  At the main entrance of the massage establishment, in compliance with the sign regulations of this Code, a recognizable and legible sign shall be posted which identifies the premises as a massage establishment. 
2.  Within the massage establishment, in an open and conspicuous public place on the premises, the Massage Business Operator shall post and at all times maintain a list of services available and the cost of such services. The services shall be described in readily understandable language. 
L.  Towels. 
1.  Based upon the maximum number of patrons for which the massage establishment can render on-site, simultaneous massages, there shall be, at all times of operation, five towels for each patron, available for the personal use of the patron. Such towels shall be clean, freshly laundered and disinfected. 
2.  Upon request of the patron, the patron shall be provided with clean, sanitary, and disinfected towels and linen or other covering for the surface upon which the massage is given. 
3.  Based upon the number of employees required to serve the maximum number of patrons for which the massage establishment can render on-site, simultaneous massages, there shall be, at all times of operation, five towels for each employee, available for the personal and exclusive use of the employee. Such towels shall be clean, freshly laundered and disinfected. 
4.  Towels shall not be reused without first having been laundered and disinfected. Disposable towels and coverings shall not be reused. 
5.  Concurrent or consecutive use of a towel by two or more persons, without laundering and disinfecting between use, is prohibited. 
M.  Linen or Other Coverings. 
1.  Based upon one surface for rendering massage service to each patron for which the massage establishment can render on-site, simultaneous massages, there shall be, at all times of operation, three sets of linen/other coverings for each such surface, available for use. Such items shall be clean and freshly laundered. 
2.  Linen/other coverings shall not be reused without first having been laundered and disinfected. Disposable coverings shall not be reused. 
3.  Heavy white paper may be used as "other coverings" provided that such paper is used only once and then discarded into a sanitary receptacle. 
N.  Storage. 
1.  Closed cabinets shall be provided with sufficient capacity to store all required clean linens, towels and coverings. 
2.  All required clean linens, towels and coverings shall be stored in closed cabinets. 
3.  Closed receptacles shall be provided with sufficient capacity to store used towels, linens and other coverings. 
4.  All used towels, linens and other coverings on the premises shall be stored in closed receptacles. 
O.  Ventilation. In addition to providing the ventilation required by the Uniform Building Code, to allow for adequate ventilation in cubicles, rooms and areas provided for patron's use, which are not serviced directly by required window or mechanical systems of ventilation, partitions within the massage establishment shall be constructed so that the height of partitions does not exceed, at any point, 75 percent of the floor-to-ceiling height at the point of measurement. 
P.  Employee Clothing. 
1.  During business hours, each massage establishment employee on the premises shall, when located in an area used by the patrons or which can be viewed by patrons, be clothed so as to be fully covered from a point not to exceed four inches above the center of the kneecap to the base of the neck, excluding the arms. Except, shorts may be worn so long as the shorts extend down the leg a minimum of three inches from the crotch and the body above that point is fully covered to the base of the neck, excluding the arms. 
2.  The covering, which includes trousers, pants or shorts, must be an opaque material and be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. 
3.  During business hours, each massage establishment employee on the premises shall, when located in an area used by the patrons or which can be viewed by patrons, shall be clothed so that the employee's specified anatomical areas are covered from view. 
Q.  Instruments. Within the massage establishment: 
1.  There shall be available a sufficient quantity of disinfecting agents and equipment, approved by the Health Department, for disinfecting instruments used in giving or administering a massage. 
2.  No instrument shall be used in giving or administering a massage unless the instrument is first disinfected using methods, disinfecting agents and equipment approved by the Health Department. 
R.  Control of Services. Within the massage establishment, the Massage Business Operator shall not allow any person: 
1.  To offer to perform, or perform any service other than those posted in accordance with this Chapter; 
2.  To give or administer, or offer to give or administer, a massage unless the person is in possession of, and is in full compliance with the terms of, a validly issued, unexpired, and unrevoked State Massage License and a Massage Certificate of Registration; 
3.  To massage or intentionally touch a Specified Anatomical Area of another person; or 
4.  To give or administer, or offer to give or administer, a massage in violation of one or more the regulations of this Title.  
6.60.130 - Same—Off-Premises. 
It is unlawful for a Massage Business Operator to provide, or offer to provide an off-premises massage service unless: 
A.  The massage is to be given or administered between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m. midnight; 
B.  The massage technician is in possession of, and is in full compliance with the terms of, a validly issued, unexpired, and unrevoked State Massage License and a Massage Certificate Registration; 
C.  The massage technician is working as part of a massage business which is in possession of, and is in full compliance with the terms of, a validly issued, unexpired, and unrevoked Operations Permit: Massage Business; 
D.  The massage is offered to be given or administered in full compliance with the regulations of this Title; 
E.  The massage is given or administered in full compliance with the regulations of this Title; and 
F.  Before the massage is given or administered, the massage technician presents to the patron a written document which lists the services available and the cost of such services. The services shall be described in readily understandable language.  
Chapter 6.61 - CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION: MASSAGE TECHNICIAN 
 
6.61.010 - Purpose. 
A.  It is the purpose of this Chapter to provide for the orderly regulation of massage technicians. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to give or administer, or offer to give or administer, a massage in violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 661; Ord. No. 672; Ord. No. 862)  
6.61.020 - Exemption for Individuals. 
A.  An exempt individual may personally give or administer, or personally offer to give or administer, a massage without having complied with this Chapter or Chapter 6.60, so long as all massages that are part of the individual's massage business are given or administered while engaging in practices within the scope of the exempted individual's applicable State license or holistic health practice. 
B.  Exempt Individuals. So long as the requirements of Subsection A are being met, for purposes of this Chapter, an "exempt individual" is one who is within one or more of the following categories: 
1.  Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths or physical therapists who are duly licensed to practice their respective professions in the State of California; 
2.  Registered Nurses, Practical Nurses and Licensed Vocational Nurses who are licensed to practice under the laws of this state; 
3.  Trainers of any amateur, semiprofessional or professional athlete or athletic team; 
4.  Barbers and beauticians who are duly licensed under the laws of this State; 
5.  Holistic health practitioners, while engaging in practices within the scope of their practice. "Holistic health practitioner" is a non-medical health care therapist who uses massage in a therapeutic approach to caring for patrons. The practice of such health care therapist may include other services such as nutritional assistance or counseling as long as all massage activities are directed toward health care. To qualify for this exemption, the person, prior to initiating the conduct of a massage business within the City, must first present themselves to the Issuing Authority to be registered and provide proof of: 
a.  Satisfactory completion of no less than 1,000 hours of instruction in such specialty or therapeutic approach at a school whose curriculum is accredited by the State of California; and 
b.  Membership in a State or nationally chartered organization devoted to the specialty of therapeutic approach whose members are subject to a code of behavior that is effectively enforced against members by the organization and which requires participation in continuing education; 
c.  Evidence of passing a qualified written examination prepared by the Health Department and administered by the Sheriff establishing competency and ability of the applicant to engage in the practice of massage; and 
d.  Evidence of passing an examination prepared and conducted by the Health Department wherein the applicant shall be required to demonstrate a basic knowledge of anatomy, physiology, hygiene, and manual and mechanical massage. 
6.  Hospitals, nursing homes, sanitariums, or other health care facilities duly licensed by the State of California, while engaging in practices within the scope of their licenses; or 
7.  Employees of an accredited high school, junior college or college, while engaging in practices within the scope of their employment.  
6.61.030 - Denial/Revocation of Exempt Status. 
A.  Upon giving the individual notice, and an opportunity to be heard, an exemption specified in this Chapter may be denied or revoked by the City if the individual: 
1.  Loses the license required to qualify for the exemption; or 
2.  There is a criminal conviction that, in accordance with the express provisions of this Chapter, authorizes the denial or revocation of an operations permit. 
B.  An exemption, which is denied or revoked due to a loss of a qualifying license, shall not be reinstated until one year after the full, unconditioned license is reobtained. 
C.  An exemption, which is revoked due to a criminal conviction, shall not be reinstated for a period of ten years. 
D.  An individual whose exemption is denied or revoked is subject to all of the regulations in this Chapter.  
6.61.040 - Definitions. 
The definitions found at Section 6.60.040 of this Code apply to this Chapter 6.61.  
6.61.050 - Issuing Authority. 
The City's Director of Finance is the Issuing Authority for the Certificate of Registration: Massage Technician.  
6.61.060 - Application. 
A.  An application shall be filed with the Issuing Authority no less than 45 days prior to the proposed date for the commencement of the giving or administering of massages. 
B.  If, during the processing of the application, there is any change in information contained in the application, the applicant shall notify the Issuing Authority, in writing, within two days of such change.  
6.61.070 - Contents of Application. 
The applicant for a Certificate of Registration: Massage Technician shall furnish the following information: 
A.  Name, residence address and telephone number; 
B.  The previous addresses of applicant, if any, for a period of three years immediately prior to the date of the application and the inclusive dates of residence at each; 
C.  Social Security number and driver's license number, if any; 
D.  Applicant's sex, weight, height, color of hair and eyes; 
E.  Written evidence that the applicant is at least 18 years of age; 
F.  Identification of the existing Operations Permit: Massage Business issued pursuant to Chapter 6.60 for the business at which the applicant will provide massage services or, identify a pending application for such Permit; 
G.  Business, occupation or employment of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of application; 
H.  State whether the applicant has ever been convicted of any crime, except misdemeanor traffic violations. If the applicant has been so convicted, a statement giving the place and court in which such conviction was had, the specific charge under which the conviction was obtained, the sentence imposed as a result of such conviction, and the circumstances surrounding the crime for which convicted; 
I.  The business license or permit history of the applicant; whether the applicant, is previously operating in this or another county, city or state under license or permit, has had such license or permit suspended or revoked, the reason therefore, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such suspension or revocation; 
J.  Two portrait photographs, at least two inches by two inches, taken within the six-month period immediately preceding the date of application; 
K.  The name and address of the massage establishment, if any, at which the applicant expects to be employed; and 
L.  The applicant's original State Massage License as well as a photocopy of the State Massage License, both to be provided by the applicant. Upon verifying the photocopy as an accurate copy of the original State Massage License, the Issuing Authority will return the State Massage License to the applicant.  
6.61.080 - Fees. 
There is no fee for a Certificate of Registration: Massage Technician.  
6.61.090 - Issuance of Certificate of Registration: Massage Technician. 
The Certificate of Registration: Massage Technician shall: 
1.  Identify the permittee; 
2.  Identify the permittee's State Massage License; 
3.  Identify the Massage Business for which the permittee will work; 
4.  Identify the massage establishment and the establishment's Operations Permit: Massage Business issued pursuant to Chapter 6.60; 
5.  Specifically permit off-premises massage service, if appropriate; 
6.  Impose conditions that are reasonable and necessary to the massage technician's compliance with the regulations of this Code; 
7.  Specify a permit expiration date, one year from the date of issuance; 
8.  Expressly state that while the Certificate of Registration: Massage Technician authorizes the person to give or administer massages, each person who gives or administers a massage must be part of a massage business which possesses and is in full compliance with the terms of, a validly issued, unexpired, and unrevoked Operations Permit: Massage Business; 
9.  Have affixed to the permit a photograph of the permittee; and 
10.  If appropriate, expressly note that the permittee is in a trainee status.  
6.61.100 - Denial of Application/Revocation of Certificate of Registration: Massage Technician. 
The Issuing Authority shall issue a Massage Certificate of Registration unless the Issuing Authority determines: 
A.  A State license is not authentic, valid or has expired; 
B.  In applying for the Massage Certificate of Registration, the applicant provided false or materially misleading information or concealed relevant information; 
C.  The applicant or permittee is not in compliance with the regulations of this Code; or 
D.  The applicant has not provided the information required by Section 6.61.070.  
6.61.110 - Regulations: Giving/Administering Massage. 
It is unlawful for a massage technician to give or administer, for commercial purposes, a massage unless such massage technician is in possession of, and is in full compliance with the terms of, a validly issued, unexpired, and unrevoked Certificate of Registration: Massage Technician and in full compliance with the following regulations: 
A.  It is unlawful for a massage technician to give or administer a massage unless the patron's Specified Anatomical Areas are fully covered; 
B.  No massage technician, while performing any task or service associated with the business of massage, shall massage or intentionally touch a Specified Anatomical area of another person; and 
C.  All massage must be provided in full compliance with the regulations provided in Section 120 of Chapter 6.60, "Regulations: Massage Establishments."  
6.61.120 - Regulations: Off-Premises. 
It is unlawful for a massage technician to provide, or offer to provide, an off-premises massage unless: 
A.  The massage is to be given or administered between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m. midnight; 
B.  The massage technician is working as part of a massage business which is in possession of, and is in full compliance with the terms of, a validly issued, unexpired, and unrevoked Operations Permit: Massage Business and possesses a validly issued, unexpired, and unrevoked Certificate of Registration: Massage Technician; 
C.  It is unlawful for a massage technician to give or administer a massage unless the patron's Specified Anatomical Areas are fully covered; 
D.  No massage technician, while performing any task or service associated with the business of massage, shall massage or intentionally touch a Specified Anatomical Area of another person; 
E.  The massage is offered to be given or administered in full compliance with the regulations of this Title; 
F.  The massage is given or administered in full compliance with the regulations of this Title; and 
G.  Before the massage is given or administered, the massage technician presents to the patron a written document which lists the services available and the cost of such services. The services shall be described in readily understandable language.  
TITLE 7 - EXPENDITURES  
Chapter 7.04 - PURCHASE OF SUPPLIES, EQUIPMENT AND SERVICES 
 
7.04.010 - Purpose. 
The purposes of this Chapter are to define the centralized system of the City of the purchase of supplies, equipment and services to provide for the fair and equitable treatment of all persons involved in the purchasing process, to obtain the highest possible value in exchange for public funds and to safeguard the quality and the integrity of the purchasing system. 
(Ord. No. 547; Ord. No. 827)  
7.04.020 - Purchasing Officer. 
A.  Each department head of the City is designated as a "Purchasing Officer" for that department head's department. 
B.  In addition to administering the other procedures of this Chapter, the Purchasing Officer: 
1.  Shall keep informed of current developments in market conditions and new products and shall maintain a bidders list, vendors catalogue file, and records needed for the efficient purchase of supplies and equipment for the Purchasing Officer's department; 
2.  Shall first consider sources of supplies, services and equipment located within the City; 
3.  May prescribe and maintain such forms and supplemental procedures as are reasonably necessary for the operation of the Purchasing Officer's department in accordance with this Chapter; and 
4.  Shall inspect supplies and equipment delivered to determine their conformance with the specifications, and may require the vendor to reimburse the City for the performance of chemical and physical tests on samples. 
5.  For services, shall review the services performed by the consultant/service provider and authorize payment only after determining services have been satisfactorily performed. 
C.  The City Manager may authorize, in writing, a City employee to purchase specified supplies and equipment, independently from the Purchasing Officer of a City department. The authorized employee shall comply with the procedures of this Chapter and shall make periodic reports to the City Manager on the status of the purchase. The City Manager shall ensure that each individual so authorized has filed a financial disclosure statement in accordance with this Code.  
7.04.030 - Determination of Requirement and Status for Purchasing Supplies, Services and Equipment. 
A.  The adopted budget for each department shall include the needs for supplies and equipment of that department during the fiscal year. 
B.  Each Purchasing Officer shall ensure that sufficient documentation is submitted with the request for payment to demonstrate compliance with the procedures of this Chapter and to justify the acquisition and acceptance of the supplies or equipment. 
C.  Each Purchasing Officer shall submit a report to the City Manager showing all supplies and equipment on hand in the department that are no longer useful to the department upon request. The Purchasing Officer may exchange or trade in such supplies and equipment as part of a purchase only after approval from City Manager. The City Manager may direct the transfer of surplus supplies and equipment to another City department. The City Manager may direct the disposal of such surplus supplies and equipment.  
7.04.040 - Requisition—$1,500.00 or Less. 
If the estimated value of the purchase of supplies, services or equipment is $1,500.00 or less, the Purchasing Officer may: 
A.  Select a vendor, without bid; 
B.  Send requisition to Finance Department; 
C.  Complete the purchase transaction; and 
D.  After supplies, services or equipment have been received, submit the invoice to the Director of Finance for placement on the warrant list.  
7.04.050 - Same—$1,500.01 to $5,000.00. 
If the estimated value of the purchase of supplies, services or equipment is $1,500.01 or more, but less than $5,000.01, the Purchasing Officer shall: 
A.  Solicit bids/proposals by written and telephonic request to prospective vendors. 
B.  Require bids to be in writing. 
C.  Seek at least three bids/proposals. 
D.  Recommend the responsible vendor with the lowest bid price in conformity with the specifications and/or qualifications as appropriate. 
E.  Prepare and submit a requisition to the Director of Finance for approval. 
F.  The Director of Finance will issue a purchase order to the selected vendor. 
G.  After supplies, services or equipment have been received, submit the invoice to the Director of Finance for placement on the warrant list.  
7.04.060 - Same—$5,000.01 to $15,000.00. 
If the estimated value of the purchase of supplies, services or equipment is $5,000.01 or more, but less than $15,000.01, the Purchasing Officer shall: 
A.  Post a notice inviting bids/proposals on the bulletin board in City Hall at least ten days before the date of opening of the bids. 
B.  Solicit bids/proposals by written and telephonic request to prospective vendors. 
C.  Require bids/proposals to be in writing. 
D.  Seek at least three bids/proposals. 
E.  Recommend the responsible vendor with the lowest bid price in conformity with the specifications and/or qualifications as appropriate. 
F.  Prepare and submit requisition to the Director of Finance for approval. 
G.  The Director of Finance will issue a purchase order to the selected vendor. 
H.  After supplies, services or equipment have been received, submit the invoice to the Director of Finance for placement on the warrant list.  
7.04.070 - Issuance of Requisition and Purchase Order. 
Except where specific authority is first obtained from the City Manager, the Purchasing Officer may not prepare or submit a requisition for supplies, services or equipment unless there exist an unencumbered appropriation in the fund account against which the purchase is to be charged.  
7.04.080 - Contract—More than $15,000.00. 
If the estimated value of the purchase of supplies, services or equipment is more than $15,000.01, the following provisions shall be satisfied: 
A.  If funds have not been appropriated in the current fiscal year for the supplies, services or equipment, the Purchasing Officer shall receive authorization from City Council to solicit bids and/or proposals. 
B.  Provided the City Council has authorized the solicitation of bids and/or proposals, the Purchasing Officer shall proceed as follows: 
1.  Publish a notice soliciting bids/proposals at least ten days before the date of opening of the bids. 
2.  Mail the notice soliciting bids/proposals at least ten days before the date of opening of the bids. 
3.  Post the notice soliciting bids/proposals on the public bulletin board in City Hall. 
C.  The Purchasing Officer shall include in the notice soliciting bids/proposals: 
1.  The requirement that the bid/proposal be in writing and that it be sealed. 
2.  A general description of the supplies, services or equipment sought to be purchased. 
3.  The location where bid blanks, specifications and/or required services and qualifications may be obtained. 
4.  The time and place for opening bids/proposals. 
5.  The security required, if any. 
D.  The Purchasing Officer may require a security deposit to be submitted as a condition for considering a bid/proposal. The amount of the security deposit shall be sufficient to reimburse the City for costs incurred if the bidder is successful but fails to execute the contract or fails to perform obligations under the contract. Bid security shall be returned to each unsuccessful bidder. 
E.  The City Clerk shall open the bids/proposals in public and submit to the City Council a recommendation regarding the award of the contract. 
F.  The City Council may award the contract to the responsible vendor submitting the lowest bid, in conformity with the specifications, or may reject all bids presented. 
G.  If two or more bids received are of the same total amount, the City Council may direct the Purchasing Officer to further negotiate with the tie bidders. The City Council may thereafter award the contract to the lowest negotiated bidder. 
H.  After the City Council awards the contract, the Purchasing Officer shall submit a written request to the Director of Finance to encumber the funds.  
7.04.090 - Exemption from Bidding. 
Where otherwise required by this Chapter, the following procurements, contracts or transactions are exempted from the provisions of this Chapter, at the discretion of the City Manager: 
A.  Emergency procurements for construction, equipment or repairs; 
B.  Goods and/or services that can be reasonably obtained from only a single source; 
C.  Sufficient, satisfactory bids are not received; 
D.  Items required to match or be compatible with other goods, furnishings, materials or equipment previously purchased by the City; 
E.  Goods, furnishings, types of materials or equipment that have been standardized for the City by the City Manager or by the City Council; 
F.  Utility services and related charges; 
G.  Goods, services and/or professional services obtained from or through agreement with any governmental, public or quasi-public agency where the agency contracted for goods, services and/or services through a competitive process as described in Section 7.04.100; 
H.  Real property leases or purchases and related title and escrow fees, to the extent permitted by law; 
I.  Insurance and bonds; 
J.  Advertising in magazines, newspapers or other media; 
K.  Works of art, entertainment or performers; 
L.  Library collection materials or services or other books or periodicals; 
M.  Membership dues, conventions, training, travel arrangements including hotels, car rentals and airfare; 
N.  Surplus personal property owned by another government, public or quasi-public entity; 
O.  Situations where solicitations of bids or proposals for goods, services and/or professional services would be, in the discretion of the awarding authority, impractical, unavailing, impossible, or not in the best interests of the City.  
7.04.100 - Cooperative Purchasing. 
The Purchasing Officer shall have the authority to join with other public or quasi-public agencies in cooperative purchasing plans or programs for the purchase of goods and/or services by contract, arrangement or agreement as allowed by law and as determined by the Purchasing Officer to be in the City's best interest. For purposes of this section, the determination of whether it is in the City's best interest shall include consideration of whether the procedure used by the public or quasi-public entity was competitive or otherwise resulted in a competitive price. The Purchasing Officer may buy directly from a vendor at a price established by another public agency when the other agency has made their purchase in a competitive manner.  
7.04.110 - Professional and Special Services. 
For purposes of this section, Professional Services shall mean the procurement of services that involve the exercise of professional discretion and independent judgment based on advanced or specialized knowledge, expertise or training gained by formal study or experience. Special services shall mean those services that the City Manager has determined the City lacks sufficient personnel with the necessary training and expertise to perform the services or to perform such services in a timely manner. 
A.  It is in the best interest of the public, as allowed by State law, that contracts for professional and special services be awarded based on the demonstrated competence and professional qualifications necessary for the satisfactory performance of the services required. The Purchasing Officer may negotiate with qualified firms or individuals to obtain a fair and reasonable price for the services and is not required to award a contract to the lowest responsible bidder. Notwithstanding any contrary terms contained in this Chapter, procurement of professional services for architects, engineers, land surveyors, and construction project management firms shall be governed by Chapter 7.16. 
B.  Procurement of professional or special services where the total cost of services provided in a 12-month period is $15,000.00 or less shall be made using simplified and cost effective operational procedures and forms approved by the City Manager and in accordance with Sections 7.04.040, 7.04.050 and 7.04.060 and this Chapter. 
C.  Professional or special services where the cost of services provided in a 12-month period is more than $15,000.00 shall be procured as follows: 
1.  The Purchasing Officer shall obtain the names of at least three firms or individuals that are, or have within the preceding 12 months, provided substantially similar services to public agencies. The Purchasing Officer may waive the requirements for solicitation of multiple proposals if only one individual or firm can reasonably provide the professional services, and it is in the best interest of the City to waive the requirement. 
2.  A request for proposal shall be provided to all potential candidates outlining the scope of services required, time frame for completion, pricing structure, liability insurance information and coverage and other pertinent information. Professionals must submit their responses in the specified format no later than the stated final due date for proposals. The response must include liability insurance information and coverage. 
3.  The evaluation process will be based on the criteria stated in the request for proposal but will generally include the scope of services offered, the professional's capabilities and previous experience in the field. 
4.  After the proposals are evaluated, the Purchasing Officer will negotiate an agreement with the selected professional. If an agreement is not reached within a reasonable time, the Purchasing Officer will terminate discussion with the first candidate and open negotiations with the second choice. 
5.  The City Council may waive the bid requirements of this chapter when it is necessary or convenient for the management of the City's affairs.  
7.04.120 - City Manager Contracting Authority. 
A.  The City Manager shall have the authority to award the contracts as below. 
1.  All procurement of Professional/Special services, including those procured by Chapter 7.16, for which the cost to the City is $15,000.00 or less; and 
2.  All procurement of supplies, goods and/or materials for which the cost to the City is $15,000.00 or less; and 
3.  All capital outlay items approved by the City Council during the applicable budget year in an amount of $15,000.00 or less; and 
4.  Change orders for contracts for the purchases of supplies, services and equipment provided the total cost does not exceed the lesser of 20 percent of the original bid amount or $15,000.00 and sufficient unencumbered funds exist or have been previously appropriated for the specific contract; and 
5.  All public works change orders equal to the contingency amount set when the underlying contract was awarded; and 
6.  Change orders for an amount of more than $15,000.00 shall require City Council approval. 
7.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, any change order that results in the need for additional appropriation or extends the term of a contract for more than three months beyond the original term shall be approved by the City Council. 
B.  The City Manager shall approve alternate procurement methods, if appropriate, for use on an experimental basis, and recommend to the City Council additions, deletions or modifications to the City's procurement methods. 
C.  The City Manager shall have the authority to delegate the awarding of contracts, amendments and change orders for goods and services as set forth in this Chapter by memorandum or by administrative order. 
D.  Upon request of the City Council, the City Manager shall submit a report to the City Council identifying all contracts, including the amount of each contract that has been awarded administratively.  
Chapter 7.08 - PAYMENT OF DEMANDS 
 
7.08.010 - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this Chapter to describe procedures for the processing and payment of demands, bills, and other claims against the City arising out of contract, including bills for labor, material, and supplies furnished, not including payroll or claims for damages. 
(Ord. No. 483)  
7.08.020 - Submission of Demand. 
A.  The demands shall contain a brief description of the labor, material, or supplies furnished, and the date and price. 
B.  The demands shall be accompanied by a requisition/purchase order signed by the City official ordering the labor, material, or supplies. 
C.  Contracts executed by the City calling for specific payments on specified dates shall constitute a demand for payment on such dates. 
D.  Demands shall be submitted to the Director of Finance.  
7.08.030 - Register of Demands. 
A.  The Director of Finance shall prepare a register of demands containing demands submitted over a preceding period of time. The Director of Finance shall sign a certificate on the register of demands that: 
1.  Each demand on this register reflects an indebtedness authorized by this City; 
2.  The financial data is correct; and 
3.  There are funds available to pay each demand. 
B.  When the register of demands has been certified by the Director of Finance, it shall be submitted to the City Council for approval or rejection. 
C.  When the register of demands has been approved by the City Council, the City Clerk shall note the date on which the register was approved and the Mayor shall sign the document authorizing payment.  
Chapter 7.16 - ACQUISITION OF SERVICES FROM ARCHITECTS, ENGINEERS, LAND SURVEYORS, CONSTRUCTION MANAGEMENT FIRMS 
 
7.16.010 - Requirement. 
A.  Unless otherwise provided, the City's selection of architects, engineers, land surveyors, and construction project management firms to provide professional services by contract with the City shall be on the basis of demonstrated competence and on the professional qualifications necessary for the satisfactory performance of the professional services required. (Government Code §§ 4525, et seq.) 
B.  The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply where the City Manager determines that the services needed are of a technical nature and involve little professional judgment, and that selecting the lowest responsible bidder would be in the public's interest. 
(Ord. No. 534)  
7.16.020 - Contracting Officer. 
Unless otherwise specified by the City Council for a particular contract, the City Manager or his designee shall be the Contracting Officer for purposes of this Chapter.  
7.16.030 - Annual Statements of Qualifications. 
The City Manager shall develop and maintain a procedure whereby architects, engineers, land surveyors and construction project management firms may submit annual statements of qualifications and performance data.  
7.16.040 - Selection Procedures. 
For each proposed professional contract: 
A.  The Contracting Officer shall establish the professional competence and qualifications necessary to be possessed by a firm in order to be awarded the proposed professional services contract. 
B.  The Contracting Officer may publish a notice that the City is proposing to award a contract to obtain specified, professional services. 
C.  The Contracting Officer may directly solicit proposals from appropriate firms. 
D.  The Contracting Officer may discuss with one or more firms the alternative methods for providing the required professional services. 
E.  The Contracting Officer may conduct further negotiations with one or more of the most qualified firms to fully clarify each firm's offer to provide services.  
7.16.050 - Award of Contract. 
For any contract over $15,000.00, the Contracting Officer shall submit the proposals of the most qualified firm or firms together with a recommended action to the City Council for review and awarding of the professional services contract. 
(Ord. No. 827)  
Chapter 7.20 - ALTERNATIVE BID PROCEDURES FOR PUBLIC WORKS PROJECTS 
 
7.20.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the following sections is to establish alternative bid procedures for public works projects, as provided for by the California Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act (the "Act"). 
(Ord. No. 866)  
7.20.020 - Alternative Bid Procedures. 
Public projects, as defined by the Act and in accordance with the limits listed below pursuant to the Public Contract Code, may be let to contract by Alternative procedures. The applicable thresholds (provided below for reference purposes) shall be as provided in the Public Contract Code as the same may be amended from time to time. 
A.  Public projects of $45,000.00 or less may be performed by the City of Del Mar, by negotiated contract, or by purchase order. 
B.  Public projects of $175,000.00 or less may be let to contract by Alternative procedures as set forth in this Chapter. If all bids received are in excess of $175,000.00, the City Council may, by adoption of a resolution by a four-fifths vote, award the contract, at $187,500.00 or less, to the lowest responsible bidder, if it determines the cost estimate of the public agency was reasonable. 
C.  Public projects of more than $175,000.00 shall, except as otherwise provided in the Act, be let to contract by formal bidding procedures.  
7.20.030 - Contractors List. 
A list of contractors shall be developed and maintained in accordance with the provisions of Section 22034 of the Public Contract Code and criteria promulgated from time to time by the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission (the "Commission").  
7.20.040 - Notice Inviting Alternative Bids. 
A.  Where a public project is to be performed which is subject to the provisions of this Chapter, a notice inviting Alternative bids shall be mailed to all contractors for the category of work to be bid, as shown on the list developed in accordance with Section 7.20.030, or to all construction trade journals as specified by the Commission in accordance with Section 22036 of the Public Contract Code. Additional contractors and/or construction trade journals may be notified at the discretion of the department soliciting bids, provided however: 
1.  If there is no list of qualified contractors maintained by the City for the particular category of work to be performed, the notice inviting bids shall be sent only to the construction trade journals specified by the Commission. 
2.  If the product or service is proprietary in nature such that it can be obtained only from a certain contractor or contractors, the notice inviting information bids may be sent exclusively to such contractor or contractors. 
B.  All mailing of notices to contractors and construction trade journals pursuant to Subsection A. shall be completed not less than ten calendar days before bids are due. 
C.  The notice inviting Alternative bids shall describe the project in general terms and how to obtain more detailed information about the project, and shall state the time and place for the submission of bids.  
7.20.050 - Award of Contracts. 
The City Manager, or designee, is authorized to award Alternative contracts pursuant to this Chapter.  
TITLE 8 - BEACHES, WATERWAYS AND PARKS  
Chapter 8.04 - GENERAL REGULATIONS 
 
8.04.010 - Activity Zones. 
A.  The Head Lifeguard on duty is authorized to designate activity zones for the regulation of City beaches, waters, and parks. Designations of zones shall be made in consideration of: 
1.  The number of persons utilizing the area; 
2.  The surf, wave, and tide conditions; 
3.  The need to protect the public health and safety. 
B.  To impose activity zone regulations, the zone must be marked to show the type of zone and its boundaries. Further, a notice must be posted at each lifeguard station indicating the permitted and prohibited uses for each zone. In addition, the Lifeguard Captain may install signs at a designated zone that indicates the permitted and prohibited uses in that zone. 
C.  It is unlawful for any person to knowingly violate the regulations of a posted activity zone. 
(Ord. No. 479; Ord. No. 884)  
8.04.020 - Motor Vehicles. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to drive, park, or allow to stand, any self-propelled vehicle on a public beach or public park unless the operator has previously obtained express approval from the City Manager or Lifeguard Captain. 
B.  Approval required by this section shall be given only to accomplish a public purpose and only for a temporary period subject to such conditions as are necessary to protect the public health and safety.  
8.04.030 - Fishing Spears. 
A.  Within 100 feet of any other person while upon any public property, it is unlawful for any person to possess a fishing spear gun or similar instrument in a cocked or armed position, or to possess any unsheathed or uncovered spear, barb, prong or similar instrument. 
B.  A spear gun or similar instrument shall be deemed cocked or armed unless it is in a condition incapable of projecting spears, barbs or prongs.  
8.04.040 - Glass Containers Prohibited. 
While upon any beach or sidewalk adjacent to a beach within the City, it shall be unlawful for any person to possess a container whose exterior surface is in any degree made of glass.  
8.04.050 - Tents, Screens, and Canopies. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to erect a tent on any public beach, park, and preserve, bluff top or open space. For the purposes of this section, a tent includes: a hut, tarpaulin, or any other temporary outdoor shelter used for sleeping or living quarters. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to erect upon a City beach or park, a screen, beach cabana, or sun shade with more than two walls or which surrounds a central point by more than 180 degrees and which is larger than ten feet by ten feet in size. 
C.  It is unlawful for any person to erect a canopy on any public preserve, bluff top, or open space within the City; except for Powerhouse Park, Seagrove Park, or any public beach when: 
1.  The canopy is ten feet by ten feet in size or smaller. 
2.  For the purposes of this section, a canopy is defined as a protective roof-like covering, often of canvas or cloth and mounted on a frame, but can be supported by rope or cable. 
D.  This section shall not apply when express approval from the City Manager or Lifeguard Chief has been obtained or when approved and done in accordance with a permit issued by the City and therefore in effect. 
(Ord. No. 884)  
8.04.060 - Nudity. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to appear, bathe, sunbathe, or walk while in any public park, playground, beach or the waters adjacent thereto in such a manner that the genitals, vulva, pubis, pubic symphysis, pubic hair, natal cleft, perineum, anus, anal region or pubic hair region of any person, or any portion of the breast at or below the upper edge of the areola thereof of any female person is exposed to the public view or is not covered by an opaque covering. 
B.  This section does not apply to children under the age of six years.  
8.04.070 - Fires. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to build, ignite or maintain a fire or flame upon any public beach, public sea wall, park land, preserve, trail, bluff top, open space, street end, or public right-of-way, except for portable barbecues or cooking stoves used in accordance with subsection B of this section. In addition to illegal fires, the following shall be prohibited: portable or removable fire pits, fire rings, burning of gel fuels, torches, flame lanterns, charcoal briquettes or other solid cooking fuel. 
B.  Only portable metal barbecues or cooking stoves used specifically for cooking purposes that utilize Liquid Propane (LP) or other similar liquid fuel shall be allowed. Only liquid fuel designed specifically by the barbecue/stove manufacturer may be used. Portable barbecues and stoves must be no greater than three cubic feet in size and must be elevated off the ground/surface so that no damage occurs to City property. Using a portable barbecue or stove as a heater and not for active cooking is prohibited. Use of barbecues and cooking stoves defined in this subsection are limited to Seagrove Park, Powerhouse Park and City beaches only. 
C.  It shall be unlawful to dispose of, deposit, throw, propel, dump, bury or leave behind any burned, ignited, burning, or unused fuel (solid, liquid, gel) material into any waterway or upon the public right-of-way, including but not limited to, beaches, sea walls, park land, preserves, trails, bluff tops, open spaces and street ends. 
D.  Subsections A. and B. shall not apply to fires or barbecues ignited or utilized when approved and done in accordance with a City permit and then in effect issued by the Lifeguard Chief, Fire Captain, or City Manager. A fire or barbecue permit may be revoked in the event that permitted activity creates a hazard or per the discretion of City staff and/or law enforcement. 
E.  Any violation of this section may be enforced as an infraction or a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 526; Ord. No. 884)  
8.04.080 - Bluff-Top Closure. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to be upon the bluff top west of the railroad track between 11th Street and 85 feet north of 8th Street. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to enter upon any coastal bluff or bluff preserve where signs or barriers maintained by the City designate such locations as closed to public access. It is unlawful for dog owners to allow their dogs to enter these prohibited areas. 
C.  It is unlawful for any person to enter upon the Scripps Bluff Preserve pathway or bluff top during the hours of darkness. 
D.  This Section does not apply to persons or vehicles used for maintenance, emergency, or restoration purposes. 
E.  Any violation of this section may be enforced as an infraction or a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 623; Ord. No. 884)  
8.04.090 - Riding Bicycles on City Parks and Preserves Prohibited. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a bicycle upon any City park or preserve. 
(Ord. No. 626)  
Chapter 8.12 - SAN DIEGUITO LAGOON AND RIVER 
 
8.12.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Chapter is to: protect the biodiversity, natural heritage and unique aquatic and upland ecosystems of the San Dieguito Lagoon and San Dieguito River; sustain, conserve, and protect natural habitats, wildlife and marine life populations; accommodate habitat restoration projects; improve educational, and research opportunities; accommodate recreational activities in a manner that preserves environmentally sensitive resources and protects public health and safety; and to manage the use of the San Dieguito Lagoon and River consistent with the Del Mar Community Plan. 
The provisions of this section are intended to allow for the public's right of access to and use of navigable waters, as allowed by the U.S. and California Constitutions. However, the provisions of this Chapter are also intended to ensure that public access to and use of navigable waters does not come at the expense of damage to environmentally sensitive flora or fauna or at the expense of public safety or welfare. 
(Ord. No. 484; Ord. No. 864)  
8.12.020 - Boundaries of the San Dieguito Lagoon and River. 
This Chapter shall apply to: (i) all portions of the San Dieguito Lagoon and San Dieguito River lying within the City of Del Mar extending east from the easterly side of the Camino del Mar Bridge to the easterly limits of the City, including all waters within defined river channels and basins and all waters at or below the mean high tide line; (ii) all areas included as part of the approved San Dieguito Lagoon Restoration Project; and (iii) publicly owned properties located immediately adjacent to the San Dieguito Lagoon and San Dieguito River identified and signed as containing sensitive wetland or upland habitat. The areas regulated by this Chapter are collectively referred to as the "San Dieguito Lagoon and River Valley."  
8.12.030 - Prohibited Activities. 
A.  The following activities are prohibited within the confines of the San Dieguito Lagoon and River Valley: 
1.  Swimming, wading, and/or diving; 
2.  The removal and/or take of any living or non-living marine resources. The prohibition on take of resources includes a ban on fishing except that fishing shall be allowed in areas where the City, in consultation with representatives of the State Department of Fish and Game, has determined that such activity will not be detrimental to preservation of environmentally sensitive resources and where signage has been installed identifying the allowed fishing locations; 
3.  The use of "vehicles" including, without limitation, any automobile, off-road vehicle, motorcycle and/or hot air balloon; and 
4.  The use of any motorized watercraft, including, without limitation, jet skis, wet bikes, surf jets, miniature speed boats, air boats, hovercraft and/or motorized boats. 
B.  Access to waters shall be limited to designated and signed trails and pathways so as to avoid degradation of environmentally sensitive areas. 
C.  Access to the San Dieguito Lagoon and River Valley shall be limited to designated trail and walkways signed for public use. Dogs must be leashed and under the control of a person at all times. 
D.  Bicycles and similar non-motorized vehicles shall be permitted only on trails and walkways designated and signed as permitting bicycle access. 
E.  Other prohibited activities: 
1.  Fires and fireworks; 
2.  Littering, as regulated by the Del Mar Municipal Code; 
3.  Amplified music; and 
4.  Overnight camping.  
8.12.040 - Exemptions from limitations of Chapter for authorized restoration, maintenance and improvement activities. 
The prohibitions contained in this chapter shall not apply to the activities listed below, provided such activities have received all permits and/or authorizations required by local, state or federal law, as applicable; and provided the activities are carried out by duly authorized representatives of the agency or entity that received the required permits in a manner consistent with the terms and conditions of all such permits and authorizations. 
A.  Habitat restoration and/or management activities; 
B.  Flood control; 
C.  Vector control; 
D.  Installation or maintenance of recreational trails; 
E.  Installation or habitat interpretive centers; 
F.  Recreational trail patrols and maintenance; or 
G.  Safety and enforcement activities carried out by duly appointed public safety officers.  
8.12.050 - Installation of signage identifying prohibited activities. 
The City Manager is authorized to install signage notifying the public of those activities allowed or prohibited by this Chapter and of the location of designated public access trails and pathways and designated areas where fishing is allowed.  
TITLE 9 - PUBLIC SAFETY, PEACE AND WELFARE  
Chapter 9.04 - GENERAL OFFENSES 
 
9.04.010 - Camping on Private Property. 
It is unlawful for any person to camp, lodge, sleep or tarry at night in or on any private property without the prior permission of the owner of such property. The owner may give prior permission through the owner's lessee or agent. 
(Ord. No. 422; Ord. No. 807; Ord. No. 834)  
9.04.020 - Camping on Public Property. 
A.  Unless otherwise permitted in accordance with the provisions of this Code, it is unlawful for any person to camp in the hours of darkness on public property to include, without limitation, highways, streets, alleys, rights-of-way, beaches and parks. 
B.  Camping is evidenced by, among other things, the establishment of sleeping accommodations; the use of a bedroll or sleeping bag; the erection or maintenance of a shelter. 
(Ord. No. 469)  
9.04.030 - Hunting Prohibited. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to use any implement, for example, without limitation, firearms, a bow and arrow, crossbow, slingshot, spear, snare, net or trap on public property for the purpose of pursuing, with the intent to kill, injure or capture, any mammal, bird or reptile. 
(Ord. No. 473)  
9.04.040 - Use of Bridges/Use of the Lagoon Viewpoint—Old Grand Avenue Bridge. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to dive, fish or jump from any bridge within the City in an area where notice is posted that diving, fishing or jumping is prohibited. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to dive, fish or jump from the Lagoon Viewpoint—Old Grand Avenue Bridge where notice is posted that diving, fishing or jumping is prohibited. 
C.  The City Manager is authorized to erect signs required by this section in accordance with resolutions of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 470; Ord. No. 834)  
9.04.050 - Use of Toilets. 
A.  It is unlawful for a male person to resort to any public toilet set apart for female persons. 
B.  It is unlawful for any female person to resort to any public toilet set apart for male persons. 
C.  This Section does not prohibit a child under the age of six years from resorting to any public toilet while accompanied by that child's father, mother or other responsible adult. 
(Ord. No. 480)  
9.04.060 - Fireworks Prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, use, or discharge fireworks within the City. (Health and Safety Code § 12541) 
(Ord. No. 494)  
9.04.070 - Consumption of Alcoholic Beverages on Designated Public Property. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to consume an alcoholic beverage while located on any of the following public areas: 
1.  Any public street, sidewalk or alley. 
2.  Caminito Park. 
B.  For this Section "Alcoholic Beverage" is defined as that term in the California Business and Professions Code. (See BP [Business and Professions Code] § 23004) 
C.  It is unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage or possess any bottle, can, or other receptacle containing any alcoholic beverage which has been opened, or a seal broken, or the contents of which have been partially removed, on any of the streets, sidewalks, alleys, parking lots, public parking structures, including private parking lots and parking structures held open for public use, public parks, public playgrounds, public buildings, public lavatories or public beach within the City from 12:01 a.m. on March 1st through the day after Labor Day at midnight. 
D.  This Section is not applicable to the consumption of alcoholic beverages done in accordance with a permit issued by the City and then in effect. 
(Ord. No. 737; Ord. No. 807; Ord. No. 826) 
Cross reference— Commercial use of public property, Ch. 6.48.  
Chapter 9.08 - NIGHTTIME CURFEW FOR MINORS 
 
9.08.010 - Purpose. 
This Chapter is intended to reasonably balance the public interest and the protected rights of minors and their parents. This balance is achieved by applying the principle that parental responsibility for a minor's conduct is paramount to the City's regulatory authority. Enforcement of this curfew becomes necessary in the absence of proper exercise of parental authority. 
(Ord. No. 698; Ord. No. 885)  
9.08.020 - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply to this Chapter: 
Curfew Hours means the period from 10:00 p.m. any evening of the week, until 5:00 a.m. the following day. 
Emergency means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, natural disaster, automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. 
Establishment means any privately-owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including but not limited to, any place of amusement or entertainment. 
Guardian means: 
A.  A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor, or 
B.  A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court. 
Minor means any person under 18 years of age. 
Parent means a person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent of a minor. 
Public Place means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities, and shops. 
Responsible Adult means a person at least 18 years of age, authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor. 
Serious bodily injury means bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. 
(Ord. No. 885)  
9.08.030 - Curfew Restriction. 
A.  It is unlawful for any minor to remain in a public place or on the premises of any establishment within the City during curfew hours. 
B.  It is unlawful for any parent or guardian of a minor knowingly to permit, or by insufficient control to allow, the minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the City during curfew hours. 
C.  It is a defense to the prosecution under Subsection A. or B. above that the minor was: 
1.  Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian or by a responsible adult; 
2.  On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian or responsible adult, without any detour or stop; 
3.  In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel; 
4.  Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop; 
5.  Involved in an emergency; 
6.  At a public place abutting the minor's residence; 
7.  Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by one or more adults and sponsored by the City, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by one or more adults and sponsored by the City, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor; 
8.  Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution or the California Constitution; 
9.  Emancipated pursuant to law. 
D.  Before taking any law enforcement action under this Chapter, the law enforcement officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being in the public place or on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours. The law enforcement officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this Chapter unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any responses and other circumstances, no defense under this Section is present or applicable.  
9.08.040 - Enforcement; Penalty. 
A.  Each violation of this Chapter constitutes a separate offense. 
B.  A charge under this Chapter may be prosecuted either as a misdemeanor or an infraction. Minors shall be prosecuted in accordance with juvenile court law and procedure. 
C.  Any person convicted of an infraction for violating this Chapter may be punished by a fine not exceeding $250.00 or by a requirement to perform county or city approved work projects or community service or both. 
D.  Any Parent or Guardian convicted of a misdemeanor for violating this Chapter may be punished by imprisonment in the County jail for a period of time not exceeding six months, or by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or both. 
(Ord. No. 885)  
Chapter 9.12 - FIREARMS 
 
9.12.010 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this Section: 
A.  Fire means to explode, discharge or impel by using heat, percussion or electric spark, or the release of compressed air or gas. 
B.  Firearm means any weapon from which a missile, such as but not limited to, a bullet, ball or shell, is hurled by an explosion or by means of compressed air or gas. 
(Ord. No. 422)  
9.12.020 - Firing within City. 
It is unlawful for any person to fire any firearm within the City, except where reasonably necessary in defense of person or property.  
9.12.030 - Exceptions. 
The provisions of this Chapter do not apply to any of the following: 
A.  Firearms fired under the authority of the United States, the State of California or the City of Del Mar. 
B.  Firearms fired as part of the operation of a shooting gallery operated under the control of the 22nd Agricultural District as part of the County Fair.  
9.12.040 - Public Buildings. 
Except for officers of the Federal, State, County or City of Del Mar and persons possessing a valid license to carry a loaded weapon, it is unlawful for any person to enter a public building within the City while in possession of a firearm.  
Chapter 9.16 - GAMBLING 
 
9.16.010 - Adoption of Provisions by Reference. 
There is hereby adopted, by reference, by the City of Del Mar, for the purpose of prescribing regulations for and the prohibition of gambling, Sections 37.101, 37.102 and 37.103 of the San Diego County Code, together with such secondary references as are included in those portions. The provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the City of Del Mar. 
(Ord. No. 422)  
9.16.020 - Prohibition. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate the provisions incorporated by reference into Section 9.08.010 of this Code.  
Chapter 9.18 - CHARITABLE BINGO GAMES 
 
9.18.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Chapter is to ensure that any Bingo Game operated in the City of Del Mar is conducted in compliance with the Government Code of the State of California and is also conducted in a manner to protect against adverse impacts on the health, safety and welfare of the community. 
(Ord. No. 844; Ord. No. 876)  
9.18.020 - Definitions. 
The following words and terms are defined for the purpose of applying the provisions of this Chapter: 
A.  Bingo shall mean a game of chance in which prizes are awarded on the basis of designated numbers or symbols on a card which conform to numbers or symbols selected at random. An electronic system of Bingo that substitutes a computer with stored Bingo "card" matrices for traditional paper or cardboard Bingo cards does not qualify as a Bingo Game within meaning of this Chapter, except for those portable card minding devices ("PCMD") as provided by California Penal Code § 326.5. 
B.  Bingo Game shall mean the same as "Bingo." 
C.  City Treasurer shall mean the Treasurer of the City of Del Mar or his/her designee. 
D.  Director shall mean the Director of the City of Del Mar's Department of Planning and Community Development. 
E.  Eligible Charitable Organization shall have the definition as provided in Section 9.18.050 below. 
F.  Government Code shall mean all sections of the California State statutes, including but not limited to, the Penal Code, the Taxation Code, the Government Code and all amendments thereto.  
9.18.030 - Locations in which Bingo Games are permitted. 
A.  The playing, maintaining or operating of a Bingo Game shall be allowed in any of the City's zoning districts listed below, provided the Bingo Game is conducted, maintained and operated in accordance with all of the provisions of Section 326.5 of the California Penal Code and with all of the provisions of this Chapter. 
Fairgrounds/Racetrack (FR) 
Public Facilities (PF)  
9.18.040 - Permit Required. 
No person shall play Bingo or maintain or operate a Bingo Game, as the term is defined in this Chapter and in Section 326.5 of the California Penal Code, unless a valid City of Del Mar Bingo Permit has first been obtained pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter.  
9.18.050 - Organizations eligible to operate a Bingo Game. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to conduct a Bingo Game in the City unless such person is a member of a nonprofit, charitable organization, or other organization as provided by California Penal Code § 326.5(a) and acting on behalf of such organization, and has a valid Bingo Permit issued pursuant to this Chapter. Such organizations shall be deemed an "Eligible Charitable Organization" pursuant to this Chapter. 
B.  No Bingo Permit shall be issued to an organization unless the Bingo Permit applicant is an Eligible Charitable Organization pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter.  
9.18.060 - Bingo Permit Application—Required Application Material. 
An application for a Bingo Permit shall include all of the following materials: 
A.  An application, submitted on a form provided by the City, along with such information, maps and plans as required by the Director to accomplish the purposes of this Chapter; 
B.  The name and address of the applicant(s). If the applicant is an organization, the names of the principals or managers of the organization shall be provided; 
C.  A statement that the applicant is an Eligible Charitable Organization under Section 326.5 of the California Penal Code and this Chapter; 
D.  A general description of the proposed location and schedule of operation of the Bingo Game(s); 
E.  A written statement that the applicant agrees to conduct Bingo Games in strict accordance with the provisions of Section 326.5 of the California Penal Code and with the provisions of this Chapter, as they may be amended from time to time, along with a written acknowledgement that the Permit to conduct Bingo Games may be suspended or revoked upon violation of any of such provisions; 
F.  A Bingo Permit application processing fee, as adopted by resolution of the City Council in accordance with the provisions of Government Code; 
G.  The written consent of the owner of the real property at which the Bingo Game is to be conducted; 
H.  A copy of the licenses and authorizations required for operation of a Bingo Game, including a City of Del Mar Business License; 
I.  As applicable, a certificate, or determination of exemption from the Revenue and Taxation Code, or a letter of good standing from the Exemption Division of the Franchise Tax Board in Sacramento, showing exemption under California Regulations, pursuant to Penal Code § 326.5; and 
J.  A list of all members, employees or volunteers of the Eligible Charitable Organization who will operate the Bingo Game, including full names of each such person, date of birth and driver's license number.  
9.18.070 - Issuing Authority and Application Procedure for a Bingo Permit. 
A.  The City Council shall serve as the issuing authority for an application for a Bingo Permit. Upon receipt, the application shall be routed to each City Department, as deemed appropriate by the Director, for comment and suggested conditions. After receipt of comments and suggested conditions, the Director shall cause the application to be placed on the first available agenda of the City Council as a Public Hearing item. 
B.  A staff report shall be prepared for the City Council, to include a recommendation from staff. 
C.  The City Council shall take action to approve, conditionally approve, or deny the application based on the standards of review contained in this Chapter. The City Council may also continue the application, as deemed necessary, in order to gain additional information to be used as the basis for making a determination on the application.  
9.18.080 - Provision of Notice of Hearing on a Bingo Permit application. 
A.  Notice of a Bingo Permit application shall contain the date, place, and time set for the scheduled City Council review of the application. The required notice shall also include all of the following: 
1.  The number assigned to the application; 
2.  A description of the proposed Bingo Game and its location; and 
3.  A brief description of the purpose of the City Council review and of the review process. 
B.  Notice of an application for a Bingo Permit shall be provided as follows: 
1.  Published once in a newspaper of general circulation within the City; 
2.  Mailed to all owners of real property within 300 feet of the location of the proposed Bingo Game, with ownership as identified on County Tax Assessors' rolls; and 
3.  Posting at City Hall by staff and posting at the site of the proposed Bingo Game by the applicant using a notification card provided by the City.  
9.18.090 - Standards of Review for Applications. 
An application for a Bingo Permit shall be approved by the issuing authority identified in this Chapter unless the issuing authority makes one or more of the following findings of fact: 
A.  That the issuance of the Bingo Permit will endanger public health, safety or welfare of the surrounding property; 
B.  That the issuance of the Bingo Permit will have an adverse impact on the welfare of the community or on the community's appearance or aesthetics; 
C.  That the issuance of the Bingo Permit is inconsistent with the Community Plan or Zoning Regulations; 
D.  That the applicant for the Bingo Permit is not eligible pursuant to the provisions of either Section 326.5 of the Penal Code or this Chapter; 
E.  That the information provided in the Bingo Permit application is false or erroneous; or 
F.  That the proposed operation or method of conducting the Bingo Game(s) will be contrary to the provisions of this Chapter.  
9.18.100 - Conditions of Approval of Bingo Permit. 
An approved Bingo Permit shall be subject to such conditions as the issuing authority deems necessary or desirable for the enforcement of the provisions of this Chapter, for enforcement of the California Penal Code, or to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the community.  
9.18.110 - Term of Permit. 
A Bingo Permit shall be valid for a period of two years from the date of approval.  
9.18.120 - Renewal of Bingo Permits. 
A.  Notwithstanding the other provisions of this Chapter, the Permittee may request a renewal of the term of a Bingo Permit. The request shall be submitted on a form provided by the City and shall be accompanied by a processing fee, as established by resolution of the City Council. 
B.  Upon submittal, the Director shall review the request for Bingo Permit Renewal and make a determination if the circumstances and findings under which the original Bingo Permit application were issued are still applicable and can support findings for approval of a renewal of the Permit. 
C.  The Director's determination on the request for Bingo Permit Renewal shall be appealable in accordance with the provisions of the DMMC. 
D.  A Bingo Permit Renewal shall be valid for a period of two years from the date of approval. 
E.  Within three months of the end of the period of a valid Bingo Permit Renewal, the Permittee may request another Bingo Permit Renewal.  
9.18.130 - Bingo Permits not Transferable. 
Each permit issued under this Chapter shall be issued to a specific person on behalf of a specific Eligible Charitable Organization to conduct Bingo Games at a specific location. A Bingo Permit may not be transferred from one Eligible Charitable Organization to another. The Permittee of which a valid Bingo Permit is issued may submit a written request for a substitution of the individual authorized by the permit due to staff or employment changes within the Eligible Charitable Organization.  
9.18.140 - Bingo Game Operation Parameters. 
A Bingo Game shall be operated in compliance with all of the following requirements: 
A.  Any Bingo Game conducted in the City shall be operated in compliance with the provisions of Section 326.5 of the California Penal Code and with each term and condition of the Permit issued therefore pursuant to this Chapter; 
B.  The facility at which the Bingo Game is conducted shall provide the off-street parking as proposed and approved in the Bingo Permit application material; 
C.  The operator shall provide the security measures as proposed and approved in the Bingo Permit application material; 
D.  The Bingo Permittee shall conduct a Bingo Game only on property owned, leased or authorized for such use. Nothing in this Subsection shall be construed to require that the property owned, leased, or authorized to the organization for use by the organization be used or leased exclusively by, or donated exclusively to, such organization; 
E.  No minors shall be allowed to participate in any Bingo Game; 
F.  All Bingo Games shall be open to the public, not just to those affiliated with the Eligible Charitable Organization; 
G.  A Bingo Game shall be operated and staffed only by members, employees or volunteers of the Eligible Charitable Organization which have obtained the Bingo Permit. Such persons shall be limited to those set forth in the most recent application for a license or renewal as approved by the license collector, and shall not receive a profit, wage or salary from any Bingo Game. Only the Eligible Charitable Organization authorized to conduct a Bingo Game shall operate such game, or participate in the promotion, supervision or any other phase of such games. This Subdivision does not preclude the employment of security personnel by the organization; 
H.  No individual, corporation, partnership, or other legal entity except the Eligible Charitable Organization authorized to conduct a Bingo Game shall hold a financial interest in the conduct of such Bingo Game; 
I.  No Bingo Game shall be conducted between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.; 
J.  No person shall be allowed to participate in a Bingo Game unless the person is physically present at the time and place in which the Bingo Game is being conducted; 
K.  The Bingo Permit and the rules of the Bingo Game shall be conspicuously posted at the location of the Bingo Game; 
L.  With respect to Eligible Charitable Organizations, all profits and/or proceeds derived from the Bingo Games shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account pursuant to Penal Code § 326.5; 
M.  The total value of prizes awarded during the conduct of any Bingo Game shall not exceed $500.00 in cash or kind, or both, for each separate game which is conducted; and 
N.  At start and midpoint of each Fiscal Year, the Permittee shall file with the City Treasurer, a full and complete Bingo Financial Statement, on a form to be approved by the City Treasurer, of all moneys collected and disbursed and the amount remaining for charitable purposes as a result of all Bingo Games conducted during the preceding six months.  
9.18.150 - Fee for Law Enforcement and Public Safety Services provided by City. 
A.  In order to provide the municipal services to accommodate and regulate the operation of Bingo Games, the City shall impose an additional Fee for the provision of those Law Enforcement and Public Safety service costs incurred by the City to provide Public Safety services directly related to the operation of Bingo Games. 
B.  The Fee for Law Enforcement and Public Safety service costs shall not exceed the actual costs incurred by the City to provide the Law Enforcement and Public Safety services related to the operation of Bingo Games. 
C.  The Permittee shall be billed bi-annually following the submittal of the Bingo Financial Statement, as required by this Chapter. The City shall prepare a cost summary based on the actual costs for Law Enforcement and Public Safety service costs. 
D.  The Fee for Law Enforcement and Public Safety service costs required in this Section is separate and distinct from any other fee required by this Chapter.  
9.18.160 - Provision of Financial Records upon request by City. 
Upon request by the City Treasurer, the applicant shall make available for inspection all of applicant's financial books, records and papers at any reasonable time before the Bingo Permit application is granted or the Permittee during the time the Bingo Permit is in effect, which books, records and papers will be inspected solely for the determination of the factual accuracy of the information contained in the application. Failure to make any such information available within ten days of the City Treasurer's request to inspect same shall constitute cause for denial or revocation of the Bingo Permit.  
9.18.170 - Revocation of Permit. 
A Bingo Permit may be revoked upon a written finding by the Director that the Bingo Game is being operated in violation of one or more of the conditions of the Bingo Permit or that the Bingo Game is being operated in violation of one or more of the provisions of this Chapter or of applicable State of California regulations or codes. A Bingo Permit may also be revoked upon a written finding by the Director that the Bingo Game is being operated in a manner that constitutes a nuisance. The decision of the Director shall be appealable to the City Council in accordance with the provisions of the Del Mar Municipal Code.  
9.18.180 - Violations and penalties. 
A.  A violation of this Chapter shall be deemed a violation of the Del Mar Municipal Code and shall be subject to enforcement under the provisions of DMMC Chapter 1.10. 
B.  It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to receive a profit, wage or salary from any Bingo Game authorized by this Chapter pursuant to California Penal Code § 326.5.  
Chapter 9.20 - NOISE REGULATIONS 
 
9.20.010 - Purpose. 
In order to secure and promote the public health, comfort, safety and welfare, and to protect the rights of its citizens to privacy and freedom from nuisance, it is the purpose of this Chapter to prohibit unnecessary, excessive, and annoying noises at levels which are detrimental to the health and welfare of the community, and to minimize airborne dust and pollen. This Chapter is intended to provide systematic, regulatory controls on noise within the City. 
(Ord. No. 452; Ord. No. 535; Ord. No. 686)  
9.20.020 - Definitions. 
Whenever the following words and phrases are used in this Chapter, they shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this Section: 
A-Weighted Sound Level means the sound level in decibels as measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighting network. The level so read is designated dB(A) or dBA. 
Ambient Noise Level means the composite noise from all sources near and far. In this context, the ambient noise level constitutes a normal or existing level of environmental noise at a given location and time. 
Average Sound Level means a sound level typical of the sound levels at a certain place during a given period of time, averaged by the general rule of combination for sound levels, said general rule being set forth in the American National Standard Specifications for Sound Level Meters (see S1.4-1983 or the latest revision thereof). Average sound level is also called equivalent continuous sound level (Leq). 
Construction Equipment means any tools, machinery, or equipment used in connection with construction operations, including all types of "special construction" equipment as defined in the pertinent sections of the California Vehicle Code when used in the construction process on any construction site, regardless of whether such construction site be located on-highway or off-highway. 
Decibel (dB) means a unit measure of sound (noise) level. 
Disturbing, Excessive or Offensive Noise means: 
A.  Any sound or noise which constitutes a nuisance involving discomfort or annoyance to persons of normal sensitivity residing in the area. 
B.  Any sound or noise conflicting with the criteria or levels set forth in this Chapter. 
Emergency Work means work made necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a public calamity or work required to protect persons or property from imminent exposure to danger of damage, or work by public or private utilities when restoring utility service. 
Motor Vehicles mean any and all self-propelled vehicles as defined in the California Vehicle Code, specifically including, but not limited to, "mini-bikes" and "go-carts". 
Noise Control Officer means the Director of Planning and Community Development of the City of Del Mar or his designated representative. 
Noise Level means the same as "sound level". The terms may be used interchangeably herein. 
Person means a person, firm, association, co-partnership, joint venture, corporation, or any entity, public or private. 
Sound Level means in decibels, the weighted sound pressure level obtained by the use of a sound level meter and frequency weighting network as specified in American National Standards Institute specifications for Sound Level Meters (see ANSI S1.4-1983, or the latest version thereof). If the frequency weighting employed is not indicated, the A-weighting is implied. 
Sound Level Meter means an instrument, including a microphone, an amplifier, a readout, and frequency weighting networks for the measurement of sound levels, which meets or exceeds the requirements pertinent for type S2A meters in the American National Standard Specifications for Sound Level Meters (see S1.4-1983 or the latest revision thereof). 
Supplementary Definitions of Technical Terms. Definitions of technical terms not defined herein shall be obtained from American National Standard Acoustical Terminology (see S1.1-1960; R-1976).  
9.20.030 - Sound Level measurement. 
A.  Any sound or noise level measurement made pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter shall be measured with a sound level meter using the A-weighting and meter response pursuant to applicable manufacturer's instructions. 
B.  The sound level meter shall be appropriately calibrated and adjusted as necessary by means of an acoustical calibrator of the coupler-type to assure meter accuracy within the tolerances set forth by the American National Standards Institute (see ANSI S1.4-1983 or the latest revision thereof). 
C.  For outdoor measurements, the microphone shall be not less than four feet above ground, at least four feet distant from walls or other large reflecting surfaces and shall be protected from the effects of wind noises by the use of appropriate wind screens and the location selected shall be at any point on the affected property. In cases when the microphone must be located within ten feet of walls or similar large reflecting surfaces, the actual measured distances and orientation of the sources, microphone and reflecting surfaces shall be noted and recorded. In no case shall a noise measurement be taken within five feet of the noise source. 
D.  For indoor measurements, the microphone shall be at least three feet distant from any wall, ceiling or partition, and the average measurement of at least three microphone positions throughout the room shall be determined.  
9.20.040 - Sound Level Limits. 
A.  Unless otherwise specified, it shall be unlawful for any person(s) to cause noise by any means to the extent that the one-hour average sound level exceeds the applicable limit given in the following table at any location in the City of Del Mar beyond the premises on which the noise is produced, as measured pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter. The noise subject to these limits is that part of the total noise at the specified location that is due solely to the action of said person(s). 
TABLE OF APPLICABLE LIMITS 
Property Receiving Noise 	Time of Day 	One-Hour 
Average 
Sound Level 
(decibels) 
1. R1-5, R1-5B, R1-10, R1-10B, R-2, R1-14, R1-40, RM-East, RM-West, RM-Central, RM-South, OS Overlay 	7 a.m. to 10 p.m. 
10 p.m. to 7 a.m. 	50 
40 
2. NC, RC, CC, PC, BC, VC 	7 a.m. to 10 p.m. 
10 p.m. to 7 a.m. 	60 
50 
3. RR 	7 a.m. to 10 p.m. 
10 p.m. to 7 a.m. 	60 
55 
 
B.  The noise limits specified in Subsection A. above shall be adjusted as follows to account for the effects of time and duration on the impact of noise levels: 
1.  Noise that is produced for no more than a cumulative period of 30 minutes in any hour may exceed the noise limit by three decibels. 
2.  Noise that is produced for no more than a cumulative period of 15 minutes in any hour may exceed the noise limit by six decibels. 
3.  Noise that is produced for no more than a cumulative period of ten minutes in any hour may exceed the noise limit by eight decibels. 
4.  Noise that is produced for no more than a cumulative period of five minutes in any hour may exceed the noise limit by 11 decibels. 
5.  Noise that is produced for no more than a cumulative period of two minutes in any hour may exceed the noise limit by 15 decibels. 
C.  For purposes of this chapter, the peak decibel reading for a noise with a fluctuating noise level (such as live or recorded music) shall be considered as the noise level for the entire cumulative period of noise. Likewise, the time between repetitive intermittent noises (such as banging, pounding, or hammering) shall be included in the cumulative of the noise. 
D.  If the measured ambient level exceeds the applicable limit noted above, the allowable one-hour average sound level shall be the ambient noise level. 
E.  The sound level limit at a location on a boundary between two zoning districts is the arithmetic mean of the respective limits of the two districts. 
F.  Fixed-location public utility distribution or transmission facilities located on or adjacent to a property line shall be subject to the noise level limits of this Chapter, measured at or beyond six feet from the boundary of the easement upon which the equipment is located.  
9.20.050 - Construction Noise. 
Any person who operates powered construction or landscape equipment and/or who erects, constructs, demolishes, excavates for, alters or repairs any building or structure within the City of Del Mar in such a manner as to cause noise to be received beyond the boundaries of the property on which the construction work is occurring shall comply with the following: 
A.  No construction work shall be performed on Sundays or City holidays. 
B.  No construction work shall be performed before 9:00 a.m. or after 7:00 p.m. on Saturday. 
C.  No construction work shall be performed before 7:00 a.m. or after 7:00 p.m. on Monday through Friday. 
D.  Construction activity shall not cause an hourly average sound level greater than 75 decibels on property zoned or used for residential purposes. 
E.  Exception: A person may perform construction work on the person's own property, provided such construction activity is not carried on for profit or livelihood, between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on Sundays and City holidays.  
9.20.060 - Motor Vehicles. 
A.  On- and Off-Highway. Violations for exceeding applicable noise level limits as to persons operating motor vehicles on- or off-public streets or highways in the City of Del Mar shall be prosecuted under applicable California Vehicle Code provisions. 
B.  Repairs of Motor Vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any person within the City of Del Mar to repair, rebuild, or test any motor vehicle in such a manner as to cause disturbing, excessive, or offensive noises as defined in this Chapter. 
C.  Engines and Motor Vehicles. Any disturbing or raucous noises caused off-streets or highways by racing or accelerating the engine of any motor vehicle while moving or not moving, by the willful backfiring of any engine and exhaust from the engine tailpipe or muffler, or from the screeching of tires, is prohibited. 
D.  Emergency Vehicles. Nothing in this Section shall apply to authorized emergency vehicles when being used in emergency situations.  
9.20.070 - Aircraft. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate aircraft or aircraft engines within or above the City of Del Mar in violation with the provisions of this Chapter.  
9.20.080 - Watercraft. 
Violations for excessive noise of watercraft operating in waters under the jurisdiction of the City of Del Mar shall be prosecuted under the applicable provisions of the California Harbors and Navigation Code.  
9.20.090 - Public Nuisance Noise. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made or continued, within the limits of the City of Del Mar, any disturbing, excessive or offensive noise which causes discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable persons of normal sensitivity residing in the area. 
B.  In the absence of objective measurement by use of a sound level meter, the characteristics and conditions which shall be considered in determining whether a violation of the provisions of this Section exists shall include any or all of the following: 
1.  The level of the noise; 
2.  Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual; 
3.  Whether the origin of the noise is natural or unnatural; 
4.  The level of the ambient noise; 
5.  The proximity of the noise to sleeping facilities; 
6.  The nature and zoning of the area from which the noise emanates and the area where it is received; 
7.  The time of day or night the noise occurs; 
8.  The duration of the noise; or 
9.  Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent or constant. 
C.  Identified Excessive Noises. The following activities, among others, are declared to cause disturbing, excessive, or offensive noises in violation of this Section but said enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely: 
1.  Horns, Signaling Devices, etc. Unnecessary use or operation of horns, signaling devices, etc., on automobiles, motorcycles, or any other vehicle. 
2.  Radios, Television Sets, Phonographs, Loud Speaking Amplifiers and Similar Devices. 
a.  Uses restricted. The use, operation or permitting to be played, used, or operated, any sound production or reproduction device, radio receiving set, musical instrument, drums, phonograph, television set, loud speakers and sound amplifiers or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of any reasonable person of normal sensitivity in any residential or public area is prohibited. This provision shall not apply to any participant in a duly licensed parade, or to any person who has been otherwise duly authorized by the City of Del Mar to engage in such conduct. 
b.  Prima Facie Violations. The operation of any such set, instrument, phonograph, television set, machine, loud speakers or similar device between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the building, structure, or vehicle in which it is located, shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this Section. 
3.  Animals. 
a.  The keeping or maintenance, or the permitting to be kept or maintained upon any premises owned, occupied, or controlled by any person of any animal or animals which by any frequent or long continued noise, shall cause annoyance or discomfort to reasonable persons of normal sensitivity in the vicinity. 
b.  The written affirmation by two persons having separate residences that violation of this Section disturbs the peace and quiet of said persons shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this Section. 
4.  Playing of Radios on Buses or Trolleys. The operation of any radio, phonograph, or tape player on an urban transit bus or trolley so as to emit noise that is audible to any other person in the vehicle is prohibited. 
5.  Playing of Radios, Phonographs, and Other Sound Production or Reproduction Devices in Public Parks and Beach Areas and Public Parking Lots and Streets Adjacent Thereto. The operation of any radio, phonograph, television set, or any other sound production or reproduction device in any public park or on any public beach or any public parking lot or street adjacent to such park or beach, without the prior written approval of the City Manager, in such a manner that such radio, phonograph, television set or sound production or reproduction device emits a sound level exceeding those found in the following table at any point ten feet or more from the noise source is prohibited: 
TABLE OF APPLICABLE LIMITS 
Time of Day 	Time Average 
Sound Level Limits 
7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. 	65 decibels 
7:01 p.m. to 6:59 a.m. 	55 decibels 
 
6.  Portable Engine Motor-powered Leaf Blowers. It shall be unlawful for any person to use or operate within the City, any portable machine, powered with a gasoline engine or electric motor, to blow leaves, dirt and other debris off sidewalks, driveways, lawns, and other surfaces. 
7.  Yelling, Shouting, etc. Disturbing or raucous singing, yelling, shouting, hooting, or whistling on public streets at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of neighboring residents or persons of normal sensitivity within the area for whatever reason is prohibited. The occurrence of such conduct between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this Section. 
(Ord. No. 535)  
9.20.110 - Exemptions. 
A.  Emergency work. The provisions of the chapter shall not apply to any emergency work as defined herein, provided that: 
1.  The Noise Control Officer has been notified in advance, if possible, or as soon as practical after said emergency, and 
2.  Any vehicle, device, apparatus, or equipment used, related to, or connected with emergency work is designed, modified, or equipped to reduce sounds produced to the lowest possible level consistent with effective operation of such vehicle, device, apparatus, or equipment. 
B.  Government Preempted Activities. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any activity to the extent regulation thereof has been preempted by Federal, State, or Local law.  
9.20.120 - Enforcement. 
A.  Any person(s) violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be subject to enforcement and penalties prescribed within the Del Mar Municipal Code.  
Chapter 9.24 - NEWSRACKS ON PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY 
 
9.24.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Chapter is: 
A.  To protect the safety and welfare of the City's residents and visitors from unregulated newsracks being placed in locations in public rights-of-way that pose a danger to pedestrian or vehicular traffic or that unreasonably interfere with the public's use of those rights-of-way; and 
B.  To protect the unique architectural features and scenic amenities of the City.  
9.24.020 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this Chapter: 
A.  Distributor shall mean any person responsible for placing or maintaining a newsrack. 
B.  Director shall mean the City Manager or the City Manager's designee. 
C.  Cluster shall mean a group of newsracks placed side by side or in proximity to one another so as to appear to be in a continuous row. 
D.  Designated Cluster Site shall mean a location designated by the City Manager as being consistent with the provisions of this Chapter. 
E.  Newsrack shall mean any self-service box, container, storage unit or other dispenser installed, used or maintained for the display, sale or distribution of publications. 
F.  Sidewalk shall mean any public right-of-way provided for the exclusive use of pedestrians.  
9.24.030 - Violation of Chapter. 
It is unlawful for any person to place, install, use or maintain a newsrack on or within a public right-of-way in violation of the provisions of this Chapter.  
9.24.040 - Receipt of Newsrack Permit. 
No person shall place or maintain a newsrack within the public right-of-way without being in the possession of a valid Newsrack Permit issued in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.  
9.24.050 - Newsrack Permit Application. 
A.  An application for a Newsrack Permit shall be submitted to the Director. 
B.  An application shall be accompanied by the following: 
1.  The name, address and telephone number of the applicant; 
2.  The name, address and telephone number of a responsible person whom the City may notify or contact at any time concerning the applicant's newsrack; 
3.  The name of the publication to be placed in the newsrack; 
4.  The type or brand of newsrack, including a description of the newsrack and mounting system; 
5.  A scaled diagram showing the size and dimensions of the proposed newsrack and the location proposed for installation of the newsrack; and 
6.  Any additional information which is necessary for the proper disposition of the application in accordance with the regulations of this Chapter. 
C.  The applicant shall pay a permit application fee which shall be set by resolution of the City Council in an amount that shall not exceed the reasonable cost of processing the application.  
9.24.060 - Newsrack Permits, Issuance, Terms and Conditions. 
A.  A Newsrack Permit shall be issued unless the Director makes a written finding that an application is not in compliance with the provisions of this Chapter. 
B.  The Director shall act within ten calendar days of the receipt of a complete application. 
C.  A Permit may be issued for the installation of a newsrack(s) without prior inspection of the location. However, the continuation of the privilege conferred in the Permit shall be conditioned upon compliance with the provisions of this Chapter. 
D.  Newsrack Permits are not transferable. 
E.  Newsrack Permit applications shall be reviewed on a first-come, first-serve basis. 
F.  Upon the issuance of a Newsrack Permit, the applicant shall be issued a Newsrack Permit sticker. The Newsrack Permit sticker shall be permanently affixed to the front of the newsrack. 
G.  The Permit Holder shall agree to indemnify and hold harmless the City of Del Mar, its officers and employees, from any loss, liability, damage, or cost sustained by any person or property, arising from the installation, operation, or use of such newsracks; provided, however, that such obligation to indemnify and hold harmless the City of Del Mar, its officers and employees, shall not extend to any loss, liability damage or cost resulting from the acts or property of another. 
H.  Prior to the granting of a Newsrack Permit, the applicant shall provide the City with a certificate showing that such person or distributor has in force at that time, public liability and property damage insurance naming the City as an additional insured, in an amount not less than $100,000.00 minimum liability combined single limit (bodily injury and property damage) per person and per occurrence. The Permit Holder shall provide and keep in force that policy of public liability insurance during such time as they continue to locate any newsrack under the terms of this Section. The evidence of insurance filed with the City shall include a statement by the insurance carrier that 30 days notice will be given to the City before cancellation becomes effective. 
I.  The Director may attach additional conditions of approval to a Newsrack Permit as may be necessary to assure compliance with the provisions of this Chapter.  
9.24.070 - Placement of Newsracks. 
A newsrack placed or maintained within a public right-of-way shall be situated in accordance with the following: 
A.  If placed near a curb, the back of the newsrack shall be situated not less than 20 inches nor more than 24 inches from the edge of the curb (measured from the street side of the curb in a straight line away from the street). If placed near a wall, the back of the newsrack shall be situated not more than six inches from the face of the wall. 
B.  No newsrack shall be placed within five feet of: 
1.  A marked crosswalk; 
2.  A curb return of any unmarked crosswalk; 
3.  Fire hydrant, call box or other emergency facility; 
4.  A driveway; 
5.  A governmental mailbox; or 
6.  A designated loading zone or handicap parking space. 
C.  No newsrack shall be placed in a location where placement obstructs, interferes with or impedes vehicular or pedestrian traffic, including pedestrian traffic in the location of bus stops. Any placement which would reduce the width of usable sidewalk in that location to less than four feet shall be considered to interfere with pedestrian traffic. 
D.  No newsrack shall be placed where placement obstructs, interferes with or impedes the governmental use of the right-of-way. 
E.  No newsrack shall be placed where placement obstructs, interferes with or impedes access to, or use of, abutting property, including, but not limited to, residences, places of business, or legally parked or stopped vehicles. 
F.  No newsrack shall be placed where placement endangers public health or safety. 
G.  No newsrack shall be placed on the opposite side of a sidewalk or parkway across from an another newsrack. 
H.  No newsrack shall be placed where placement involves attachment to any fire hydrant, power pole, sign post, tree, refuse container, or any other existing fixture. 
I.  No newsrack shall be placed directly in front of a display window of any commercial structure abutting a sidewalk, (except near a curb as regulated herein) without the written authorization of the property owner. 
J.  No newsrack shall be placed within the R1-40; R1-14; R1-10; R1-10B; R1-5; R1-5B; RM-West, East, Central, or South; R-2; R-C; CVPP or FW zones.  
9.24.080 - Clusters of Newsracks. 
A newsrack may be placed with other newsracks, in a cluster, at a designated cluster site, in accordance with the following: 
A.  The length of any cluster of newsracks shall not exceed 15 feet measured from the outside edges of the newsracks at each end of the cluster. 
B.  An exception allowing a longer cluster length than the limitation of Subsection A above may be granted by the Director, or the Director's designee, following a written finding that: 
1.  The exception will maintain sufficient clear space for the safe pedestrian traffic; and 
2.  The intensity of pedestrian traffic or the width of the sidewalk in a particular location would safely accommodate a larger length of a cluster of newsracks than would otherwise be allowed and authorized by this Chapter and that a larger length would not adversely affect the visual amenities of the area. 
C.  An exception mandating a shorter cluster length than provided for in Subsection A. may be imposed by the Director, or the Director's designee, following a finding that: the intensity of pedestrian traffic or the width of the sidewalk in a particular location necessitates a lesser length of a cluster of newsracks than would otherwise be allowed and authorized by this Chapter. 
D.  No newsrack or cluster of newsracks shall be placed within 200 feet of any other cluster site within a public right-of-way. 
E.  For purposes of this Section, the prohibition on locating a newsrack or newsrack cluster within 200 feet of another newsrack cluster site shall not apply to newsracks located on the opposite side of a public street.  
9.24.090 - Design of Newsracks. 
A.  No newsrack shall be taller than 52 inches in height measured from the ground to the highest part of the newsrack, including coin box; nor more than 30 inches in width measured parallel to the adjacent curb or wall; nor more than 24 inches in depth measured perpendicular to the adjacent curb or wall. 
B.  No surface of a newsrack shall be used to display advertising; except that: 
1.  The newsrack may be used to display the name of the newspaper or periodical. 
2.  Each newsrack shall have affixed to it, a notice, visible to the public, containing the name and address and telephone number of the distributor. In the alternative, this information shall be available in the Newsrack Permit application on file. 
3.  Each newsrack shall have affixed to it, a Newsrack Permit sticker issued by the Director.  
9.24.100 - Prohibition of Specified Material. 
A.  No publication offered for sale in a newsrack placed or maintained on a public right-of-way shall be displayed or exhibited in a manner which exposes to public view, from any public place, any of the following: 
1.  Any statement or word describing explicit sexual acts, sexual organs or excrement where such statement or word has as its purpose or effect, sexual arousal, gratification or affront; or 
2.  Any picture or illustration of genitals, pubic hair, perineum, anus or anal region of any person or any picture or illustration of any portion of the breast below the areola thereof of any female person, other than a child under the age of puberty, where such picture or illustration has as its purpose or effect: sexual arousal, gratification or affront; or 
3.  Any picture or illustration depicting explicit sexual acts where such picture or illustration has as its purpose or effect, sexual arousal, gratification or affront. 
B.  For purposes of this Section, the term "explicit sexual acts" means the depiction of sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, sadism, masochism, or excretory functions in conjunction with sexual activity, lewd exhibition of the genitals or masturbation, whether any of the above is depicted or described as being performed alone or between members of the same or opposite sex, or between humans and animals, or other acts of sexual arousal involving any physical contact with a person's genitals, pubic region, pubic hair, perineum, anus or anal region.  
9.24.110 - Installation of Newsracks. 
A.  Damage to public property resulting from the installation of a newsrack shall be repaired immediately by, and at the expense of, the persons directing, managing or accomplishing the installation. 
Failure of the persons directing, managing or accomplishing the installation to make the required repairs shall result in City forces undertaking to make such repairs. 
B.  The cost of repairs by the City shall be chargeable as a civil debt to the persons directing, managing or accomplishing the installation and may be collected by the City in the same manner as it collects any other civil debt or obligation.  
9.24.120 - Maintenance of Newsracks. 
A.  All newsracks shall be maintained by the distributor in a neat, clean, and operable condition to include without limitation an appearance: 
1.  Reasonably free of dirt and grease. 
2.  Reasonably free of chipped, faded, peeling or cracked paint. 
3.  Reasonably free of rust and corrosion. 
4.  With clear plastic or glass maintained in an unbroken and uncracked condition. 
5.  With paper or cardboard parts, or inserts free of rips, cracks or tears. 
6.  With structural portions in an unbroken condition.  
9.24.130 - Abatement of Nuisance by Removal. 
A.  A newsrack installed, located, maintained or abandoned contrary to the provisions of this Chapter shall constitute a public nuisance and may be abated subject to the provisions of this Chapter. 
B.  A newsrack installed, located, maintained or abandoned contrary to the provisions of this Chapter may be removed and stored by the Director or the Director's designee, in accordance with the following: 
1.  A "Notice to Cure" shall: 
a.  Be mailed to the distributor at the address shown on the newsrack; 
b.  Be affixed to the newsrack; 
c.  Contain a description of the violation, a request for compliance with the Chapter within ten calendar days, and a warning that the newsrack will, after the expiration of the ten-day period, be removed and stored at the expense of the distributor; and 
d.  Contain a notice that at any time within said ten-day period, an administrative hearing to challenge the existence of the violation may be requested by the distributor. 
2.  If the distributor requests a hearing, the Director shall schedule the hearing to occur within ten calendar days of the request. The hearing shall be conducted by the Director. The distributor shall have ten calendar days from the date of any adverse ruling which may result from the hearing to comply with the provisions specified in the ruling. If, to comply with the provisions of this Chapter cited in the decision, the subject newsrack may be removed and stored by the Director. 
C.  The cost of removal and/or storage by the City Administrator or his designee of any newsrack subject to this Chapter shall be chargeable as a civil debt to the owner thereof, and may be collected by the City in the same manner as it collects any other civil debt or obligation. In addition, the newsracks in question shall be deemed to be unclaimed property, and may be disposed of accordingly. 
D.  A newsrack which remains empty for 30 consecutive days shall be considered to be abandoned and shall be subject to abatement according to the provisions of this Chapter.  
9.24.140 - Removal of Newsrack Posing Immediate Threat. 
A.  If a newsrack is placed so as to constitute an immediate threat to public safety; and allowing the newsrack to remain until the newsrack owner is notified would allow the danger to continue; and such danger cannot otherwise be corrected, the City may remove the dangerous newsrack from the public right-of-way in accordance with the following procedures: 
1.  The City Manager shall determine whether the newsrack poses the type of danger specified in this Section. 
2.  As soon as possible following the City Manager's determination that the newsrack poses the type of danger specified in this Section, the City shall notify the newsrack distributor of the seizure of the newsrack. 
3.  The notice shall include: 
a.  The date, time and location of the post-seizure hearing; and 
b.  The procedure for reclaiming the seized newsrack. 
4.  A post-seizure hearing shall be conducted by the City manager and shall occur no sooner than three working days after notice to the newsrack owner. 
5.  At the hearing, the owner of the seized newsrack shall be determined, and there shall be a review of the factual basis supporting the seizure. 
6.  Following the hearing, if the City Manager determines that the seizure was appropriate, the owner of the newsrack may take possession of the seized newsrack upon: 
a.  The payment of all costs incurred by the City in removing and storing the newsrack; 
b.  Payment of a civil penalty in an amount to be determined by the City Manager necessary to cover all administrative costs involved with removal of the newsrack and the hearing process; and 
c.  The owners' execution of a statement agreeing to abide by the newsrack regulations contained in the Municipal Code. 
7.  If, following the hearing, the City Manager determines that the newsrack was not seized in accordance with the provisions of this Section, the City Manager shall direct that the newsrack be returned to the site from which it was seized. 
(Ord. No. 644)  
Chapter 9.26 - MOBILE VENDING 
 
9.26.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Chapter is to regulate mobile vending activities in order to protect public health, safety, and welfare, while accommodating commercial uses that generally promote an active and social pedestrian environment within appropriate areas of the City of Del Mar. 
(Ord. No. 881)  
9.26.020 - Definitions. 
The following words and terms are defined for the purpose of applying the provisions of this Chapter: 
A.  License shall mean a City of Del Mar Business License. 
B.  Mobile Food Truck shall mean a motorized vehicle or vehicle-towed trailer in which food is cooked and/or prepared to order and is served to walk up customers. 
C.  Mobile Food Truck Event shall mean an organized gathering of Mobile Food Truck vendors, located on a private, commercially zoned property, and which is open to the general public and operates on a regular schedule. 
D.  Mobile Food Vending shall mean selling, vending, supplying or providing of food, drinks or any other consumables from a temporary stand, vehicle, truck, trailer, cart, wagon, motorized or human-powered wheeled device. Mobile Food Vending does not include commercial activity without food or drink sales provided in Chapter 6.48 of this Code. 
E.  Permit shall mean an Operations Permit: Mobile Vending in accordance with DMMC Chapter 6.50. 
F.  Property Owner shall mean the holder of fee title to a property, whether a person, partnership, corporation or other entity recognized by law, and his/her/its lessees, permittees, assignees or successors in interest. 
G.  Public Property shall mean any real property owned, leased, operated, or controlled by the City of Del Mar other than a street, alley, parkway, sidewalk or other area dedicated, identified or used as a public right-of-way. 
H.  Public Right-of-Way shall mean any public street, road, avenue, highway, named or unnamed alley, lane, court, place trail, or other public way, operated and/or controlled by the City or other public entity, or subject to an easement owned by or dedicated or granted to City. 
I.  Special Event shall mean an activity or series of activities, specific to an identifiable time and place, most often produced in conjunction with community organizations, held on public or private property, which require the receipt of a City of Del Mar Facilities Use Permit or other Operations Permit pursuant to Title 6 of this Code.  
9.26.030 - Permit Requirement. 
A.  No person shall conduct Mobile Vending operations on Public Property or Public Right-of-Way without first obtaining a Permit in accordance with the provisions of DMMC Chapter 6.50 (Operations Permit—Mobile Vending) and this Chapter. 
B.  No Property Owner shall allow Mobile Vending operations to be conducted on private property without first obtaining a Permit in accordance with the provisions of DMMC Chapter 6.50 (Operations Permit—Mobile Vending) and this Chapter. 
C.  No Permit shall be required when the mobile vending activity is associated with the operation of a City-permitted Special Event, subject to the conditions thereof. 
D.  No Permit shall be required when the mobile vending activity is limited to a single Mobile Food Truck on private property operating solely for private catering purposes and when all of the following provisions are met: 
1.  The Mobile Food Truck is parked entirely on private property; and 
2.  Service is limited to the guests of the catered event only. 
3.  No payment transactions shall occur for individual orders taken by the Mobile Food Truck operator.  
9.26.040 - License Requirement. 
It is unlawful for any person to engage in the activity of Mobile Vending or operate a Mobile Food Truck in the City without having a current Business License obtained from the City in accordance with the provisions of DMMC Title 5.  
9.26.050 - Health Permit Requirement. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to engage in the activity of Mobile Food Vending or to operate a Mobile Food Truck in the City of Del Mar without a valid permit, certificate or other authorization required by the County of San Diego Department of Health.  
9.26.060 - Sales Tax Reporting. 
All Mobile Vendors, including Mobile Food Truck operators, shall be subject to reporting of tax revenues generated within the City of Del Mar on a form supplied by the City.  
9.26.070 - General Provisions for Mobile Food Trucks. 
A.  No Mobile Food Truck shall, except when performing a private catering function in conformance with Subsection 9.26.030.C of this Chapter, may operate before 10:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m., including set-up and clean-up. 
B.  No Mobile Food Truck shall operate within 500 feet of any off-street Mobile Food Truck Event, City-Permitted special or reoccurring event. Exceptions to this prohibition are allowed when consent is provided within the Special Event permit, or when mobile food trucks are requested as part of the Special Event permit. In this case, all standards and conditions required by Section 9.26.080 of this Code shall apply. If necessary, additional conditions may be imposed to ensure public/pedestrian safety (example: temporary, controlled street crossings) shall be required. 
C.  Mobile Food Trucks shall not idle vehicle engines more than five minutes during any one-hour time period. 
D.  Mobile Food Truck operators shall be responsible for controlling smoke and odors caused by food preparation so as to avoid a public nuisance. 
E.  All food containers, utensils and napkins distributed to customers from a Mobile Food Truck shall be biodegradable, compostable or recyclable. 
F.  No amplified music or loudspeakers shall be permitted. The operation shall at all times comply with the provisions of the City's Noise Ordinance (DMMC Chapter 9.20). 
G.  No temporary lighting shall be provided on the site where the Mobile Food Truck is operating, except that localized lighting may be used on or in the Mobile Food Trucks for the purpose of inside food preparation and menu illumination. 
H.  No signage other than that exhibited on the Mobile Food Truck may be displayed at the site where the Mobile Food Truck is operating. The prohibition shall include any hand-held signage and handbills. 
I.  No sales or service of alcohol shall be allowed by Mobile Food Trucks.  
9.26.080 - Mobile Food Trucks on Private Property. 
Mobile Food Trucks may operate on private properties in the Central Commercial, Beach Commercial and North Commercial Zones pursuant to the following minimum standards and conditions: 
A.  One Mobile Food Truck shall be allowed for each 1,500 square feet of paved, level parking area on a site, provided that parking spaces in that area are not reserved, encumbered, or designated to satisfy the off-street parking of a business or activity that is operating at the same time as the Mobile Food Truck. 
B.  No more than eight Mobile Food Trucks shall operate on any private property at one time. 
C.  A minimum of two off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each Mobile Food Truck. The parking required herein shall be provided free of charge and shall not be reserved, encumbered, or designated to satisfy the off-street parking of another business or activity that is operating on the site at the same time as the Mobile Food Truck. 
D.  A minimum of two fixed-location bicycle parking spaces per Mobile Food Truck shall be required on the site at which the Mobile Food Truck is operation. 
E.  No Mobile Food Truck Events shall operate more frequently than one day per week. 
F.  A minimum of one accessible restroom with hand-washing facilities shall be made available during all hours the Mobile Food Truck Event is in operation. These facilities must be located on-site and be made available for use by patrons of the event. 
G.  Separate refuse and recycling containers shall be provided on-site during all hours of Mobile Food Truck operations. All litter generated within a minimum of a 100-foot radius of the site shall be collected prior to closure of the Mobile Food Truck operations. 
H.  No overnight parking of Mobile Food Trucks shall be allowed on the permitted vending site. 
I.  A maximum 200 square-foot, uncovered seating area may be provided to serve patrons of the Mobile Food Truck. All seating areas shall be removed prior to close of the Mobile Food Truck Event for the day. The seating shall be located in an area of the site that is not reserved, encumbered, or designated to satisfy the off-street parking of a business or activity that is operating at the same time as the Mobile Food Truck (Event).  
9.26.090 - Mobile Food Trucks on Public Right-of-Way. 
Mobile Food Trucks may operate in legal parallel parking spaces located adjacent to commercially zoned properties provided they comply with all of the following minimum standards and conditions: 
A.  Mobile Food Trucks shall be parked directly adjacent to a paved sidewalk (not parkway) which contains a minimum width of seven feet, free and clear for pedestrian passage, as measured perpendicular to the face of the curb. 
B.  Food service shall be limited solely to that side of the Mobile Food Truck facing the adjacent sidewalk. 
C.  The Mobile Food Truck shall be in full compliance with all parking and Vehicle Code provisions which apply to the location at which it is parked, including the maximum allowed parking time limit for the parking space(s) occupied. 
D.  The Mobile Food Truck operations shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
E.  The Mobile Food Truck operator shall not encroach onto a public sidewalk with any part of the vehicle or any other equipment or furniture related to the operation of its business, except for required refuse receptacles. 
F.  No Mobile Food Truck operator shall conduct business unless he or she maintains a clearly designated refuse and recycling receptacle(s) in the immediate vicinity of the vehicle. Such receptacles shall be marked with a sign requesting use by patrons. Prior to leaving the location, the Mobile Food Truck Operator shall pick up, remove and dispose of all trash generated by the Mobile Food Truck operations within 100 feet of the Truck. 
G.  No Mobile Food Truck shall operate within 25 feet of any street intersection controlled by a crosswalk, traffic light, or stop sign. 
H.  Prior to the commencement of operations, the Mobile Food Truck operator shall secure a written agreement, with a copy provided to the City, giving the operator and his/her employees the right to use permanent sanitation facilities located not more than 200 feet from the location where the Mobile Food Truck will be operated. 
I.  The Mobile Food Truck operator shall maintain, and supply copies to the City, policies of commercial general liability and automobile liability in an amount no less than $1,000,000.00 per occurrence naming the City as an additional insured.  
9.26.100 - Mobile Food Trucks and Non-Profit Fundraising. 
Non-profit organizations may conduct Mobile Food Truck Events on public property or on non-profit organization owned property with the prior receipt of an Operations Permit if held to raise funds for the hosting non-profit organization(s). The Operations Permit shall be subject to Sections 9.26.070 and 9.26.080 of this Chapter, and all of the following: 
A.  A minimum ten percent of all food sales shall be donated to the non-profit organization sponsoring the event. 
B.  Fundraising events may only occur during the allowed operating hours specified in the DMMC and only at the times of the day and week when the primary use of the property is not being operated and when the parking located on the site is not allocated to another use.  
Chapter 9.28 - CHEMICALS USED IN PRODUCING CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES 
 
9.28.010 - Adoption of Provisions by Reference. 
There is hereby adopted, by reference, by the City of Del Mar, for the purpose of prescribing regulations for the sale of chemicals used in producing controlled substances, Section 32.1104 of the San Diego County Code, together with such secondary references as are included in that section. The provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the City of Del Mar. 
(Ord. No. 475)  
9.28.020 - Effective Date. 
The effective date of this ordinance is March 19, 1987.  
9.28.030 - Violation. 
A violation of the provisions of this Chapter is punishable in accordance with the general enforcement provisions of this Code.  
Chapter 9.30 - REGULATION OF CLONAZEPAM 
 
9.30.010 - Purpose. 
This Chapter provides regulations to regulate the possession of Clonazepam within the City of Del Mar. 
(Ord. No. 720)  
9.30.020 - Clonazepam—Definition. 
Clonazepam means any drug, substance or compound, whether legal or illegal containing clonazepam as described in California Health and Safety Code § 11057(d)(6).  
9.30.030 - Possession Prohibited. 
Except as authorized by law and otherwise provided in Subdivision (b) of Article 7 (commencing with Section 4211) of Chapter 9 and Division 2 of the California Business and Professions Code, it shall be unlawful for any person to possess the drug clonazepam or any substance containing the same without a validly issued prescription.  
9.30.040 - Enforcement Authority. 
The City Attorney and contract law enforcement personnel from the San Diego County Sheriff's Department or any designated representative of the City shall be authorized to administer and enforce the provisions of this Chapter.  
9.30.050 - Enforcement Remedies. 
Violations of this Chapter may be prosecuted as misdemeanors subject to the maximum fines and jail time as prescribed by law. The City Attorney may also pursue injunctive relief, civil penalties or administrative remedies as may be authorized by law.  
9.30.060 - Strict Liability Offense. 
Violations of the Chapter shall be treated as strict liability offenses irrespective of intent.  
Chapter 9.32 - DISTURBANCE ABATEMENT 
 
9.32.010 - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this Chapter to provide a source of recovery for the costs incurred by the City in returning a second and subsequent time to the scene of a disturbance of peace. 
(Ord. No. 537)  
9.32.020 - Definitions. 
A.  Responsible person means the person who owns the property where the disturbance of the peace is occurring, the person in charge of the premises where the disturbance of the peace is occurring or the person who organized the event which is causing the disturbance of the peace. If the "responsible person" is a minor, then the parents or guardians of that minor will be jointly and severally liable for the costs incurred for the second and subsequent responses. 
B.  Costs of second and subsequent responses means the salaries of the City employees and officials for the amount of time actually expended in responding to or in remaining at the disturbance of the peace at a rate established by the City Council, together with the actual costs of any medical treatment to injured City employees and the costs of repairing or replacing any damaged or destroyed City equipment or property.  
9.32.030 - First Response. 
A.  During a first response to a disturbance of the peace occurring on private property, the responding officer may, among other things, deliver to the responsible person or persons a "Notice of Violation: First Response" which shall contain a message substantially as follows: 
"This notice of violation is given to you as a result of a first response of the City of Del Mar to a disturbance of the peace occurring in violation of Penal Code Section 415. You will be charged all City personnel and equipment expenses incurred as a result of any second or subsequent response to this location." 
B.  The "Notice of Violation: First Response" may contain such other information as deemed necessary by the City Manager to accomplish the purposes of this Chapter.  
9.32.040 - Subsequent Responses. 
A.  If the City is required to respond a second or subsequent time to a disturbance of the peace and a "Notice of Violation: First Response" has been delivered to the responsible person or persons, then the City shall commence computing the response costs. 
B.  A statement of the charges incurred by the City in its second and subsequent responses shall be prepared and delivered to the responsible person or persons. 
C.  The amount of the charge shall be deemed a debt to the City of the responsible person or persons who shall be liable in an action brought in the name of the City for recovery of such amount, including reasonable attorney's fees.  
9.32.050 - Confidentiality. 
Information furnished and secured pursuant to this Chapter shall be confidential in character and shall not be subject to public inspection and shall be kept so that the contents thereof shall not be known except to persons charged with the administration of this Chapter or pursuant to a court order. 
(Ord. No. 537)  
Chapter 9.34 - BURGLARY, ROBBERY, AND EMERGENCY ALARM SYSTEMS 
 
9.34.010 - Purpose. 
A.  The volume and frequency of nuisance alarms threatens the safety of the public by causing a serious drain upon public safety services and equipment needed at other locations and threatens the welfare of the public by causing unnecessary expenditure of tax dollars through responses to nuisance alarms. It is the purpose of this Chapter to provide a system for recovering costs incurred by the City in responding to nuisance alarms from burglary, robbery and emergency alarm systems located in the City. 
B.  Exemptions. The provisions of this Chapter do not apply to alarm systems affixed to automobiles, boats, boat trailers or recreational vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 618; Ord. No. 820; Ord. No. 838)  
9.34.020 - Definitions. 
A.  Alarm System means any device designed for the detection of an unauthorized entry on the premises where the system is located or for alerting others of the commission of an unlawful act, or the giving, signaling or transmission of a fire alarm device or signal of information to the effect that there is a fire, both which, when the alarm is activated, emits an audible or silent signal or message to which City law enforcement personnel or fire personnel are expected to respond. 
B.  Alarm User is the person who owns, operates and maintains an alarm system within the City. 
C.  False Alarm means: (1) the activation of an alarm system due to other than an unauthorized intrusion on the premises or the commission or attempted commission of an unlawful act, which the alarm system is designed to detect and to which City law enforcement personnel responded; or (2) the activation of an alarm system designed to detect fires or other similar emergency events when no such danger exists, and to which City fire department personnel responded. 
1.  Except that: an activation of an alarm system caused by any malfunction of telephone line circuits or violent natural catastrophic conditions does not constitute a false alarm. The alarm user has the burden of proving the applicability of this exception to a particular alarm. 
2.  The cause for activating an alarm system shall be determined by the City's law enforcement or fire department personnel. Upon failure to find any evidence of a fire or of an illegal entry on the protected premises or the commission or intended commission of an illegal act, it shall be presumed that a false alarm has occurred.  
9.34.030 - Nuisance Alarm System. 
A.  An alarm system which produces more than two false alarms in any 30- day period or three or more false alarms in any one year period is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
B.  An alarm user of an alarm system which creates a sufficient number of false alarms to constitute a public nuisance, as described in Subsection A above, is liable for the fees imposed under the authority of this Chapter. 
C.  Upon the occurrence of the third false alarm, a fee shall be imposed as provided in Section 9.34.040. 
(Ord. No. 820)  
9.34.040 - Imposition of Fee. 
A.  Fees for a nuisance alarm shall be established periodically by resolution of the City Council to accomplish the purposes of this Chapter. 
B.  The amount of the fee shall be deemed a debt of the alarm user owed to the City, and shall include without limitation the reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the City in collecting the fee.  
9.34.050 - Notice of Nuisance. 
A.  During a response to a false alarm, the responding officer may, but is not required to, deliver to the alarm user a "Notice of Nuisance" which shall contain a message substantially as follows: 
"This notice is given to you as a result of a response of the City of Del Mar to a false alarm at your premises. In accordance with Chapter 9.34 of the Del Mar Municipal Code, any alarm system which produces more than two false alarms in any thirty day period or three or more false alarms in any one year period is declared to be a public nuisance. You will be charged a fee for each nuisance alarm at your premises." 
B.  The "Notice of Nuisance" may contain such other information as deemed necessary by the City Manager to accomplish the purposes of this Chapter. 
C.  The failure to receive a "Notice of Nuisance" shall not be a defense to any action, including the issuance of citations, that the City may bring to enforce the provisions of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 820)  
Chapter 9.36 - ELIMINATION OF HUMAN WASTE IN PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY AND PUBLIC PLACES 
 
9.36.010 - Purpose and Intent. 
The presence of persons who are exposed to public view while urinating and/or defecating in a place open to the public, in or on public rights-of-way, public parks, public beaches or any other public land or facility, or in or on any private property open to public view from any public right-of-way, public park, public beach or other public land or facility, is offensive to members of the general public exposed to such persons. Urination and/or defecation in a public place shall be prohibited. The provisions of this chapter are enacted for the purpose of securing and promoting the public health, safety, and general welfare of all persons in the City of Del Mar. 
(Ord. No. 790)  
9.36.020 - Definitions. 
Public Right-of-Way shall mean any place of any nature which is dedicated to use by the public for pedestrian, vehicular or other travel, or for other public use, and includes, but is not limited to, a street, sidewalk, curb, gutter, crossing, beach, beach access, intersection, parkway, highway, alley, lane, mall, court, way, avenue, boulevard, road, roadway, bluff, hiking trail, viaduct, drainage channel, storm water channel, canal, subway, tunnel, bridge, thoroughfare, square and any other similar public way.  
9.36.030 - Urination, Defecation Prohibited. 
It is hereby declared a public nuisance and unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate in a public right-of-way, or any place open to the public, or in or on any private property open to public view from any public right-of-way, public park, public beach or other public land or facility. The prohibitions in this section shall not apply to urination or defection which is done in any fixture provided for such purposes in any restroom or other facility designed for the sanitary disposal of human waste.  
9.36.040 - Penalties for the Violation of this Chapter. 
A violation of this section shall be punishable as either an infraction or a misdemeanor or by civil administrative citation, in accordance with DMMC Chapter 1.08.  
Chapter 9.38 - SOCIAL HOST/HOUSE PARTY 
 
9.38.010 - Purpose and Intent. 
The City Council finds and determines that youth often obtain alcoholic beverages while attending parties held at private residences or at other such premises, which are under the control of a person(s) who is aware of or should be reasonably aware of the said illegal activity and fails to stop it. The City Council further finds and determines that person(s) who are held responsible for abetting or tolerating such conduct will be more likely to properly supervise or stop such activity on property under their control. It is the purpose of this Chapter to impose criminal liability on persons who control the property on which such parties occur and who fail to properly supervise or stop the illegal activity. It is the further purpose of this Chapter to impose civil liability for the recovery of the costs of enforcement services and to provide for the recovery of reasonable attorney's fees in the event of litigation. 
(Ord. No. 843)  
9.38.020 - Definitions. 
Terms used in this Chapter shall have the meaning set forth in this Section and given to them by State law except as expressly provided herein. 
A.  Adult shall mean a person who is 21 years of age or older. 
B.  Control shall mean any form of dominion including ownership, tenancy, or other possessory right, including persons who organize or host a gathering, party or event. 
C.  Party or House Party shall mean a social gathering at a residence, property or premises. 
D.  Residence, Property or Premises shall mean a hotel or motel room, home, yard (including patio area/deck, pool area, ocean seawall), apartment, condominium, or other dwelling unit, or hall or meeting room, structure, vacant lot, or any other property, commercial or private, or any other land accessible to the public, whether occupied on a temporary or permanent basis, whether occupied as a dwelling utilized for a party or other social function, and whether owned, leased, rented, or used with or without compensation. 
E.  Enforcement Services Response Costs are the costs associated with responses by law enforcement, fire, and other emergency response providers to a gathering, including, but not limited to: 
1.  Salaries and benefits of law enforcement, code enforcement, fire, or other emergency response personnel for the amount of time spent responding to, remaining at, or otherwise dealing with a gathering, and the administrative costs attributable to such response(s); 
2.  The cost of any medical treatment for any law enforcement, code enforcement, fire, or other emergency response personnel injured responding to, remaining at, or leaving the scene of a gathering; 
3.  The cost of repairing any City equipment or property damaged, and the cost of the use of any such equipment, in responding to, remaining at, leaving the scene of a gathering; and 
4.  Any other allowable costs related to the enforcement of any of the provisions of this Chapter. 
F.  Minor shall mean a person who is less than 21 years of age. 
G.  Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
H.  Alcoholic beverage has the same meaning as that set forth in the California Business and Professions Code § 23004. 
I.  Guardian means: 
1.  A person who, under court order, is the guardian of a person of minority age; or 
2.  A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by the court. 
J.  Parent means a person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent or step parent of another person. 
K.  Gathering or Event means a group of three or more persons who have assembled or are assembling for a social occasion or social activity.  
9.38.030 - Consumption of alcohol by minor prohibited in public place, place open to public, or place not open to public. 
Except as permitted by State law, it is unlawful for any minor to: 
A.  Consume at any public place or any place open to the public any alcoholic beverage; or 
B.  Consume at any place not open to the public any alcoholic beverage, unless in connection with the consumption of an alcoholic beverage by a minor who is being supervised by his or her parent or legal guardian with no more than three minors present.  
9.38.040 - Hosting—Allowing a party, gathering, or event where minors obtain, possess or consume alcoholic beverages is prohibited. 
A.  It is the duty of any person having control of any premises, who knowingly hosts, permits, or allows a gathering at said premises to take all reasonable steps to prevent the possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages by any minor present at the gathering. Reasonable steps include, but are not limited to: controlling access to alcoholic beverages at the gathering; controlling the quantity of alcoholic beverages present at the gathering; verifying the age of persons attending the gathering by inspecting drivers' licenses or other government-issued identification cards to ensure that minors do not consume alcoholic beverages while at the gathering; and supervising the activities of minors at the gathering in order to detect and prevent any unlawful possession, consumption or ingestion of alcohol by minors. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person having control of any premises to knowingly host, permit, or allow a gathering to take place at said premises where at least one minor obtains, possesses or consumes an alcoholic beverage, whenever the person having control of the premises either knows a minor has consumed an alcoholic beverage or reasonably should have known that a minor consumed an alcoholic beverage had the person taken all reasonable steps to prevent the consumption of an alcoholic beverage by a minor as set forth in Subsection A. of this Section. 
C.  This section shall not apply to conduct involving the use of alcoholic beverages that occurs exclusively between a minor and his or her parent or legal guardian, as permitted by Article I, Section 4, of the California Constitution.  
9.38.050 - Protected Activities. 
The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to legally protected religious activities or gatherings of family members with not more than three non-family members.  
9.38.060 - Repeat Offenses Within One Year. 
Any person, firm, or corporation who has been determined to have any additional violation(s) related to the regulations stated in the sections of this Chapter within one calendar year from the first violation shall incur a separate, but additional, charge for repeat offenses.  
9.38.070 - Enforcement; Penalty. 
A.  Each violation of this Chapter constitutes a separate offense. 
B.  A charge under this Chapter may be prosecuted either as a misdemeanor or an infraction. 
C.  Any person, firm or corporation convicted of a misdemeanor for violating this Chapter may be punished by imprisonment in the County Jail for a period of time not exceeding six months or by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or both.  
9.38.080 - Civil Liability for Enforcement Services. 
When a house party or gathering prohibited by Sections 9.38.030 and 9.38.040 occurs and a police officer, sheriff deputy, park ranger, fire/emergency medical services, community services officer, or code enforcement officer, or other enforcement personnel is called to the scene, the person(s) having control of the gathering or house party at the residence or premises may be liable for the Enforcement Services Response Costs incurred by the City for providing enforcement services.  
9.38.090 - Prima Facie Evidence. 
Whenever a person who has control, hosts or organizes a gathering or party is present when a minor obtains, possesses or consumes any alcoholic beverage, it shall be prima facie evidence that the person knew or should have known that the minor obtained, possessed, or consumed an alcoholic beverage at the party or gathering.  
9.38.100 - Reimbursement for Cost of Enforcement Services. 
The City of Del Mar may seek administrative fees and Enforcement Services Response Costs associated with enforcement of Sections 9.38.030 and 9.38.040, through all remedies or procedures provided by statute, ordinance, or law.  
9.38.101 - Reservation of Legal Options. 
Sections 9.38.030 and 9.38.040 shall not limit the authority of peace officers or private citizens to make arrests for any criminal offense arising out of conduct regulated by Sections 9.38.030 and 9.38.040, nor shall they limit the City of Del Mar or the People of the State of California's ability to initiate and prosecute any criminal offense arising out of the same circumstances necessitating the application of DMMC Sections 9.38.030 and 9.38.040.  
TITLE 10 - FIRE PREVENTION  
Chapter 10.04 - 2016 FIRE CODE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 921 , § 3(Exh. A), adopted November 21, 2016, repealed and reenacted Chapter 10.04 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, Chapter 10.04, §§ 10.04.010—10.04.120 pertained to the 2013 Fire Code, and derived from Ord. No. 360; Ord. No. 506; Ord. No. 538; Ord. No. 593; Ord. No. 674; Ord. No. 775; Ord. No. 808; Ord. No. 812; Ord. No. 854, and Ord. No. 891. 
 
10.04.010 - Adoption of California Fire Code. 
That a certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the City of Del Mar Fire Department being marked and designated as the 2015 International Fire Code and 2016 California Fire Code, including Appendix I, as published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the fire code of the City of Del Mar, State of California, regulating and governing the safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of buildings and premises, or construction, erection, alteration, repair, moving, removal, conversion, demolition, equipment use, and maintenance of buildings and structures, including that providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Fire Code on file in the City of Del Mar Fire Department are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this Chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and revisions, if any, prescribed in this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 921 , § 3(Exh. A), 11-21-2016)  
10.04.020 - Establishment and duties of the Fire Prevention Bureau. 
A.  The California Fire Code as adopted and amended herein shall be enforced by the Fire Prevention Bureau in the Fire Department in the City of Del Mar which is hereby established and shall be operated under the supervision of the Chief of the Fire Department. 
B.  The Fire Marshal in charge of the Fire Prevention Bureau shall be appointed by the Chief of the Fire Department on the basis of examination to determine his or her qualifications. 
C.  The Chief of the Fire Department may detail such members of the Fire Department as inspectors as shall from time to time be necessary. 
(Ord. No. 921 , § 3(Exh. A), 11-21-2016)  
10.04.030 - Definitions. 
Chapter 2 Definitions 
Section 202 General Definitions. This section is added or revised to read: 
Fire Hazard - is anything that increases or could create a hazard or menace of fire to a greater degree than customarily recognized as normal by persons in the public service regularly engaged in preventing, suppressing or extinguishing fire or any other act which could obstruct, delay, hinder or interfere with the operations of the Fire Department or egress of occupants in the event of fire. 
Fireworks - is any combustible or explosive composition, or any substance or combination of substances, or device prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or an audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation, and shall include blank cartridges, toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes, or toy guns in which explosives are used, firecrackers, torpedoes, sky-rockets, roman candles, Daygo bombs, sparklers, snap caps, poppers or other devices of like construction and any devices containing any explosive or flammable compound, or any tablet or other device containing any explosive substance, except that the term "fireworks" shall not include any auto flares, paper caps containing not in excess of an average of twenty-five hundredths of a grain of explosive content per cap and toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns or other devices for use of such caps, the sale and use of which shall not be permitted at all times. "Fireworks" shall include snap caps and poppers, regardless of the amount of explosive content included in each device. 
Hazardous Fire Area - is any geographic area mapped by the State or local jurisdiction as a moderate, high or very high fire hazard area, or as set forth by the FAHJ that contains the type and condition of vegetation, topography, weather, and structure density to potentially increase the possibility of vegetation conflagration fires shall be considered a hazardous fire area. 
Mid-Rise Commercial Building - a building not defined as a high-rise building by section 202 of the California Building Code and is three (3) levels or more in height, including basement levels. Measurements shall be made from the underside of the roof or floor above the topmost space that may be occupied, to the lowest level of fire apparatus access. Nothing in section 319 shall imply or allow a building height in excess of current City of Del Mar planning and zoning requirements. 
Whenever the terms "This Code" and 2015 International Fire Code are used, they shall mean the 2016 California Fire Code as modified by the City of Del Mar with the additions, deletions and revisions set forth in the amendments. 
(Ord. No. 921 , § 3(Exh. A), 11-21-2016)  
10.04.040 - Chapter 57 Flammable and Combustible Liquids; Chapter 61 Liquefied Petroleum Gases. 
Chapter 57 Flammable and Combustible Liquids 
Section 5704.2.9.6.1 Locations where Above-ground Tanks are Prohibited. This section is revised to read: 
In the City of Del Mar, (geographic limits in which the storage of class I and Class II liquids in above-ground tanks outside of buildings is prohibited): the limits referred to in Section 5704.2.9.6.1 and 5706.2.4.4 of the 2016 California Fire Code and the 2015 International Fire Code in which storage of flammable or combustible liquids in outside above-ground tanks is prohibited are hereby established as the jurisdictional limits of the City of Del Mar. 
EXCEPTIONS: 
1.  2000 gallons maximum temporary (six months maximum) aboveground tanks meeting UL 2085 for private use on farms, agricultural and rural property, remote construction sites, earth moving projects, gravel pits or borrow pits. Such tanks shall be specially designed, approved and listed, and have features incorporated into their design which mitigates concerns for exposure to heat (two-hour fire resistance), ignition sources and mechanical damage. A Fire Department permit will be required. 
2.  Crankcase drainings may be stored in specially constructed aboveground storage tanks, approved by the Chief, with a maximum capacity of 550 gallons. Such tanks may be located within a building when the Chief deems appropriate, and the container meets the following: specially designed, approved and listed containers which have features incorporated into their design which mitigates concerns for exposure to heat, ignition sources and mechanical damage. 
3.  Containers must be installed and used in accordance with their listing, and provisions must be made for leak and spill containment. In no case shall such storage be permitted in residential or institutional property. All installations require a Fire Department permit. 
4.  With the Fire Chief's approval, Class I and II liquids may be stored in aboveground tanks inside or outside of buildings in specially designed, approved and listed containers which have features incorporated into their design which mitigates concerns for exposure to heat, ignition sources and mechanical damage. Class I liquids will be limited to 550 gallons and Class II liquids will be limited to 1,100 gallons. Containers must be installed and used in accordance with their listing, and provisions must be made for leak and spill containment. The Chief may disapprove the installation of such containers when in his opinion their use presents a risk to life or property. 
5.  With the Fire Chief's approval, temporary storage of a maximum 10,000 gallons of Class II liquids may be permitted for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days at remote construction sites, earth moving projects, gravel pits or borrow pits, consistent with 5704 and 5706. 
Section 5705.2.4 Class I, II and III Liquids. This section is revised to delete Exception 4. 
Section 5706.2.4.4 Locations where Aboveground Tanks are prohibited. This section is revised to read: 
The geographic limits in which the storage of Class I and Class II liquids in aboveground tanks are prohibited in residential areas within the City of Del Mar. 
Section 5706.4 Bulk Plants or Terminals. This section is revised to read: 
The geographic limits in which bulk plants and terminals of flammable and combustible liquids are received are prohibited for the protection of heavily populated and congested areas and is hereby established as jurisdiction limits of the City of Del Mar. 
Chapter 61 Liquefied Petroleum Gases 
Section 6104.2 Maximum Capacity within Established Limits. This section is revised to read: 
The geographic limits in which the bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas is prohibited for the protection of heavily populated and congested areas is hereby established as jurisdiction limits of the City of Del Mar. 
(Ord. No. 921 , § 3(Exh. A), 11-21-2016)  
10.04.050 - Explosives and Fireworks. 
Chapter 56 Explosives and Fireworks 
Section 5608.2 Fireworks. This section is added to read: 
Fireworks shall not be sold, manufactured, disposed or discharged within the jurisdictional boundaries of the City of Del Mar, except when a permit is issued for public display, theatrical purposes and/or group entertainment by the Fire Department to a California State Fire Marshal licensed pyro-technician and the minimum requirements of Title-19, California Code of Regulations, Chapter-6, fireworks are met. The San Diego County Regulatory Ordinance, Title-3, Division-2, Chapter 1, section 32.101 through 32.108 may be used as a guide when enforcing these requirements. 
Section 5608.3 Fire Works Penalty. This section is added to read: 
Fireworks Penalty - Any person violating any provision or failing to comply with this Chapter or the requirements of Title-19 California Code of Regulations, Chapter 6, and/or San Diego County Regulatory Ordinance, Title-3, Division-2, Chapter 1, section 32.101 through 32.108, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed One Thousand dollars ($1000) or by imprisonment in the County jail for a period of not more than one year or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 921 , § 3(Exh. A), 11-21-2016)  
10.04.060 - Mid-Rise Buildings. 
Chapter 3 General Requirements 
Section 320 Mid-Rise Buildings 
Section 320.1 General. This section is added to read: 
All newly constructed mid-rise buildings or any mid-rise building which undergo a complete renovation that requires the vacancy of the entire building to complete the renovation, shall require the installation of fire sprinklers throughout the building and a Class I standpipe system, with 2-½ inch hose outlets in each stair enclosure and on each floor level. The Fire Department connection serving the wet-pipe fire sprinkler system and wet-pipe standpipe system shall be interconnected. A stand-alone fire department connection is required for any installation of dry standpipe systems. 
Section 319.1.2 Elevators. This section is added to read: 
At least one elevator cab shall be assigned for Fire Department use and shall serve all floors of the building. 
(Ord. No. 921 , § 3(Exh. A), 11-21-2016)  
10.04.070 - Section 503 Fire Apparatus Access Roads. 
Chapter 5 Fire Service Features 
Section 503 Fire Apparatus Access Roads 
Section 503.2.3 Surface. This section is revised to read: 
New or improved fire apparatus access roads shall be designed and maintained to support the imposed loads of fire apparatus not less than 75,000 lbs. and shall be provided with an approved driving surface to provide all-weather driving capabilities. 
Section 503.2.7 Grade. This section is revised to read: 
New or improved grades exceeding 15.0% (incline or decline) on fire apparatus access roads shall not be permitted without mitigation. Minimal mitigation shall be a surface of Portland cement concrete (PCC), with a deep broom finish perpendicular to the entire direction of travel, or equivalent, to enhance traction the entire length of the grade. The Fire Chief may require additional mitigation measures where he/she deems appropriate. 
Section 503.2.8 Angles of Approach and Departure. This section is revised to read: 
The angle of departure and angle of approach of a fire access roadway shall not exceed seven degrees (12 percent) or as approved by the Chief. 
Section 503.3 Marking. This section is revised to read: 
When required by the Fire Code Official, approved signs or other approved notices shall be provided for all public and private fire apparatus access roads to identify such roads or prohibit obstruction thereof. Signs or notices shall be maintained in a clean and legible condition at all times and shall be replaced or repaired when necessary to provide adequate visibility. All new public roads, all private roads within major subdivisions and all private roads serving four or more parcels shall be named. Road name signs shall comply with City of Del Mar standards. 
Section 503.6 Security Gates. This section is revised to read: 
Section 503.6 Security Gates: No person shall install a security gate or security device across a fire access roadway without the Fire Code Official's approval. All gates providing access from a road to a driveway shall be located a minimum of 30 feet from the nearest edge of the roadway and shall be at least two feet wider than the width of the traffic lane(s) serving the gate. An automatic gate across a fire access roadway or driveway shall be equipped with an approved emergency key-operated switch overriding all command functions and opening the gate. A gate accessing more than four residences or residential lots, or a gate accessing any hazardous institutional, educational or assembly occupancy group structure, shall also be equipped with an approved emergency traffic control-activating strobe light sensor or other device approved by the Fire Code Official, which will activate the gate on the approach of the emergency apparatus with a battery back-up or manual mechanical disconnect in case of power failure. An automatic gate shall meet Fire Department policies deemed necessary by the Fire Code Official for rapid, reliable access. An automatic gate serving more than one dwelling or residential lot in existence at the time of adoption of this Chapter is required to install an approved emergency key-operated switch or other mechanism approved by the Fire Code Official, at an approved location, which overrides all command functions and opens the gate. A property owner shall comply with this requirement within 90 days of receiving written notice to comply. Where this section requires an approved key-operated switch, it may be dual-keyed or equipped with dual switches provided to facilitate access by law enforcement personnel. 
(Ord. No. 921 , § 3(Exh. A), 11-21-2016)  
10.04.080 - Fire Protection Water Supplies and Fire Service Features. 
Chapter 507 Fire Protection Water Supplies 
Section 507.2.2 Water Tanks. This section is revised to read: 
Section 507.2.2A - Water Tanks - Table 507.2.2 A - Water storage tanks may be required when adequate water supply is not available from nearby water mains. When tanks are installed, they shall be approved by the Fire Chief and comply with Table No. 507.2.2A and recommended NFPA standards. 
WATER STORAGE TANKS 
Table No. 507.2.2A 
TABLE NO 507.2.2A 
Building Square 
Feet 	Gallons Per 
Minute Water 
Flow 	Capacity 
Gallons 	Duration 
Minutes 
Up to 1,500 	250 	5,000 	20 
Over 1,500 	250 	10,000 	40 
When exposure distance is one hundred feet (100') or less from adjacent property, or where additional hazards or higher fire flow exists, the required water storage may be modified by the Fire Code Official. 
 
1.  Tank elevation shall be equal to or higher than the Fire Department connection on the premises. Regardless of domestic use, all tanks shall be equipped with a device that will ensure that the tank contains the designated amount of water for fire flow duration as determined by the Fire Department. Tank size may be increased to serve multiple structures on a single parcel. 
2.  Supply outlet shall be at least 4 inches in diameter from the base of the tank to the point of outlet at the Fire Department connection. The Fire Department connection shall provide an approved means of controlling water flow. 
3.  The outlet shall be located along an access roadway and shall not be closer than 50 feet or further than 150 feet from the structure. 
4.  All exposed tanks and supply pipes shall be of an alloy or other material listed for aboveground use. Adequate support shall be provided. 
Section 507.5.1 Where Required. This section is revised to read: 
The location, type and number of fire hydrants connected to a water supply capable of delivering the required fire flow shall be provided on the public or private street, or on the site of the premises to be protected or both. Fire hydrants shall be accessible to the fire department apparatus by roads meeting the requirements of section 503. 
Section 507.5.1.01 Requirements for single family dwellings. This section is revised to read: 
In zones other than industrial, commercial and multi-family, fire hydrants shall be installed within 300 feet of a structure on parcels one acre or larger in size and within 500 feet of a structure on parcels less than one-half acre in size. 
Section 507.5.1.02 Requirements for multi-family, commercial and industrial zones. This section is revised to read: 
In multi-family zones and in commercial and industrial zones, fire hydrants shall be installed at intersections, at the beginning radius of cul-de-sacs, and every 300 feet of fire access roadways, regardless of parcel size. 
(Ord. No. 921 , § 3(Exh. A), 11-21-2016)  
10.04.090 - Section 903 Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements; Section 905 Standpipe Systems. 
Chapter 9 Fire Protection Systems 
Section 903.2 Where Required. This section is revised to read: 
Approved automatic sprinkler system in new building and structures shall be provided in the locations described in sections 903.2.1 through 903.2.12 , and may be required in additions and remodels of existing structures as described in section 903.2.01 and 903.2.03. 
Life Safety Sprinkler System shall meet National Fire Protection Association Standards 13-D and 13-R latest addition, and City of Del Mar installation policies, as appropriate. 
Section 903.2.01.1 Additions 
An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with 903.3 may be required to be installed throughout structures when the addition is more than 50% of the existing building or when the altered building will exceed a fire flow of 1,500 gallons per minute as calculated per section 507.3. The Fire Code Official may require an automatic sprinkler system be installed in buildings where no water main exists to provide the required fire flow or where a special hazard exists such as: poor access roads, grade, bluffs and canyon rims, hazardous brush and response times greater than 5 minutes by a Fire Department. 
Section 903.2.01.2 Remodels or Reconstruction 
An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with section 903.3 may be required if the scope of work includes significant modification to the interior of the roof of the building, and the cost of the installation does not exceed 15 percent of the total construction costs of the remodel. 
Section 903.2.02 Commercial and Group U 
An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with section 903.3 shall be required in buildings and structures where the required fire flow exceeds 1500 gallons per minute as calculated by section 507.3, or when the square footage of a new commercial building exceeds 5,000 square feet. The Fire Code Official may also require an automatic sprinkler system to be installed in any building where no water main exists to provide the required fire flow or where a special hazard exists such as: poor access roads, grade, bluffs and canyon rims, or hazardous brush. Newly constructed commercial or any existing building with three levels or more in height which undergoes a complete renovation that requires the complete vacancy of the building to complete the renovation shall require the installation of fire sprinklers throughout the building and a Class I standpipe system, with 2-1/2 inch hose outlets in each stair enclosure and on each floor level. 
The Fire Department connection serving the fire sprinkler system and standpipe system shall be interconnected. 
903.2.03 Exception 
Agricultural buildings constructed of wood or metal frame, over which fabric or similar material is stretched, which are specifically used as green houses are exempt from the automatic sprinkler requirements unless physically connected to other structures. 
Section 905 Standpipe Systems 
Section 905.3 Required Installations. This section is revised to read: 
A Class I standpipe with 2.5 inch hose valves shall be provided for all commercial buildings three levels or more in height, regardless of occupancy use. Hose valves shall be located in each stair enclosure and on each floor level, including the roof. For single story buildings or parking structures with large floor areas, Class I standpipes may be required. 
(Ord. No. 921 , § 3(Exh. A), 11-21-2016)  
10.04.100 - Appeals. 
Section 108 Board of Appeals. This section is revised to read: 
Whenever the Fire Marshal disapproves an application or refuses to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of this Code do not apply, or that the true intent and meaning of the Code has been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal the decision of the Fire Marshal to the Del Mar City Council in writing within 10 days from the date of the decision appealed, in accordance with Chapter 1.12 of the Del Mar Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 921 , § 3(Exh. A), 11-21-2016)  
10.04.110 - Penalties. 
Section 109 Violation Penalties. This section is revised to read: 
A.  Any person, corporation, association or entity that violates the provisions of Sections 106, 107, 109, 110, or 111 of the 2010 California Fire Code is guilty of a misdemeanor. Any person, corporation, association or entity that violates any other provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor or infraction as determined under Chapter 1.08 Del Mar Municipal Code. The penalty for violations shall be determined under Chapter 1.08 of the Del Mar Municipal Code. Each day or portion thereof that a violation of this chapter exists shall constitute a separate violation. Each violation of this chapter, in addition to the offenses under this section, shall constitute a public nuisance. 
B.  The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(Ord. No. 921 , § 3(Exh. A), 11-21-2016)  
10.04.120 - Administration. 
Chapter 1 - Administration 
Section 101.5 City of Del Mar Validity. This section is revised to read: 
The City Council of the City of Del Mar hereby declares that should any section, paragraph, sentence or word of this ordinance or of the code hereby adopted be declared for any reason to be invalid, it is the intent of the City Council of the City of Del Mar that it would have passed all other portions of this ordinance independently of the elimination here from of any such portion as may be declared invalid. 
Section 102.13 Repeal of Conflicting Ordinances, Resolutions or motions. This section is revised to read: 
Section 102.13 REPEAL OF CONFLICTING ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS OR MOTIONS. 
All former ordinances, resolutions or motions, or parts thereof, which conflict or are inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance or of the Code or standards hereby adopted, are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 921 , § 3(Exh. A), 11-21-2016)  
10.040.130 - General Requirements. 
Chapter 3 General Requirements 
Section 308.1.6.3. Sky Lanterns. This section is revised to read: 
Sky lanterns, floating luminary, and similar devices propelled by open flame are prohibited for sale or use. 
(Ord. No. 921 , § 3(Exh. A), 11-21-2016)  
Chapter 10.08 - REIMBURSEMENT FOR PROTECTIVE SERVICES 
 
10.08.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide for obtaining reimbursement from responsible individuals for the expenses of an emergency response by the City to protect the public fire or hazardous substances. 
(Ord. No. 427)  
10.08.020 - Definitions. 
The meaning of the terms used herein shall be as set forth in the Uniform Fire Code, then adopted and in use in the City, and such terms as are included in Chapter 1, Part 1 of Division 12 of the Health and Safety Code commencing at Section 13000 relating to liability for fires and hazardous substances.  
10.08.030 - Reimbursement Required. 
In accordance with the Health and Safety Code Section 13000 et seq., an individual who acts negligently or in violation of the law and thereby requires the City to provide an emergency response to a danger posed by a fire or hazardous substance shall reimburse the City for the costs incurred.  
10.08.040 - Report. 
A City department involved in an emergency response may submit a report to the City Manager indicating: 
A.  The costs incurred. 
B.  The person or entity apparently responsible for reimbursing the City. 
C.  The basis of the determination regarding responsibility.  
10.08.050 - Notice to Responsible Party. 
A.  If it is reasonably likely that the party identified in the report is responsible for reimbursing the City, the City Manager may submit a demand to the identified party. The City Manager is authorized to accept a reasonable offer of reimbursement. 
B.  The City Manager may set the matter for administrative hearing by the City Council. Notice of the date set for hearing and the department report shall be sent to the person or entity to be charged together with a copy of the administrative hearing procedures contained in the Municipal Code.  
10.08.060 - Action by City Council. 
If the matter is referred to the City Council for administrative hearing, the City Council shall, by resolution: 
A.  Confirm or disallow the charge, in full or in part; 
B.  Determine the amount of reimbursement owed by the party to the City; and 
C.  Direct that the City commence collection proceedings against the party.  
TITLE 11 - HEALTH AND SANITATION  
Chapter 11.04 - HEALTH REGULATED ACTIVITIES 
 
11.04.010 - Purpose. 
Any person who conducts a business or activity which is described in this Chapter shall first obtain a health permit, together with any other licenses, permits or approvals required by this Code. 
(Ord. No. 354)  
11.04.020 - Adoption of Code by Reference. 
There is hereby adopted, by reference, by the City of Del Mar, for the purpose of prescribing rules and regulations for the protection of the public health and safety, the following portions of the San Diego County Code, together with such secondary references as are included in those portions, effective as of the date set forth in Section 23.12.030 below. The provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the City of Del Mar to include without limitation, the fees, regulatory provisions, and definitions, but excluding the procedural provisions beyond those specified for processing applications, conducting investigations, issuing permits, and enforcing regulatory provisions: 
A.  Title 6, Division 1, Chapter 1, regulating the preparation and distribution of food. 
B.  Title 6, Division 1, Chapter 2, regulating food handlers. 
C.  Title 6, Division 1, Chapter 3, providing for the destruction of spoiled food. 
D.  Title 6, Division 6, Chapter 1, regarding applications, permits, and fees. 
E.  Title 6, Division 6, Chapter 2, regulating camps and picnic grounds. 
F.  Title 6, Division 6, Chapter 4, regulating refrigeration plants. 
G.  Title 6, Division 6, Chapter 8, regulating reduction plants. 
H.  Title 6, Division 6, Chapter 9, providing for the enforcement of the State Housing Law. 
I.  Title 6, Division 6, Chapter 10, regulating apartments and hotels. 
J.  Title 6, Division 7, Chapter 1, regulating waste of water. 
K.  Title 6, Division 7, Chapter 2, regarding the pollution of waters. 
L.  Title 6, Division 7, Chapter 3, regarding public swimming pools. 
M.  Title 6, Division 7, Chapter 4, regulating wells. 
N.  Title 6, Division 8, Chapter 3, regarding septic tanks and seepage pits. 
O.  Title 6, Division 8, Chapter 5, regarding the management of solid waste. 
P.  Title 6, Division 8, Chapter 6, regarding septic tank and cesspool cleaners. 
Q.  Title 6, Division 8, Chapter 1, regarding condemnation of buildings. 
R.  Title 6, Division 8, Chapter 8, regarding disclosure of hazardous materials. 
S.  Title 6, Division 8, Chapter 9, regarding hazardous waste establishments. 
T.  Title 6, Division 8, Chapter 12, regarding medical waste. 
U.  Title 6, Division 5, Chapter 1, regarding health and sanitation and land use fees.  
11.04.030 - Effective Date. 
The effective date of this Chapter is September 15, 1993. 
(Ord. No. 632)  
11.04.040 - Issuing Authority. 
The San Diego County Health Officer, together with the Department of Health Services for the County of San Diego, is hereby designated as the Health Officer for the City of Del Mar with authority to enforce and observe within the City of Del Mar the following: 
A.  All orders, quarantine regulations, and rules and regulations issued by the State Department of Health Services under the provisions of the Health and Safety Code of the State of California. 
B.  All statutes of the State of California relating to public health. 
C.  Those portions of the San Diego County Code pertaining to public health and sanitation as are set forth in this Chapter.  
11.04.050 - Regulations. 
A.  Each applicant for a permit required by this Chapter shall apply to the Department of Health Services, County of San Diego. 
B.  The Department of Health Services of the County of San Diego shall collect and retain for the benefit of the County of San Diego the fees and delinquent payment penalties imposed by this Chapter.  
11.04.060 - Penalties for Delinquent Payment. 
A.  In any case where the applicant has failed for a period of 30 days to file the application and obtain the required permit, there shall be added to and collected with the required fee a penalty equal to ten percent of the fee and for each additional month or fraction of a month after the expiration of said 30-day period that the applicant fails to file such application and obtain such permit, there shall be added to and collected with the fee an additional penalty equal to ten percent of the fee; provided, however, in no event shall the total penalty added to the fee pursuant to this Section be more than 60 percent of the fee. The imposition of or payment of the penalty imposed by this Section shall not prevent the imposition of any other penalty prescribed by this Code or prevent the prosecution for violation of this Code. 
B.  The annual fee for renewal, if unpaid, is delinquent on the first day of the second month after the month in which the permit expires, and thereafter a penalty equal to ten percent of the annual fee shall be added thereto and shall be collected at the time application for renewal is made. 
C.  If the annual fee for renewal and the penalty is not paid the first month after it is due, there shall be added to and collected with the annual fee, an additional penalty equal to ten percent of the annual fee for each month or fraction of a month during which the annual fee or any penalty continues to remain unpaid, provided, however, in no event shall the total penalty added to the annual fee pursuant to this Section be more than 60 percent of the annual fee. The imposition of or payment of the penalty imposed by this Section, shall not prevent the imposition of any other penalty prescribed by this Code or prevent the prosecution for violation of this Code. (Reference §§ 65.104 and 65.105 of the San Diego County Code).  
Chapter 11.08 - SMOKING AND TOBACCO REGULATIONS 
 
11.08.010 - Purpose. 
A.  The smoking of tobacco or any other weed or plant has been widely recognized as a public health threat to those who use tobacco products. Secondhand smoke from tobacco, and other plants, has also been recognized as a health hazard and as a cause of annoyance, inconvenience and discomfort to other persons in proximity to the smoking activity. Secondhand smoke has been identified as being particularly harmful to persons with certain respiratory conditions, and has also been determined to cause cancer to nonsmokers exposed to secondhand smoke on a frequent basis. 
B.  Tobacco products are a major and persistent source of litter, in the City of Del Mar, on its streets and in its parks and beaches, and hence constitute a public nuisance as well as a health hazard. Tobacco litter also presents a threat to wildlife. Cigarette filters have been found in the stomachs of fish, birds, whales and other marine creatures who mistake them for food. Composed of cellulose acetate, a form of plastic, cigarette butts can persist in the environment as long as other forms of plastic. Additionally, Cigarette butts pose a health threat to young children. 
C.  This chapter of the Municipal Code is intended to protect public health, safety and welfare, to reduce unwanted and unwelcome exposure to secondhand smoke. It is also intended to provide for a cleaner and more hygienic environment for those who live, work and play in Del Mar. This chapter is also intended to create a reasonable balance between the needs of persons who smoke and the needs of nonsmokers, including children and persons with existing respiratory conditions. Finally, this Chapter is also intended to decrease the accessibility of tobacco and tobacco-related products to underage minors. 
(Ord. No. 835)  
11.08.020 - Definitions. 
A.  Bar shall mean any area which is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages and in which serving food is only incidental to the consumption of such beverages. Bar shall include those facilities located within a hotel, motel, or other similar transient occupancy establishment. Bar shall include those areas located within eating establishments that are devoted to serving alcoholic beverages and in which serving food is only incidental to the consumption of such beverages. Bar does not include the dining areas of a restaurant, regardless of whether or not alcoholic beverages are served therein. 
B.  City carpool vehicle shall mean any truck, van, or automobile owned or leased by the City and operated by a City employee. 
C.  Eating establishment shall mean any coffee shop, cafeteria, short-order cafe, luncheonette, delicatessen, soda fountain, restaurant, or other commercial entity serving food to members of the public for on-site consumption. 
D.  Employee shall mean any person who works for an employer in consideration of direct or indirect monetary wages or profit. 
E.  Employer shall mean any person who employs the services of an individual person or persons in consideration of direct or indirect monetary wages or profit. 
F.  Enclosed area as used in this Chapter, shall mean: 
1.  Any building space located between a floor and ceiling with perimeter walls on all sides, either permanent or temporary; 
2.  Any covered or partially covered area of a structure where 50 percent or more of the perimeter of the covered area is, in total, defined by vertical walls or partial walls; and/or 
3.  Any uncovered area of a structure where 75 percent or more of the perimeter line along the uncovered area is defined, in total, by a vertical wall or partial wall. Atrium and courtyards are examples of this type of enclosed area, as defined in this Section. 
G.  Enclosed public place as used in this Chapter, shall mean any enclosed area to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted. Examples of enclosed public places include, but are not limited to: retail stores, retail service establishments, retail food production and marketing establishments, restaurants, theatres, educational facilities, public transportation facilities, stores, banks, eating establishments, hotels, motels, museums, galleries, polling places, health care facilities of any kind (including clinics, dental, chiropractic, or physical therapy facilities), general business offices, nonprofit entity offices and libraries. Enclosed public places further include, but are not limited to, hallways, restrooms, stairways, escalators, elevators, lobbies, waiting rooms, reception areas, waiting rooms, checkout stations, counters and other pay stations, classrooms, meeting or conference rooms, lecture rooms, or other places in which members of the general public congregate for service or otherwise frequent. A private residence shall not be considered an enclosed public place, unless operated as a child day-care or licensed care facility. 
H.  Place of employment shall mean any area under the legal or de facto control of an employer, business or nonprofit entity, where an employee or member of the general public may enter in the normal course of operations, regardless of the hours of operation. Place of employment shall include, but not be limited to, indoor and outdoor work areas, construction sites, vehicles used in employment or for business purposes, employee lounges, conference and banquet rooms, health care facilities and warehouses. A private residence shall not be considered a place of employment unless it is used as child-care or health-care facility subject to licensing requirements. For purposes of this Chapter, "place of employment" shall mean the same as "workplace." 
I.  Playground shall mean any public or privately owned park or recreational area, with or without sports equipment, designed to be used by children for play or sports activities. 
J.  Reasonable distance shall mean a distance of 20 feet or, a greater distance as may be required in this Chapter to ensure that occupants or users of an area in which smoking is prohibited are not exposed to second-hand smoke created by those smoking outside a smoke-free area. With respect to proximity to a designated smoking area, reasonable distance shall also mean the distance, as determined in writing by the City Manager, to be necessary in a given circumstance to ensure that occupants or users of a smoke-free area are not exposed to second-hand smoke. 
K.  Self-service merchandising shall mean the open display of tobacco products and point-of-sale tobacco-related promotional products in an area to which the public has access but without the intervention of any employee. 
L.  Smoke-free area shall mean any location in which smoking is prohibited pursuant to this Chapter. 
M.  Smoking as defined in this Chapter, shall mean the possession of any lighted pipe, lighted cigar, the use of an electronic cigarette as defined in California Health and Safety Code § 119405 or a similar device intended to emulate smoking, which permits a person to inhale vapors or mists that may or may not include nicotine, or lighted cigarette of any kind, or the lighting of a pipe, cigar, or cigarette of any kind, including, but not limited to, any tobacco product, or any other weed or plant. 
N.  Tobacco product shall mean any substance containing tobacco leaf, including but not limited to cigarettes, cigars, smoking tobacco, and smokeless tobacco. 
O.  Tobacco retailer shall mean any person or governmental entity that operates a store, stand, concession, or other place at which sales of tobacco products are made to purchasers for consumption or use. 
P.  Tobacco vending machine shall mean any electronic or mechanical device or appliance that dispenses or releases tobacco products and/or tobacco accessories and which operates upon the insertion of money, token or other item representation of value. 
Q.  Workplace. see "Place of employment." 
(Ord. No. 354; Ord. No. 621; Ord. No. 653; Ord. No. 783; Ord. No. 835; Ord. No. 895)  
11.08.030 - Locations in Which Smoking is Prohibited. 
Except as otherwise allowed by this Chapter, smoking is prohibited at all of the following locations: 
A.  Enclosed public places; 
B.  Places of employment and within a reasonable distance of the outside entrances, operable windows, and ventilation systems of places of employment, as reasonable distance is defined in this Chapter. This prohibition shall apply to all portions of the places of employment, including but not limited to: common work areas, meeting rooms, offices, elevators, hallways, food service or storage areas, closets, employee lounges, stairwells, and restrooms; 
C.  City carpool vehicles; 
D.  Taxi cabs operating under a valid City of Del Mar Taxicab Operations Permit issued pursuant to Chapter 6.32 of the Del Mar Municipal Code; 
E.  Child Day-Care facilities; 
F.  Parks, beaches, and seawalls, and in or on the sidewalks, stairs, and bulbed street-ends adjacent to parks, beaches and seawalls; 
G.  All sidewalks and those segments of any street lined with a sidewalk. This provision applies to all streets and sidewalks to which the public is provided regular access but does not apply to private residential property; 
H.  All potions of outdoor seating areas of an eating establishment and within a reasonable distance of all outdoor seating areas of an eating establishment including adjacent sidewalks and/or streets and roads, as reasonable distance is defined in this Chapter. This prohibition bans smoking in any area approved for operation pursuant to a City of Del Mar Sidewalk Cafe Permit; 
I.  All public plazas and public semi-public spaces identified in a Specific Plan approved by the City of Del Mar; 
J.  All outdoor arenas, stadiums, and amphitheaters and in any bleachers and grandstands used by spectators of such arenas, stadiums and amphitheaters; 
K.  All public transportation station facilities such as, train platforms and bus shelters; and within a reasonable distance of such facilities, as reasonable distance is defined in this Chapter; 
L.  Any property designated on the City's Zoning Map as being within the Public Facilities (PF) Zone and regulated by Chapter 30.31 of the Del Mar Municipal Code; and 
M.  All portions of private residences licensed by the State of California as a child day-care facility. This prohibition applies to all portions of the child day-care facility, enclosed or unenclosed, where children may be exposed to smoke. 
(Ord. No. 783; Ord. No. 835)  
11.08.040 - Declaration of Establishment as a No-Smoking Area. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter, an owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of an establishment, facility, or outdoor area may, at their discretion, declare the entire establishment, facility, or outdoor area, or portion thereof, as a no-smoking area. Smoking shall be prohibited in any location where a declaration of no-smoking has been made in accordance with the provisions of this Section and where a sign declaring the establishment as a no-smoking area has been posted.  
11.08.050 - Posting of No-Smoking Signs and Other Warning Signs, Prohibition on Placement of Ashtrays. 
A.  The owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of a location in which smoking is prohibited pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter shall install signage notifying employees, patrons and/or visitors of the prohibition on smoking. 
B.  The signage required in this Section shall include the text "No Smoking" in letters not less than one-inch in height displayed against a contrasting background. Signs of similar size containing the international "no-smoking" symbol may be used in addition to, or in lieu of, the required text signs. The symbol shall consist of the international "No-Smoking" symbol consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it. The signage required herein shall be clearly and conspicuously posted at congregating points in, and at entrance points to, all no-smoking areas. 
C.  Every vehicle that constitutes a place of employment pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter shall have at least one conspicuous sign, visible from the exterior of the vehicle, clearly stating that smoking is prohibited. 
D.  No ashtrays shall be placed, installed or retained in an area where smoking is prohibited by this Chapter.  
11.08.060 - Locations and Warnings Where Smoking is Allowed. 
Smoking shall only be permitted in an enclosed public place as authorized by California Labor Code § 6404.5 as that statute may from time-to-time be amended and according to the following additional requirements: 
A.  Smoking may not be allowed in more than 65 percent of the guests rooms of any hotel, motel or similar transient lodging establishment and all smoke-free guest rooms shall include permanent No-Smoking signage and shall not be equipped with ashtrays. 
B.  In enclosed public places where smoking is allowed pursuant to this Chapter, signs shall be displayed at each point of entry to and within each allowed smoking area warning parties of the possible existence of smoke and of the dangers of second-hand smoke. The signage required herein shall contain the following message: 
"WARNING: THIS FACILITY PERMITS SMOKING, AND TOBACCO SMOKE IS KNOWN TO THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA TO CAUSE CANCER." 
The signage required in this Subsection shall be composed of text containing all capital letters, not less than one inch in height, displayed on a contrasting background.  
11.08.070 - Tobacco Vending Machines Prohibited. 
No cigarette or other tobacco product may be sold, offered for sale, or distributed by or from a tobacco vending machine or other appliance, or any other device designed or used for vending purposes.  
11.08.080 - Prohibition of Mobile Sales of Tobacco Products. 
Tobacco products may only be sold or distributed from a permanent and fixed location and pursuant to all other licenses and permits required by this Code and State and Federal laws.  
11.08.090 - Responsibility for Enforcement. 
A.  The City Manager, or designee, shall be responsible for compliance with this Chapter for those facilities owned, operated or leased by the City of Del Mar. 
B.  The owner, operator or manager of any facility, place of employment or enclosed public place shall be responsible for the following at such facility, enclosed public place or place of employment: 
1.  Compliance with this Chapter; 
2.  Posting all "No Smoking" signs required by this Chapter; and 
3.  Denying service to any person who violates this Chapter by smoking in a posted "No Smoking" area. 
C.  It shall be the responsibility of employers to disseminate information concerning the provisions of this Chapter to their employees. 
D.  No employer shall knowingly or intentionally permit, and no person shall engage in, the smoking of tobacco products at a place of employment in violation of the provisions of this Chapter. 
E.  For purposes of this Section, an employer who permits any non-employee access to his or her place of employment on a regular basis has not acted knowingly or intentionally if he or she has taken the following reasonable steps to prevent smoking by a non-employee: 
1.  Posted clear and prominent signs, as required and described in this Chapter. 
2.  Has requested that a non-employee who is smoking refrain from smoking in the enclosed workplace. 
F.  For purposes of this Section, "reasonable steps" shall not include: 
1.  The physical ejection of a non-employee from the place of employment; or 
2.  Any requirement or request of a non-employee to refrain from smoking using measures that would cause physical harm to the employer or any employee.  
11.08.100 - Violations and Penalties. 
A.  Any person who smokes in an area where smoking is prohibited by this Chapter shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable pursuant to Chapter 1.08 of the Del Mar Municipal Code. 
B.  Any person who owns, manages, operates, or otherwise controls an enclosed public place or place of employment and who fails to comply with the provisions of this Chapter shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable pursuant to Chapter 1.08 of the Del Mar Municipal Code. 
C.  In addition to the fines established by this Section, violation of this Chapter by a person who owns, manages, operates, or otherwise controls an enclosed public place or place of employment may result in the suspension or revocation of any permit or license issued to the person or business for the premises on which the violation occurred. 
D.  Violation of this Chapter is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, which may be abated by preliminary and permanent injunction, or other means provided for by law. The City may take action to recover the costs of the nuisance abatement. 
E.  Each day on which a violation of this Chapter occurs shall be considered a separate and distinct violation.  
11.08.110 - Other Applicable Laws. 
This Chapter shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws.  
11.08.120 - Liberal Construction. 
This Chapter shall be liberally construed so as to further its purposes.  
Chapter 11.12 - REMOVAL OF DANGEROUS RUBBISH AND WEEDS 
 
11.12.010 - Duty to Remove Rubbish and Weeds. 
It is unlawful for any owner, lessee, or occupant of any real property within the City to place or maintain dirt, rubbish, materials, grass, weeds or vegetation on or about such property or on or about adjacent sidewalks, parking areas, alleys or streets in a manner that is either dangerous or injurious to neighboring property or the health or welfare of residents in the vicinity, or interferes with the use of public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 369; Ord. No. 846)  
11.12.020 - Regulating Authority. 
The City Manager or his authorized designee shall serve as the Regulating Authority for the provisions of this Chapter.  
11.12.030 - Notice to Remove. 
Whenever the Regulating Authority discovers a violation of this Chapter, the Regulating Authority shall cause to be given a "Notice to Clean Premises."  
11.12.040 - Notice to Clean Premises. 
A.  The notice shall be headed, in letters of not less than one inch in height, with the wording "NOTICE TO CLEAN PREMISES". 
B.  The "Notice to Clean Premises" shall contain: 
1.  The date the notice is mailed. 
2.  The address of the property involved. 
3.  A description of the violation. 
4.  An order to cure the violation. 
5.  A warning that if the violation is not cured within 15 days of the date of mailing of the notice, or such additional time as may be expressly authorized by the Regulating Authority, the City shall abate the violation as a public nuisance and charge the owner for the costs incurred. 
6.  A warning that the costs incurred may become a lien on the property and subject the property to foreclosure. 
7.  A notice that the owner, lessee, or occupant may contest the existence of the violation or deny the responsibility for its cure by filling a written response with the City Clerk within ten days of the date of the mailing of the notice. 
8.  A notice that the owner, lessee, or occupant may appear and present evidence when the City Council considers the response. 
C.  On the date of mailing indicated in the Notice to Clean Premises, the Regulating Authority shall cause such notice to be distributed as follows: 
1.  Mailed by certified mail to the property owner at the address shown on the latest tax assessment rolls available from the Office of the County assessor. Such address shall be conclusively deemed to be the proper address for the purpose of mailing such notice. 
2.  Mailed by regular mail to "Owner or Occupant" at the address of the subject property. 
3.  Posted in a conspicuous place on the real property involved. 
D.  The Regulating Authority shall file with the City Clerk a declaration indicating the accomplishment of the distribution of the Notice to Clean Premises. 
(Ord. No. 846)  
11.12.050 - City Council Consideration of Response to Notice to Clean Premises. 
If a written response to the Notice to Clean Premises is received by the City Clerk within ten days of the mailing of the Notice to Clean Premises which sets forth the reasons for the response, the matter shall be set for consideration by the City Council at the next regular meeting. The City Clerk shall notify the person submitting the response of the date on which the City Council will consider the response.  
11.12.060 - Removal by City. 
A.  If no response is filed to the Notice to Clean Premises, then on the 16th day following the mailing of the Notice to Clean Premises, the Regulating Authority shall be authorized to abate the nuisance on the property. 
B.  If a response is filed, then no sooner than five days after the rendering of a decision by the City Council, affirming the Notice to Clean Premises, the Regulating Authority shall be authorized to abate the nuisance on the property. 
(Ord. No. 846)  
11.12.070 - Charge for Removal. 
A.  Upon removal of the violation, the Regulating Authority shall prepare and submit to the City Council a report listing the proposed assessment to be levied against the property. The City Clerk shall set the proposed assessment for consideration by the City Council at the next regular meeting no sooner than ten days from the date of sending notice of the proposed assessment. 
B.  Notice of the proposed assessment shall be distributed in accordance with the procedures applicable to a Notice To Clean Premises and shall contain the date and time when the City Council shall consider the report of the Regulating Authority and such information as the owner, lessee, or occupant wishes to present regarding the amount of the proposed assessment.  
11.12.080 - Confirmation of Assessment. 
At the time set for considering the report of the Regulating Authority, the City Council shall hear any objections from persons liable to be assessed. The City Council may affirm, modify or reject the proposed assessment. The affirmation of any assessment shall declare that the amount is a lien upon the subject property.  
11.12.090 - Collection of Assessment. 
A.  The assessment roll as confirmed by the City Council shall be delivered to the City Treasurer or Authorized Designee who may receive the amount due on the assessment and issue receipts at any time within ten days after the confirmation. 
B.  At the end of the ten-day period, any unpaid assessment shall be given to the Tax Collector of San Diego County. 
C.  The provisions of the Government Code §§ 39580 and 39585, inclusive, are incorporated in this Chapter by reference. The County Auditor shall enter each assessment in the county tax roll opposite the parcel of land. The amount of the assessment shall be collected at the time and in the manner of ordinary municipal taxes; and, if delinquent, the amount is subject to the same penalties and procedures of foreclosure and sale as is provided for ordinary municipal taxes. 
(Ord. No. 846)  
11.12.100 - Violation Penalty. 
The owner, occupant or person in control of any lot or premises within the City who permits or allows the existence of a public nuisance, as defined in this Chapter, upon any lot or premises owned, occupied or controlled by him, or who violated any of the provisions of this Chapter, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 846)  
Chapter 11.13 - PROPER MAINTENANCE OF TREES AND PLANTS 
 
11.13.010 - Purpose. 
The City Council finds that the City's trees, shrubs, and plants are a vital part of the City's character, and help in buffer coastal winds, reduce soil erosion, and reduce greenhouse gases. In order to preserve the natural beauty of the City's urbanized forest, and to protect the City's unique and defining Torrey Pine and Monterey Cypress populations, and its many fruit and ornamental trees and bushes, the City finds it necessary to adopt requirements for the appropriate care of trees and other vegetation to ensure that there are no hazards to the public health, or to other trees or vegetation. 
(Ord. No. 914)  
11.13.020 - Definitions. 
A.  City Arborist shall mean "Certified Arborist" as that term is defined by the International Society of Arboriculture that is retained by the City under contract to perform duties on behalf of the City. The Certified Arborist may also be a City staff person if appropriately certified. 
B.  Tree shall mean any perennial plant growing on public or private property, having a self-supporting woody main stem or trunk, typically growing to a considerable height with a definable crown.  
11.13.030 - Regulating Authority. 
The City Manager or his or her authorized designee shall serve as the Regulating Authority for the provisions of this Chapter.  
11.13.040 - Public Nuisance Trees, Shrubs and Other Plants. 
A.  Trees on Private Property. Any trees, shrubs and other plants growing on private property, when infested by any insect or infected by any disease threatening the life of same, or which by reason of such infestation or infection endangers the life or growth or healthful existence of other trees, shrubs or other plants within the City not so infested or infected, or any trees determined by the City Arborist to be a clear and present danger to persons or property, through structural weakness or any other reason may be declared, by the City Manager, to be a public nuisance, as that term is defined in Section 1.08.050 of the Municipal Code, and thereafter abated as provided for in this chapter. In addition to abatement as provided for herein, the City may impose the fines and liens set forth in Section 1.08.050. 
B.  Trees on Public Property. Any tree, shrub or other plants growing on City property, when infested by any insect or infected by any disease threatening the life of same, or which by reason of such infestation or infection endangers the life or growth or healthful existence of other trees, shrubs or other plants within the City not so infested or infected, or any trees determined by the City Arborist to be a clear and present danger to persons or property, through structural weakness or any other reason shall be removed or treated as recommended by the City Arborist and directed by the City Manager. 
C.  Nuisance Abatement. Following the City Manager's determination that a tree, shrub or plant is a public nuisance the following is required. 
1.  Notice to Owner. Immediately upon determination by the City Manager that any tree, shrub or other plant is a nuisance, s/he shall cause a copy of this chapter to be mailed to the owner together with a notice setting forth the details of the nuisance and the requirement of its abatement, advising the owner of the property that the nuisance shall be abated by the owner within 30 days if the City is not to proceed with the further steps set forth in this chapter. The notice will be: 
a.  Sent by certified mail to the property owner at the address shown on the latest tax assessment rolls available from the Office of the County assessor. Such address shall be conclusively deemed to be the proper address for the purpose of mailing such notice. 
b.  Mailed by regular mail to "Owner or Occupant" at the address of the subject property. 
c.  Posted in a conspicuous place on the real property involved. 
2.  The notice shall be headed, in letters of not less than one inch in height, with the wording "Notice to Abate Violation". 
The Notice to Abate Violation shall contain: 
a.  The date the notice is mailed. 
b.  The address of the property involved. 
c.  A description of the violation. 
d.  An order to cure the violation. 
e.  A warning that if the violation is not cured within 30 days of the date of mailing of the notice, or such additional time as may be expressly authorized by the City Manager, the City shall abate the violation as a public nuisance and charge the owner for the costs incurred. 
f.  A warning that the costs incurred may become a lien on the property. 
g.  A notice that the owner, lessee, or occupant may contest the existence of the violation or deny the responsibility for its cure by filling a written response with the City Clerk within ten days of the date of the mailing of the notice. 
h.  A notice that the owner, lessee, or occupant may appear and present evidence when the City Council considers the response. 
i.  Information that a removal of a Protected Tree under DMMC Chapter 23.50, if directed by the City Manager will constitute an emergency removal under DMMC Subsection 23.50.050.C. and no tree removal permit will be required. 
D.  The City Manager shall file with the City Clerk a declaration that the Notice to Abate Violation has been served pursuant to this Chapter.  
11.13.050 - City Council Consideration of Response of Notice to Abate Violation. 
If a written response to the Notice to Abate Violation is received by the City Clerk within ten days of the mailing of the Notice to Abate Violation which sets forth the reasons for the response, the matter shall be set for consideration by the City Council at the next regular meeting. The City Clerk shall notify the person submitting the response of the date and time on which the City Council will consider the response.  
11.13.060 - Removal by City. 
A.  Abatement of Nuisance—No Protest Received. If no protests or objections have been received, the City Manager shall order the abatement of the nuisance by having any and all trees, shrubs, or other plants infected otherwise deemed a nuisance as aforesaid treated or removed from the premises in question, and the City Manager, her/his deputies and assistants are expressly authorized to enter upon private property for such purpose except that, in any case where the nuisance exists in an area where there is a reasonable expectation of privacy, the City Manager shall first obtain an inspection warrant pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure §§ 1822.50—1822.57 before proceeding with abatement activities. Any property owner shall have the right to have any such trees, shrubs, or other plants removed at the property owner's expense, providing the same is done prior to the arrival of the City Arborist or her/his assistants to remove the same. 
B.  Abatement of Nuisance—Protest Received. If a protest is received, the City Council shall hear and consider all objections, if any to the proposed abatement, and may continue the hearing from time to time. Upon conclusion of the hearing, the Council shall direct the City Manager to complete the abatement or shall uphold the protest and direct the City Manager to take no further action on the property.  
11.13.070 - Charge for Removal. 
A.  Cost of Abatement. The City Manager or his or her designee shall keep an account of the cost of abating such nuisance upon each lot, piece, or parcel of land, and shall forthwith mail a full and correct copy of such statement to the property owner at the address shown on the latest tax assessment rolls available from the Office of the County assessor. Such address shall be conclusively deemed to be the proper address for the purpose of mailing such notice.. In the event that any such owner is unknown, the statement shall be posted on the bulletin board of City Hall for one week, giving notice when such statement will be submitted to the City Council for approval. 
B.  Opportunity to Satisfy Abatement Cost. The property owner will be given 30 days in which to pay to the City the full amount of the cost of abatement, and upon failure to pay within the 30-day period, the City will proceed to consider an assessment against the owner. 
C.  Upon removal of the violation, and expiration of the 30-day Opportunity to Satisfy Abatement Cost period, the City Manager shall prepare and submit to the City Council a report listing the proposed assessment to be levied against the property. The City Clerk shall set the proposed assessment for consideration by the City Council at the next regular meeting no sooner than ten days from the date of sending notice of the proposed assessment. 
D.  Notice of the proposed assessment shall be distributed in accordance with the procedures applicable to a Notice to Correct Violation and shall contain the date and time when the City Council shall consider the report of the City Manager and such information as the owner, lessee, or occupant wishes to present regarding the amount of the proposed assessment.  
11.13.080 - Confirmation of Assessment. 
At the time set for considering the report of the City Manager, the City Council shall hear any objections from persons liable to be assessed. The City Council may affirm, modify or reject the proposed assessment. The affirmation of any assessment shall declare that the amount is a lien upon the subject property.  
11.13.090 - Collection of Assessment. 
A.  The assessment roll as confirmed by the City Council shall be delivered to the City Treasurer or Authorized Designee who may receive the amount due on the assessment and issue receipts at any time within ten days after the confirmation. 
B.  At the end of the ten-day period, any unpaid assessment shall be given to the Tax Collector of San Diego County. 
C.  The provisions of Government Code §§ 39580 and 39585, inclusive, are incorporated in this Chapter by reference. The County Auditor shall enter each assessment in the county tax roll opposite the parcel of land. The amount of the assessment shall be collected at the time and in the manner of ordinary municipal taxes; and, if delinquent, the amount is subject to the same penalties and procedures of foreclosure and sale as is provided for ordinary municipal taxes. 
(Ord. No. 914)  
11.13.100 - Violation Penalty. 
The owner, occupant or person in control of any lot or premises within the City who permits or allows the existence of a public nuisance as that term is defined in Section 1.08.050 of the Municipal Code and as defined in this Chapter, upon any lot or premises owned, occupied or controlled by him, or who violated any of the provisions of this Chapter, shall be subject to enforcement and penalties as prescribed within the Del Mar Municipal Code.  
Chapter 11.16 - DISTRIBUTION OF POSTERS AND HANDBILLS 
 
11.16.010 - Posters on Public Property. 
Except as authorized by law, it shall be unlawful for any person to post or affix any notice or communicative device on any public property, to include without limitation, lamp posts, utility poles, trees, structures or buildings. 
(Ord. No. 428)  
11.16.020 - Distribution of Handbills. 
In distributing a handbill, to include, without limitation, a leaflet or circular, it shall be unlawful for any person to: 
A.  Throw or place the handbill upon the ground; 
B.  Affix the handbill to an unattended motor vehicle; 
C.  Go upon private residential property in defiance of a sign displayed to public view which indicates that the occupancy refuses to allow persons coming upon the property for such purpose; 
D.  Distribute the handbill to a person unwilling to accept it; or 
E.  Leave the handbill on property in a manner that does not prevent the handbill from being blown or drifting upon the ground.  
Chapter 11.20 - MANAGEMENT OF SOLID WASTE 
 
11.20.010 - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this Chapter to establish regulations for the management of solid waste. 
(Ord. No. 440)  
11.20.020 - Adoption of Code by Reference. 
There is hereby adopted by reference, by the City of Del Mar, for the purpose of prescribing rules and regulations for the management of solid waste within the City of Del Mar, the following portions of the San Diego County Code, together with such secondary references as are included in those provisions, effective as of the date set forth in Section 11.20.030 below. The provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the City of Del Mar to include, without limitation, regulatory provisions and definitions: 
A.  Title 6, Division 8, Chapter 5, Article I relating to general provisions and definitions commencing at Section 68.501. 
B.  Title 6, Division 8, Chapter 5, Article III relating to solid waste storage and removal commencing at Section 68.520. 
C.  Title 6, Division 8, Chapter 5, Article VII relating to standards, commencing at Section 68.560.  
11.20.030 - Effective Date. 
The effective date of the ordinance from which this Section derives is September 15, 1993. 
(Ord. No. 632)  
11.20.040 - Signification of Words. 
In applying those provisions of the San Diego County Code incorporated by reference, the terms used therein shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to them in the San Diego County Code except: 
A.  Board or Board of Supervisors shall mean the City Council of Del Mar. 
B.  Cardboard shall mean post-consumer waste paper grade corrugated cardboard (#11), kraft (brown) paper bags or solid fiber boxes which have served their packaging purpose and are discarded and can later be reclaimed for collection and recovery for recycling. 
C.  Commercial Recyclables shall mean recyclables from the two commercial subcategories of office buildings (of more than 20,000 square feet) which are office paper, corrugated cardboard, newspaper, and awning; and hospitality (restaurants and taverns) which are corrugated cardboard, plastic beverage bottles, glass jars and bottles, white goods (appliances), aluminum, and tin and bi-metal cans. 
D.  Commercial Solid Waste shall mean solid waste originating from stores, office, and other commercial sources, but does not include construction and demolition waste. 
E.  Construction Waste shall mean the demolition, dredging, grubbing, and the rubble resulting from construction, remodeling, repair and demolition activities on housing, commercial or governmental building and any other structure and pavement. 
F.  County, County of San Diego or San Diego County shall mean "City of Del Mar." 
G.  County Veterinarian shall mean "City Health Officer." 
H.  Curbside Collection shall mean the collection of recyclables from the residential waste stream from curb or alleyway. 
I.  Designated Recyclable Materials shall mean materials that are recyclable and/or reusable within the following categories of residential, commercial (office and hospitality), and industrial as defined more specifically within each category as listed within this Chapter. 
J.  Director or Director of Public Works shall mean "City Manager." 
K.  Garbage shall mean all kitchen and table waste, and animal or vegetable waste that attends or results from the storage, preparation, cooking, or handling of food stuffs. 
L.  Glass Bottles and Jars shall mean glass food and beverage containers including container glass covered by the deposit law, and excluding household and kitchen containers such as drinking glasses, cups, and cooking and serving dishes. 
M.  Industrial Recyclables shall mean recyclables from industry/construction waste streams to include dirt, asphalt, sand, land clearing brush, concrete, and rock. 
N.  Industrial Solid Waste shall mean solid waste originating from mechanized manufacturing facilities, factories, refineries, construction and demolition projects, publicly operated treatment works, and/or solid wastes placed in commercial collection bins. 
O.  Metal shall mean recoverable aluminum, tin and bi-metal materials such as used in beverage containers, siding, and other recyclable manufactured metal items. 
P.  Newspaper shall mean materials printed on newsprint. 
Q.  Office Paper shall mean waste paper grades of white and colored ledgers. Examples include forms, copy paper, stationery, and other papers that are generally associated with desk activity. 
R.  Permittee shall mean "Franchisee." 
S.  Plastic Beverage Bottles shall mean plastic containers with narrow necks, or mouth openings smaller than the diameter of the container bottles used for containing milk, juice, soft drinks, or water intended for human consumption; to be distinguished from non-food bottles such as those for containing motor oil, detergent, or other household products. 
T.  Recyclable Plastic Beverage Containers shall mean those bottles marked PETE (1) and HDPE (2) on bottom of plastic beverage containers. 
U.  Residential Recyclables means those specific recyclable materials from the residential waste stream including, but not limited to, newspaper, plastic beverage bottles, aluminum, tin and bi-metal cans, yard and wood wastes, white goods (appliances), and glass bottles and jars. 
V.  Scavenging shall mean the uncontrolled and/ or unauthorized removal of solid waste materials, recyclable or recoverable materials. 
W.  To Segregate Waste Material shall mean any of the following: the placement of recyclables in separate containers; the binding of recyclable material separately from the other waste material; the physical separation of recyclables from other waste materials. 
X.  Unincorporated area shall mean "within City limits." 
Y.  White Goods shall mean kitchen or other large appliances. 
Z.  Wood Wastes shall mean lumber and wood products but excludes painted wood, wood treated with chemicals, and pressure treated wood. 
AA.  Yard Wastes shall mean leaves, grass, weeds and wood materials from trees and shrubs. 
(Ord. No. 590)  
11.20.050 - [Violations.] 
A.  Any person performing any acts forbidden or failing to perform any act required by this Chapter shall be guilty of an infraction. 
B.  Each day on which a violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense.  
11.20.060 - Collection by Franchisee. 
A.  No person shall provide a collection service for solid waste and/or designated recyclable materials within the City to collect, remove, or dispose of any solid waste or recyclable material, nor transport the same over any public street or rights-of-way, unless such person has first obtained a franchise to do so and such person is then in compliance with the provisions of this Title and the franchise. 
B.  Through the granting of one or more franchises, the City Council shall provide solid waste collection services to all owners and occupiers of property within the City limits. 
C.  The charge for such service shall be due and payable by each owner or occupier of property according to the schedule of rates and charges established, from time to time, by resolution of the City Council. 
D.  Charges shall be payable at the same time and in the same manner as bills for water service. 
E.  Charges will be billed by and paid to the franchisee designated by the City Council.  
11.20.070 - Placement of Residential Waste Containers for Pick-up. 
No waste container used in residential collections shall be placed out at the curb, alley, or right-of-way before 4:00 p.m. on the day prior to scheduled collection, and all containers shall be removed before 12:00 noon on the day following collection.  
11.20.080 - Scavenging. 
A.  When recyclable or salvageable materials are placed at curbside or on a street, road, alley or any designated pickup location, as provided in this Chapter, they shall become the property of the City or its duly authorized agent. It shall be unlawful for any person other than an owner, lessee, occupant or representative of the City or its agent to move, remove, interfere with, disturb or tamper with said recyclable or salvageable materials or their containers for his or her own use.  
11.20.090 - Fees for Recycling. 
A.  The fees will be established by resolution of the City Council. The City Council may from time to time amend said resolution. 
B.  City Council may, by resolution, provide exemptions from the recycling fee.  
11.20.100 - Separation of Recyclable Materials. 
A.  Containers for designated recyclables shall be provided by collectors to each of their customers, for collection of designated recyclables. 
B.  Containers provided to single-family and multi-family residences, commercial and industrial entities shall effectively segregate the designated recyclables for pickup. 
C.  All recyclable materials shall be separated from other garbage and combined refuse, and grouped together and placed for collection in the same manner as when their regular garbage collection occurs.  
11.20.110 - Designated Recyclable Materials. 
A.  The following are the designated recyclables subject to this designation: 
USE 	DESIGNATED RECYCLABLES 
Residential 	Newspaper, plastic, beverage bottles, aluminum, tin and bi-metal cans, yard and wood waste, white goods (appliances), glass bottles and jars 
Commercial 
 (a) Office buildings of more than 200,00 sq. ft. 	Office paper, corrugated cardboard, newspapers, aluminum 
 (b) Hospitality industry, including all restaurants and taverns 	Corrugated cardboard, plastic beverage bottles, glass jars and bottles, white goods (appliances), aluminum, and tin and bi-metal cans 
Industrial 	Dirt, asphalt, sand, land clearing brush, concrete and rock 
  
11.20.120 - Enforcement. 
A.  The City Manager or designee who is assigned to duties which include the enforcement of solid waste regulations and laws is responsible for enforcing the provisions of this Chapter. 
B.  The City Manager or designee shall have responsibility for the enforcement of all provisions of this Chapter. Violations of these regulations will be addressed in the same manner as other violations of the City Code; however, nothing in the regulations shall prevent the authorized agents or deputies from efforts to obtain voluntary compliance by way of warning, notice of violation or educational means.  
Chapter 11.24 - LITTER CONTROL 
 
11.24.010 - Purpose. 
This Chapter provides the regulations to control litter within the City of Del Mar. 
(Ord. No. 428; Ord. No. 467)  
11.24.020 - Definitions. 
Litter is waste material, including, but not limited to, convenience food, beverage and other product packages or containers, steel, aluminum, glass, paper, plastic or other materials, thrown, deposited or left on property within the City, but not including waste materials discarded in accordance with the provisions of this Code.  
11.24.030 - Prohibition. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, deposit, cause to be deposited, or leave litter in or upon any public street, alley, sidewalk, beach, public right-of-way or public place within the City except in public receptacles or authorized private receptacles. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, deposit, cause to be deposited, or leave any litter in or upon any private property within the City, vacant or occupied, other than the owner of the private property.  
11.24.040 - Litter Receptacles Required. 
A.  The owner or person in control of any private property which is held open to the public shall provide a sufficient number of litter receptacles to receive the volume of waste materials likely to be discarded by persons going upon the property. 
B.  Design, marking and maintenance standards for litter receptacles may be proposed by the Public Works Director and adopted by resolution of the City Council. 
C.  In the event of a dispute, the number of litter receptacles required for a specific property shall be determined by the Planning Commission following a public hearing noticed by publication. 
D.  The number of litter receptacles required for a particular property may be included in any discretionary permit or other approval granted by the City. 
E.  The City may place additional litter receptacles on public property.  
11.24.050 - Abuse or Improper Use of Litter Receptacles. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to damage, deface, abuse or misuse any litter receptacle required by this Chapter, not owned by such person, so as to interfere with its proper function or to detract from its proper appearance. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit leaves, clippings, prunings or gardening refuse in any litter receptacle required by this Chapter. 
C.  It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit household refuse or garbage in any litter receptacle required by this Chapter; provided, however, that this Subsection shall not be construed to mean that waste food consumed on the premises of any public place may not be deposited in litter receptacles.  
11.24.060 - Property Owner Responsibility. 
A.  The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times maintain the premises free of litter; except that litter may be stored in litter receptacles for collection. 
B.  Whenever the owner or person in control of any private property fails to maintain the premises free of litter as required by this Chapter, the City may proceed to remove and dispose of such litter in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter governing the removal of dangerous rubbish and weeds.  
Chapter 11.26 - HAZARDOUS WASTE MANAGEMENT PLAN 
 
11.26.010 - Purpose. 
This Chapter implements the provisions of Article 3.5 of Chapter 6.5 of Division 20 of the California Health and Safety Code relating to Hazardous Waste Management Plans within the City of Del Mar. This Chapter is further intended to implement the provisions of the San Diego County Hazardous Waste Management Plan within the City of Del Mar. In enacting this Chapter, the City Council is acting pursuant to the provisions of California Health and Safety Code § 251.35.7(c)(3).  
11.26.020 - Consistency with San Diego County Hazardous Waste Management Plan. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, no application for a General Plan Amendment, Zone Change, Tentative Subdivision Map, Tentative Parcel Map, Coastal Use Permit, Use Permit, Site Development Permit, Variance, or any other discretionary permit or approval for the development or use of property shall be approved or conditionally approved unless the approving authority finds that the application as approved or conditionally approved is consistent with the portions of the San Diego County Hazardous Waste Management Plan which identify general areas or siting criteria for hazardous waste facilities.  
11.26.030 - Authority to Impose Appropriate Conditions. 
A.  The approving authority may impose any appropriate condition which it determines to be reasonably necessary in order to find that an application subject to Section 11.26.020 is consistent with the portions of the San Diego County Hazardous Waste Management Plan which identify general areas or siting criteria for hazardous waste facilities. 
B.  The approving authority for any permit or other land use approval, including without limitation building permits, for a hazardous waste facility may impose appropriate conditions to the issuance of such permit or approval, which the approving authority determines are reasonably necessary in order to protect the public health, safety or welfare. 
C.  Nothing in this Section shall be construed to preclude an approving authority from denying an application, permit or other land use approval for which the approving authority does not make the finding required under Section 11.26.020 which the approving authority finds is contrary to the public health, safety or welfare.  
11.26.040 - Approving Authority Defined. 
For the purposes of this Chapter, the Approving Authority is any person, commission, or legislative body of the City which is vested with authority under the provisions of this Code to approve, conditionally approve or deny, either originally or on appeal, any building permit, permit for use or development, or land use approval with respect to a hazardous waste facility.  
Chapter 11.30 - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND DISCHARGE CONTROL 
 
11.30.010 - Title. 
This Chapter shall be known as the "City of Del Mar Stormwater Management, and Discharge Control Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 652; Ord. No. 739; Ord. No. 752; Ord. No. 802; Ord. No. 839; Ord. No. 908)  
11.30.020 - Purposes and Intent. 
The purposes of this Chapter are to protect the health, safety and general welfare of City of Del Mar residents; to protect water resources and to improve water quality; to cause the use of management practices by the City and its citizens, including property owners, property managers, NCTD, and businesses operating in the City, that will reduce the adverse effects of polluted runoff discharges on waters of the State; to secure benefits from the use of stormwater as a resource; and to ensure the City is compliant with applicable State and Federal law. The Chapter seeks to promote these purposes by: 
• Prohibiting unauthorized non-stormwater discharges to the stormwater conveyance system; 
• Establishing minimum requirements for stormwater management, including source control requirements, to prevent and reduce pollution; 
• Establishing requirements for development project low impact development site design, source controls, and pollution controls, to reduce stormwater pollution and erosion; 
• Establishing requirements for the management of stormwater flows from development projects, both to prevent erosion and to protect and enhance existing water-dependent habitats; 
• Establishing standards for the use of off-site facilities for stormwater management to supplement on-site practices at new development sites; and 
• Establishing notice procedures and standards for adjusting stormwater and non-stormwater management requirements where necessary. 
(Ord. No. 908)  
11.30.030 - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall be applicable when the following words or phrases are used hereafter in this Chapter (including use in the City Stormwater Standards Manuals), whether or not these words or phrases are capitalized: 
Accelerated Erosion means erosion caused by development activities that exceeds the natural processes by which the surface of the land is worn away. Erosion includes the movement or loss of soil by the action of water, wind, or chemical action. 
Authorized Enforcement Staff means any City employee assigned to duties involving permits and other City approvals, inspections, and enforcement related to this Chapter. 
Authorized Enforcement Official means the City Manager or her/his designee. 
Best Management Practices means schedules of activities, pollution treatment practices or devices, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices or devices to prevent or reduce the discharge of unauthorized non-stormwater pollutants directly or indirectly to Stormwater, Receiving Waters, or the Stormwater Conveyance System. Best Management Practices also include but are not limited to treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. Best Management Practices may include any type of pollution prevention and pollution control measure that can help to achieve compliance with this Chapter. 
BMPs means Best Management Practices. 
BMP Retrofit means a modification or improvement of a stormwater BMP designed for an existing development site or activity that previously had either no stormwater management BMPs in place or that relied on BMPs inadequate to meet the stormwater management requirements of the site or activity. 
Channel means a natural or improved watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or intermittently flowing water. 
City means the City of Del Mar. 
City Stormwater Standards Manuals means the manuals described in Subsection 11.30.040.G. of this Chapter. 
Commercial Discharger means a Discharger who operates a Regulated Commercial Facility. 
Constructed Wetland means a vegetated area that has been deliberately designed and constructed as a BMP to provide or enhance habitat, to provide water quality benefits, or to moderate water flow rates or velocities, that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation. 
Detention means the temporary storage of stormwater in a manner that controls peak discharge rates and provides some gravity settling of pollutants. 
Detention Facility means a detention basin or alternative structure designed for the purpose of temporary storage of stream flow or surface runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates. 
Developer means a person who seeks or receives permits for or who undertakes land development activities. 
Discharge when used as a verb, means to allow pollutants to directly or indirectly enter stormwater, or to allow stormwater or non-stormwater to directly or indirectly enter the Stormwater Conveyance System or Receiving Waters, from an activity or operations that one owns or operates. When used as a noun, "Discharge" means the pollutants, stormwater and/or non-stormwater that are released from a property. 
Discharger means any person or entity engaged in activities or operations or owning facilities, which will or may result in pollutants entering non-stormwater, stormwater, the Stormwater Conveyance System, or Receiving Waters; and the owners of real property on which such activities, operations or facilities are located; provided however that a local government or public authority is not a discharger as to activities conducted by others in public rights-of-way. 
Discharges Directly To means that stormwater or non-stormwater enters Receiving Waters from a facility or activity, without mixing with any stormwater or non-stormwater from another facility or activity prior to entering such Receiving Waters. 
Drainage Easement means a legal right granted by a landowner to a grantee allowing the use of private land for stormwater management purposes. 
Dry Season means May 1 through September 30 of each year. 
Environmentally Sensitive Area means areas that include but are not limited to all Impaired Water Bodies per Clean Water Act Section 303(d), areas designated as Areas of Special Biological Significance or with the RARE beneficial use by the SWRCB in the Water Quality Control Plan for the San Diego Basin (1994 and amendments), National Wildlife Refuges, and areas designated as preserves for species-protection purposes by the State of California or a local government. 
Erosion and Sediment Control Plan means a Stormwater Management Plan that is designed to minimize the accelerated erosion and sediment runoff at a site during construction activities. 
ESA means Environmentally Sensitive Area. 
Forecast Rain Event means a forecast rain event of greater than 1/10 th of an inch with an equal or greater than 50 percent probability by the National Weather Services or comparable weather forecasting services. 
Household Hazardous Waste means a household hazardous material that no longer has a use and is discarded or intended to be discarded. The term includes but is not limited to paint and paint-related materials; yard and garden treatment products (i.e. fertilizers, herbicides); household cleaners; used oil; Vehicle fluids, batteries and oil filters; pesticides; and household batteries. 
Hydrologic Soil Group means the classification system for soil erodability set out in "Soil Survey - San Diego Area, California" (December 1973), issued by the U.S. Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service and U.S. Forest Service. (In this system soils are categorized into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from "A" soils, which have high permeability and little runoff production, to "D" soils, which have low permeability rates and produce much more runoff.) 
Hydromodification means the change in the natural watershed hydrologic processes and runoff characteristics (i.e., interception, infiltration, overland flow, interflow and groundwater flow) caused by urbanization or other land use changes that result in increased stream flows and sediment transport. In addition, alteration of stream and river channels, installation of dams and water impoundments, and excessive streambank and shoreline erosion are also considered hydromodification, due to their disruption of natural watershed hydrologic processes. 
Hydromodification Management Plan (HMP) means a plan to manage increases in runoff discharge rates and durations from all Priority Development Projects, where such increased rates and durations are likely to cause increased erosion of channel beds and banks, sediment pollutant generation, or other impacts to beneficial uses and stream habitat due to increased erosive force. 
Illegal Connection means a pipe, facility, or other device connected to the Stormwater Conveyance System or Receiving Waters, which has not been reviewed and authorized by the City; or a permitted/authorized pipe, facility, or other device, which conveys Illegal Discharges. 
Illegal Discharge means any discharge into Stormwater, the Stormwater Conveyance System, or Receiving Waters that is prohibited by this Chapter. This includes but is not limited to discharges of non-stormwater that are not exempt discharges listed in Section 11.30.060, any discharge from an Illegal Connection, and any discharge that contains additional pollutants due to the absence of a required BMP or the failure of a BMP unless it qualifies as an Upset. Discharges that require a City permit or an RWQCB permit that has not been issued or has not been acknowledged by the Discharger to be applicable are Illegal Discharges. Discharges regulated under an applicable RWQCB or City permit or SWPPP are Illegal Discharges for purposes of this Chapter unless compliance with all applicable permit and SWPPP conditions is maintained. 
Impaired Water Body means a water body that is listed by the SWRCB as impaired by a particular pollutant or pollutants, pursuant to section 303(d) of the Federal Clean Water Act. "303(d) listed water body" has the same meaning. 
Impervious Cover or Impervious Surface means constructed or modified surfaces that cannot effectively infiltrate rainfall. The term includes but is not limited to building rooftops, pavement, sidewalks, and driveways. 
Impervious Surface Area means the ground area covered or sheltered by an impervious surface, measured in plan view (i.e., as if from directly above). For example, the "impervious surface area" for a pitched roof is equal to the ground area it shelters, rather than the surface area of the roof itself. 
Industrial Activity means manufacturing, processing, or raw materials storage at a commercial, industrial or municipal facility. The term includes, but is not limited to, industrial plant yards; immediate access roads and rail lines used or traveled by carriers of raw materials; manufactured products, waste material, or by-product creation or storage; material handling; refuse storage or disposal; the application or disposal of process wastewaters; storage and maintenance of material handling equipment; treatment, storage or disposal of residuals; outdoor shipping and receiving; activities in manufacturing buildings; storage of raw materials and intermediate and finished products; and areas where significant industrial activity has taken place in the past and significant materials remain and are exposed to stormwater. Material handling activities include the storage, loading and unloading, transportation, or conveyance of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, by-product, or waste product. This includes activities of the 22nd District Agricultural Association. 
Industrial Discharger means a Discharger who operates a Regulated Industrial Facility. 
Industrial Stormwater Permit means the current State Industrial General Stormwater Permit. 
Infiltration means the process of percolating stormwater or non-stormwater into the subsoil. 
Infiltration BMPs or Infiltration Facility means any structural treatment BMP designed primarily to percolate water into the subsurface, such as an infiltration trench or infiltration basin. An infiltration facility may include filtering prior to or during infiltration. BMPs that infiltrate some water but which are designed primarily to retain water or to treat water, such as retention basins, constructed wetlands, or filtering swales are not infiltration facilities. 
Jurisdictional Runoff Management Program means the detailed plans and procedures developed and implemented by the City and Dischargers for activities and areas associated with development planning, construction, residential, commercial, industrial, municipal components; education, public participation, fiscal analysis of the programs; and the illegal discharge detection and elimination program. 
JRMP means Jurisdictional Runoff Management Program. 
Jurisdictional Wetland means an area that is naturally inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation. This includes but is not limited to areas previously designated by the City as wetlands. Constructed wetlands are not jurisdictional wetlands. 
Land Development Activity means any activity or proposed activity that requires any of the permits or approvals listed in Subsection 11.30.040.F. of this Chapter. 
Land Disturbance Activity means any activity that moves soils or substantially alters the pre-existing vegetated or man-made cover of any land. This includes, but is not limited to, grading, digging, cutting, scraping, stockpiling or excavating of soil: placement of fill materials: paving, pavement removal, exterior construction: substantial removal of vegetation where soils are disturbed including but not limited to removal by clearing or grubbing: or any activity which bares soil or rock or involves streambed alterations or the diversion or piping of any watercourse. Land Disturbance Activity does not include routine maintenance to maintain original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or the original purpose of the facility, nor does it include emergency construction activities (i.e., land disturbances) required to protect public health and safety. 
Land Owner means the holder of legal title to the land, and other persons or entities that exercise control over a land development project pursuant to rights granted in a purchase agreement, joint venture agreement, development agreement, or long term lease. 
Low Impact Development (LID) means a stormwater management and land development strategy that emphasizes conservation and the use of on-site natural features integrated with engineered, small-scale hydrologic controls to more closely reflect pre-development hydrologic functions. 
Maintenance of a BMP means periodic action taken to maintain the as-designed performance of a BMP, and includes but is not limited to operation of the BMPs as specified by the engineer, manufacturer or architect, repairs to the BMP as necessary, and replacement of the BMP by an equally effective or more effective BMP at the end of its useful life. 
Maximum Extent Practicable is the technologically-based standard for Best Management Practices (BMPs). When BMPs are required to meet this standard, the BMPs must be the most effective set of BMPs that is still practicable. A BMP is effective if it prevents, reduces or removes the pollutants that would otherwise be present in runoff due to human activity. A BMP is practicable if it complies with other regulations as well as stormwater regulations; is compatible with the area's land use, character, facilities, and activities; is technically feasible (considering area soil, geography, water resources, and other resources available); is economically feasible; and provides benefits that are reasonable in relation to costs. 
MEP means Maximum Extent Practicable. 
Mobile Business means any Regulated Commercial Business providing services at the client's premises (residential, municipal, commercial or industrial). Mobile businesses include, but are not limited to, activities providing commercial repair, maintenance, cleaning, manufacturing, food preparation or painting or any other activity determined by the City to have the potential to result in the discharge of non-stormwater or pollutants to stormwater. 
Municipal Facility means a facility owned or operated by the City that is used for a governmental purpose. Facilities on municipally owned land that are leased or rented to others to generate municipal revenues are not Municipal Facilities. (The commercial or industrial lessees of such facilities may, however, be subject to this Chapter as Commercial Dischargers or Industrial Dischargers.) 
Non-Stormwater means all discharges to and from a MS4 that do not originate from precipitation events (i.e., all discharges from a MS4 other than stormwater). Non-stormwater includes illicit discharges and NPDES permitted discharges. 
NPDES Permit means a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit issued by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the SWRCB, or the RWQCB. 
NPDES Permit No. CAS0109266 means RWQCB Order No. R9-2013-0001, NPDES Permit No. CAS0109266, "Waste Discharge Requirements for Discharges From the Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems (MS4s) Draining the Watersheds Within the San Diego Region." 
Nuisance, as defined by the Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act, means "anything which meets all of the following requirements: 
A.  Is injurious to health, or is indecent, or offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property, so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property. 
B.  Affects at the same time an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, although the extent of the annoyance or damage inflicted upon individuals may be unequal. 
C.  Occurs during, or as a result of, the treatment or disposal of wastes." 
Off-Site BMP means a stormwater management measure located outside the subject property boundary of a facility or outside the boundary described in the permit application for a land development activity. 
On-Site BMP means a stormwater management measure located within the subject property boundary or a facility, or inside the boundary described in the permit application for a land development activity. 
Performance Standard means a requirement under this Chapter that specifies a result that must be achieved (e.g., "minimize impervious surface area" or "do not impair receiving water quality") without specifying the means that must be used to achieve that result. (This Chapter applies performance standards only to certain land development and redevelopment projects that require discretionary City permits; those permits will typically include enforceable project-specific requirements intended to achieve the result required by the performance standard.) 
Pollutant means any agent introduced to stormwater or non-stormwater through human activity that may cause or contribute to the degradation of water quality such that public health, the environment, or beneficial uses of waters may be affected. The term may include but is not limited to dredged spoil, rock, sand, or silt (excluding sediment, silt, or substances in quantities which would enter Stormwater from a natural undeveloped watershed); solid waste, sewage, garbage, or medical waste; wrecked or discarded equipment; radioactive materials; industrial waste; fecal coliform, fecal streptococcus, and enterococcus bacteria and other pathogens that pose a threat to human health; volatile organic carbon, surfactants, oil and grease, petroleum hydrocarbons, total organic carbon, lead, copper, chromium, cadmium, silver, nickel, zinc, cyanides, phenols, and biocides; and any contaminant which can significantly degrade the quality of Receiving Waters by altering pH, total suspended or settleable solids, biochemical oxygen demand, chemical oxygen demand, nutrients, or temperature. 
Pollutant Control BMP means any engineered system designed to remove pollutants by simple gravity settling of particulate pollutants, filtration, biological uptake, media absorption or any other physical, biological, or chemical process. 
Pre-Development Runoff Conditions means approximate flow rates and durations that exist or existed onsite before land development occurs. For new development projects, this equates to runoff conditions immediately before project construction. For redevelopment projects, this equates to runoff conditions from the project footprint assuming infiltration characteristics of the underlying soil, and existing grade. Runoff coefficients of concrete or asphalt must not be used. A redevelopment Priority Development Project must use available information pertaining to existing underlying soil type and onsite existing grade to estimate pre-development runoff conditions. 
Primary Pollutant of Concern means any Pollutant, if that pollutant may be discharged from a priority development project or redevelopment project, and is also a basis for a listing of the receiving water for the project as impaired pursuant to Section 303(d) of the Federal Clean Water Act. 
Priority Development Project refers to development project categories as more fully set forth in Provision E.3.b of Order No. R9-2013-001. 
Rainy Season means, from October 1 through April 30. 
Receiving Waters means surface bodies of water, which directly or indirectly receive discharges from urban runoff conveyance systems, including naturally occurring wetlands, streams (perennial, intermittent, and ephemeral (exhibiting bed, bank, and ordinary high water mark), creeks, rivers, reservoirs, lakes, lagoons, estuaries, harbors, bays and the Pacific Ocean. The City shall determine the definition for wetlands and the limits thereof for the purposes of this definition, which shall be as protective as the Federal definition utilized by the United States Army Corps of Engineers and the United States Environmental Protection Agency. Constructed wetlands are not considered wetlands under this definition, unless the wetlands were constructed as mitigation for habitat loss. Other constructed BMPs are not considered receiving waters under this definition, unless the BMP was originally constructed in receiving waters. 
Redevelopment means the creation, addition, and or replacement of impervious surface on an already developed site. Examples include the expansion of a building footprint, road widening, the addition to or replacement of a structure, and creation or addition of impervious surfaces. Replacement of impervious surfaces includes any activity that is not part of a routine maintenance activity where impervious material(s) are removed, exposing underlying soil during construction. Redevelopment does not include trenching and resurfacing associated with utility work; resurfacing and reconfiguring surface parking lots and existing roadways; new sidewalk construction, pedestrian ramps, or bike lane on existing roads; and routine replacement of damaged pavement, such as pothole repair. 
Regulated Commercial Facility means all non-residential facilities or entities engaged in business or commerce, whether for profit or not-for-profit, or publicly or privately owned, including Mobile Businesses; plus residences used for commercial repair, maintenance, cleaning, manufacturing, food preparation or painting activity if that activity or any other activity has been determined by the City to have the potential to result in the discharge of non-stormwater or the discharge of pollutants to the stormwater conveyance system. It does not include Regulated Industrial Facilities and Municipal Facilities. 
Regulated Commercial Business means any Regulated Commercial Facility. 
Regulated Industrial Facility means any facility subject to the State Industrial General Stormwater Permit; any other facility primarily engaged in manufacturing, processing, storage or handling of raw materials, processed bulk materials, or refuse; and any other facility with a total outdoor uncovered area of more than two acres that is used for an Industrial Activity. Municipal Facilities are not Regulated Industrial Facilities, unless they are subject to the State Industrial General Stormwater Permit. 
Residential Discharger means, for an occupied residence, the occupants; and for a vacant residence, the owner and the manager of the residence. 
RWQCB means the California Regional Water Quality Control Board for the San Diego Region. 
Secondary Pollutant of Concern means any pollutants, discharged from a priority development project or redevelopment project that is not a primary pollutant of concern for that project. 
Source Control BMP means land use or site planning practices, or structural or nonstructural measures that aim to prevent urban runoff pollution by reducing the potential for contamination at the source of pollution. Source control BMPs minimize the contact between pollutants and urban runoff. 
State Construction General Stormwater Permit means NPDES Permit No. CAS000002, Waste Discharge Requirements for Discharges of Stormwater Associated with Construction Activities, and any amendments thereto. 
State Industrial General Stormwater Permit means NPDES Permit No. 99-08-DWQ, Waste Discharge Requirements for Discharges of Stormwater Associated with Industrial Activities Excluding Construction Activities and any amendments thereto. 
Stop Work Order means an order issued which requires that specifically identified activity or all activity on a site be halted. 
Stormwater means surface runoff and drainage associated with storm events. 
Stormwater Conveyance System means private and public drainage facilities other than sanitary sewers within the City by which urban run-off may be conveyed to Receiving Waters, and includes but is not limited to roads, streets, constructed channels, aqueducts, storm drains, pipes, street gutters, inlets to storm drains or pipes, or catch basins. 
Stormwater Management means the use of structural or nonstructural BMPs that are designed to reduce urban run-off pollutant loads, discharge volumes, and/or peak discharge flow rates or velocities. When applied to the City or another municipality, stormwater management also includes planning and programmatic measures. 
Stormwater Management Plan means a plan, submitted on a City form or in a City-specific format in connection with a development permit application for a City permit or other City approval, identifying the measures that will be used for stormwater and non-stormwater management during the permitted activity. 
Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan means a document (other than a Stormwater Management Plan), which meets the requirements for a Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) set out in the State Construction General Stormwater Permit or State Industrial General Stormwater Permit. A SWPPP submitted to the City must describe the BMPs to be implemented and other steps to be taken by the Discharger to meet the requirements of this Chapter. 
Structural BMP means a BMP that relies on either a physical condition (other than an entirely natural and undisturbed condition), or on a constructed or installed device to reduce or prevent pollutants in stormwater discharges and authorized non-stormwater discharges. Constructed or enhanced BMPs that depend on natural materials and processes (e.g., constructed drainage swales or buffers, or constructed wetlands), and that require periodic maintenance to function as designed, are Structural BMPs. 
Structural Post-Construction BMP means a structural BMP (other than a temporary construction-related BMP) put in place in connection with a land development or redevelopment project to prevent or reduce contamination in stormwater or Receiving Waters, or to prevent or reduce erosion and/or pollutant discharges downstream from the project. 
Structural Treatment BMPs means a structural post construction BMP that treats or filters stormwater to remove pollutants, or that infiltrates stormwater to soils. 
SWPPP means Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan. 
SWRCB means the State Water Resources Control Board. 
Treatment Control BMP means any engineered system designed to remove pollutants by simple gravity settling of particulate pollutants, filtration, biological uptake, media absorption or any other physical, biological, or chemical process. 
Tributary to an Impaired Water Body a facility or activity is tributary to an impaired water body if urban runoff from that facility or activity enters: 
A.  The stormwater conveyance system at a place and in a manner that will carry pollutants for which that water body is impaired in that discharge to the impaired water; 
B.  A flowing stream that will carry pollutants for which that water body is impaired in that discharge to the impaired water; or 
C.  An ephemeral stream that reaches the impaired water during storm events and that will carry pollutants for which that water body is impaired from the facility or activity to the impaired water body during such storm events. 
Upset means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with technology based effluent limitations because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the discharger. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
Urban Runoff means all flows in a stormwater conveyance system in the City other than point source discharges in violation of a site-specific NPDES permit. Urban run-off includes but is not limited to stormwater, exempt non-stormwater discharges, and illicit discharges. 
Vehicle means any automobile, car, truck, bus, motor home or other self-propelled vehicle used or suited to use for on-road transportation: and any similar vehicle modified for off-road use; motorized equipment (cement mixers, compressors, etc.); and un-motorized equipment (trailers, campers, etc.) 
Water Main means a potable or recycled water delivery line greater than or equal to four inches in diameter. 
Watercourse means a permanent or intermittent stream or other body of water, either natural or improved, which gathers or carries surface water. 
Water Quality Sensitive Area means the areas located within or discharging directly to, or Tributary to ESAs (including open space, bluff/slope/canyon(s), and Floodway and Lagoon Habitat) that may be subject to additional BMP or other water quality protection measures to protect beneficial uses and comply with water quality standards. Development Projects, commercial and industrial dischargers located within WQSA are categorized as high priority because they pose a higher threat to water quality. 
Water Quality Standards are defined as the beneficial uses (e.g., swimming, fishing, municipal drinking water supply, etc.) of water and the water quality objectives adopted by the SWRCB or the United States Environmental Protection Agency to protect those uses. 
Waters of the United States means water subject to the regulatory jurisdiction of the United States under the Federal Clean Water Act and applicable case law. (In general, this includes "navigable" waters, waters tributary to "navigable" waters, and adjacent wetlands.) 
(Ord. No. 752; Ord. No. 754; Ord. No. 839; Ord. No. 908)  
11.30.040 - General Provisions. 
A.  Responsibility for Administration. This Chapter shall be administered for the City of Del Mar by its Authorized Enforcement Officials. 
B.  Effective Date. This Chapter shall take effect on July 15, 2015. 
C.  Construction and Application. Interpretation of the meanings of parts of this Chapter shall assure consistency with the purpose and intent of this Chapter. This includes but is not limited to consistency with the requirements of NPDES Permit No. CAS0109266. This Chapter is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law. The requirements of this Chapter should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this Chapter imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall take precedence. 
D.  Recycled Water. This Chapter is not intended to prohibit or prevent the use of recycled water, or the discharge of recycled water after use. This Chapter is intended to require the use of BMPs for such uses and discharges as necessary to protect human health and the environment. 
E.  Severability and Validity. If any section of this Chapter is declared invalid by a court of law, the remaining sections shall remain valid. 
F.  City Permits and Approvals. 
1.  Discretionary Permits. An application for any of the following discretionary permits or approvals shall be accompanied by plans demonstrating how the requirements of this Chapter will be met, and the permit or approval shall not be approved unless the decision maker determines that the application complies with the requirements of this Chapter: 
a.  Demolition Permit. 
b.  Agricultural Exemption. 
c.  Final Map Modification. 
d.  Grading Plan (including Modification or Renewal). 
e.  Improvement Plan (including Modification). 
f.  Landscape Plan. 
g.  Conditional Use Permit (including Modification or Minor Deviation). 
h.  Design Review Permit (including Modification, Minor Deviation, or Extension). 
i.  Land Conservation Permit. 
j.  Parcel Map Modification. 
k.  Reclamation Plan. 
l.  Site Plan (including Amendment). 
m.  Solid Waste Facility Permit. 
n.  Tentative Map (including Resolution Amendment or Time Extension). 
o.  Tentative Parcel Map. 
p.  Variance. 
q.  Watercourse Permit. 
r.  Coastal Development Permit. 
s.  Encroachment Permit—Discretionary. 
2.  Ministerial Permits. An application for any of the following ministerial permits or approvals shall be accompanied by plans demonstrating how the specifically applicable requirements, if any, set out in corresponding sections of the City Stormwater Standards Manuals will be met, and the permit or approval shall not be approved unless the decision maker determines that the application complies with those requirements. 
a.  Building Permit. 
b.  Encroachment Permit—Ministerial. 
c.  On Site Wastewater System Permit. 
d.  Underground Tank Permit. 
e.  Well Permit. 
G.  City Stormwater Standards Manual. The City adopts a Stormwater Standards Manual to standardize the process and requirements of compliance methods. The Stormwater Standards Manual is a part of the City's JRMP. Authorized Enforcement Officials may provide additional flexibility using the Guidance Documents authorized in Subsection 11.30.040.H. below. The land development and minimum BMP requirements shall be incorporated into the Stormwater Manual of the City of Del Mar. 
H.  Guidance Documents. Any Authorized Enforcement Official may prepare, circulate for public comment, disseminate and maintain guidance documents addressing the use of pollution prevention practices and BMPs for specific activities or facilities, and the elimination of illicit connections, and illegal disposal to the Stormwater Conveyance System or Waters of the United States. Guidance Documents may be included or reference in the City JRMP. Guidance Documents may include the County of San Diego Low Impact Development Handbook, the California Stormwater Quality Association BMP handbooks, and other comparable resources. 
These guidance documents may set out additional compliance alternatives that, in specified circumstances, can provide the same environmental protection that is afforded by the BMPs required by this Chapter or specified in the City Stormwater Standards Manual. 
These guidance documents may also identify practices that have been determined by the Authorized Enforcement Official to be additional BMPs that may be implemented for Land Disturbance Activities and Land Development Activities to prevent or control pollution to the Maximum Extent Practicable (MEP). These additional BMPs shall become mandatory for affected Dischargers after being issued through an Order pursuant to Subsection 11.30.040.I. below. 
Authorized Enforcement Officials and Authorized Enforcement Staff may also take these guidance documents into account when determining whether any practices used by a Discharger, or proposed in a grading plan, a Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP), Stormwater Management Plan, an enforcement settlement offer, or any other submittal to the City, are BMPs that will prevent or control pollution to the MEP. These case-specific discretionary decisions may involve circumstances that were not anticipated when general guidance documents were prepared. Therefore, these guidance documents do not confer rights on Dischargers in these circumstances and do not constrain the discretion of Authorized Enforcement Officials or Authorized Enforcement Staff. Where appropriate, and provided the same protection is provided to the environment, Authorized Enforcement Officials and Authorized Enforcement Staff may depart from these guidance documents when making case-specific decisions authorized by this Chapter. 
I.  Significant Sources of Pollutants. Authorized Enforcement Officials shall identify Discharges and categories of facilities and activities that are a significant source of contaminants to Waters of the United States, despite compliance with this Chapter. If any such contamination problem is identified by the Authorized Enforcement Official or by Authorized Enforcement staff the Dischargers shall be ordered by the Authorized Enforcement Official or by Authorized Enforcement Staff to install, implement and maintain additional BMPs to prevent or reduce contamination in stormwater and non-stormwater to the MEP. Any such Order shall specify a reasonable date by which those BMPs must be put in place. A failure to install, implement, or maintain additional BMPs as required by any such Order is a violation of this Chapter. 
J.  Determining Whether a Discharge is "Tributary To" an Impaired Water Body. Areas within which facilities and sources will be presumed to be tributary to an impaired water body are identified by the City. The presumption that a discharge is tributary to an impaired water body can be overcome for a particular discharge based on specific facts and analysis presented by a Discharger. In making a site-specific determination as to whether a discharge is tributary to an impaired water body, consideration may be given to the amount of water and pollutant discharged; to whether the pollutant for which the water body is impaired is a suspended or dissolved pollutant; to whether the pollutant is volatile or degradable; and to whether the pollutant is substantially removed during transport by any natural or man-made features or BMPs (sinks, infiltration areas, ponds or impoundments, vegetated swales or wetlands, media filtration devices, etc.) located between the site and the impaired water body. Any such analysis must consider common mechanisms for pollutant mobilization, remobilization, and transport over time. Any such analysis and determination shall be disclosed for public review and comment to the extent required by CEQA or by City procedures for permit issuance. 
K.  Collection and Use of Stormwater. An Authorized Enforcement Official may modify any requirement imposed by this Chapter to allow the on-site collection and use of stormwater, or the collection of stormwater for delivery to and use at City-designated sites, provided the modified requirements are enforceable and provide equivalent environmental protection. 
(Ord. No. 752; Ord. No. 908)  
11.30.050 - Discharge Prohibitions. 
A.  Illegal Discharges. The discharge of Pollutants directly or indirectly into the Stormwater Conveyance System or Receiving Waters in non-stormwater is prohibited, except as exempted in Section 11.30.060 of this Chapter. The discharge of Pollutants directly or indirectly into the Stormwater Conveyance System or Receiving Waters in stormwater is prohibited, unless the applicable requirements of this Chapter have been met. 
B.  Illegal Connection. The establishment of Illegal Connections is prohibited. The use of Illegal Connections is prohibited, even if the connection was established pursuant to a valid City permit and was legal at the time it was constructed. 
C.  Litter, Dumps, and Stockpiles. Throwing, depositing, leaving, abandoning, maintaining or keeping materials or wastes on public or private lands in a manner and place where they may result in an Illegal Discharge is prohibited unless written authorization is provided by the City. 
D.  Emergency Flares. The non-emergency use of flares is prohibited unless written authorization is provided by the City.  
11.30.060 - Conditionally Allowed Non-Stormwater Discharges. 
The following non-stormwater discharges are allowed on the condition that they are addressed pursuant to the associated requirements: 
A.  Any discharge to the MS4 regulated under an NPDES permit issued to the discharger and administered by the State of California pursuant to Division 7 of the California Water Code is allowed, provided that the discharger is in compliance with all requirements of the applicable NPDES permit and other applicable laws and regulations to the satisfaction of the RWQCB. 
B.  Non-storm water discharges to the MS4 from the following categories of non-storm water discharges are allowed if the discharger obtains coverage under NPDES Permit No. CAG919002 (RWQCB Order No. R9-2008-0002, or subsequent order) and the discharger is in compliance with all requirements of the applicable NPDES permit and all other applicable laws and regulations; or the RWQCB determines in writing that coverage under NPDES Permit No. CAG919002 is not required. Otherwise, non-storm water discharges from the following categories are illicit discharges: 
1.  Discharges from uncontaminated pumped groundwater; 
2.  Discharges from foundation drains when the system is designed to be located at or below the groundwater table to actively or passively extract groundwater during any part of the year; 
3.  Discharges from crawl space pumps; 
4.  Discharges from footing drains when the system is designed to be located at or below the groundwater table to actively or passively extract groundwater during any part of the year. 
C.  Non-storm water discharges to the MS4 from water line flushing and water main breaks are allowed if the discharges have coverage under NPDES Permit No. CAG679001 (Regional Water Quality Control Board Order No. R9-2010-0003, or subsequent order), and the discharger is in compliance with all requirements of that NPDES permit and other applicable laws and regulations. This category includes water line flushing and water main break discharges from water purveyors issued a water supply permit by the California Department of Public Health or Federal military installations. Discharges from recycled or reclaimed water lines to the MS4 are allowed if the discharges have coverage under an NPDES permit, and the discharger is in compliance with the applicable NPDES permit and other applicable laws and regulations. Otherwise, discharges from water lines are illicit discharges. 
D.  Non-storm water discharges to the MS4 from the following categories are allowed, unless the enforcement official or the Regional Water Quality Control Board identifies the discharge as a source of pollutants to receiving waters, in which case the discharge is considered an illicit discharge: 
1.  Discharges from diverted stream flows; 
2.  Discharges from rising groundwater; 
3.  Discharges from uncontaminated groundwater infiltration to the MS4; 
4.  Discharges from springs; 
5.  Discharges from riparian habitats and wetlands; 
6.  Discharges from potable water sources, except as set forth in Del Mar Municipal Code; 
7.  Discharges from foundation drains when the system is designed to be located above the groundwater table at all times of the year, and the system is only expected to produce non-storm water discharges under unusual circumstances; 
8.  Discharges from footing drains when the system is designed to be located above the groundwater table at all times of the year, and the system is only expected to produce non-storm water discharges under unusual circumstances; and 
9.  Discharges from saline swimming pools when the water can be discharged via a pipe or concrete channel directly to a naturally saline water body (e.g., Pacific Ocean). 
E.  On-site wastewater systems. Discharges to the subsurface from permitted properly functioning on-site wastewater systems are not prohibited by this Chapter. 
F.  Non-storm water discharges from the following categories are allowed if they are addressed with BMPs as described in DMMC Section 11.30.070. Otherwise, non-storm water discharges from the following categories are illicit discharges: 
1.  Air conditioning condensation; 
2.  Individual residential vehicle washing; 
3.  Flows from non-emergency fire fighting activities; and 
4.  Flows from emergency [1] fire fighting activities. 
5.  Dechlorinated Swimming Pool Discharges. 
G.  Notwithstanding the categories of non-storm water discharges conditionally allowed by DMMC, if the Regional Water Quality Control Board or the enforcement official determines that any of these categories of otherwise conditionally allowed non-storm water discharges are a source of pollutants to receiving waters, are a danger to public health or safety, or are causing a public nuisance, such discharges shall be prohibited from entering the MS4. 
(Ord. No. 908) 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Note— During emergency situations, priority of efforts should be directed toward life, property, and the environment (in descending order). BMPs should not interfere with immediate emergency response operations or impact public health and safety. 
 
11.30.070 - Best Management Practice Requirements and General Requirements of All Dischargers. 
A.  Applicable Requirements. All Dischargers in the City must comply with the generally applicable prohibitions and requirements in Sections 11.30.010 through 11.30.070 of this Chapter, and must also comply with any other parts of this Chapter that are applicable to the type of facility or activity owned or operated by that Discharger. 
B.  Minimum Best Management Practices for All Dischargers. All dischargers in the City must install, implement and maintain the minimum BMPs outlined in the City's Stormwater Standard Manuals. General categories of minimum BMPs include: 
1.  Soil Erosion. Dischargers shall install BMPs to prevent erosion, and significant accumulations of eroded soils from slopes, previously disturbed by clearing or grading, to prevent sediment from entering the Stormwater Conveyance System or Receiving Waters. 
2.  Pollution Prevention. Dischargers shall implement those stormwater pollution prevention practices that are generally recognized in that Discharger's industry or business as being effective and economically feasible. 
3.  Prevention of Illegal Discharges. Illicit connections must be eliminated (even if the connection was established pursuant to a valid permit and was legal at the time it was constructed), and illegal discharge practices eliminated. 
4.  Slopes. Completed slopes that are more than five feet in height, more than 250 square feet in total area, and steeper than 3:1 (run-to-rise) that have been disturbed at any time by clearing, grading, or landscaping, shall be protected from erosion immediately following completion of the slope, and continuously thereafter. 
5.  Storage of Materials and Wastes. All materials and wastes with the potential to pollute urban runoff shall be stored in a manner that either prevents contact with rainfall and stormwater, or the contaminated runoff contained for proper and legal treatment and disposal. 
6.  Use of Materials. All materials with the potential to pollute urban run-off (including but not limited to cleaning and maintenance products used outdoors, fertilizers, pesticides and herbicides, etc.) shall be used in accordance with label directions. No such product may be disposed of or rinsed into Receiving Waters or the Stormwater Conveyance System. 
C.  Inspection, Maintenance, Repair and Upgrading of BMPs. BMPs at manned facilities must be inspected by the Discharger before forecast rain events and when safe and feasible during and after a rain event. BMPs at unmanned facilities must be inspected by the Discharger at least once during the rainy season and at least once between each rainy season. These BMPs must be maintained so that they continue to function as designed. BMPs that fail must be repaired as soon as it is safe to do so. If the failure of a BMP indicates that the BMPs in use are inappropriate or inadequate to the circumstances, the BMPs must be modified or upgraded to prevent any further failure in the same or similar circumstances. 
D.  Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan. An Authorized Enforcement Official may require a Commercial, Industrial or Land Disturbance Activities Discharger to prepare and submit a SWPPP for approval by that official if (1) the Discharger does not come into compliance with this Chapter after one or more warnings or other enforcement action, because BMPs are inadequate or are not being adequately maintained; or (2) the facility or activity at issue is a significant source of contaminants to the Stormwater Conveyance System or Receiving Waters despite compliance with this Chapter. Any Discharger required to submit and to obtain approval of a SWPPP should install, implement and maintain the BMPs specified in the approved SWPPP. 
The SWPPP shall identify the BMPs that will be used by the Discharger to prevent or control pollution of stormwater to the MEP. If the facility is an industrial facility, the SWPPP submitted to the City shall at a minimum meet the requirements of the State Industrial General Stormwater Permit. If the activity at issue is a construction or land disturbance activity, the SWPPP submitted to the City shall at a minimum meet the requirements of the State Construction General Stormwater Permit. 
Whenever submission of a SWPPP is required pursuant to this Chapter, an Authorized Enforcement Official or Authorized Enforcement Staff may take existing City guidance documents into account when determining whether the BMPs proposed in the SWPPP will prevent or control pollution to the required level of MEP. 
E.  Notification of Spills, Releases and Illegal Discharges. Spills, releases, and illegal discharges of Pollutants to Receiving Waters or to the Stormwater Conveyance System shall be reported by the Discharger as required by all applicable State and Federal laws. In addition, any such spills, releases and illegal discharges with the potential to endanger health, safety or the environment shall be reported to the City within 24 hours after discovery of the spill, release or discharge. If safe to do so, necessary actions shall be taken to contain and minimize the spill, release or illegal discharge. 
F.  Sampling, Analyzing, Monitoring, and Reporting. Commercial, Industrial or Land Disturbance Activities Dischargers shall perform the sampling, analyzing, monitoring and reporting required by this Chapter. In addition, an Authorized Enforcement Official or Authorized Enforcement Staff may order a Discharger to conduct analyzing or monitoring and to report the results to the City if: (1) the Authorized Enforcement Official determines that analyzing or monitoring is needed to determine whether BMPs are effectively preventing or reducing pollution in stormwater to the MEP, or to determine whether the facility is a significant source of contaminants to Receiving Waters; or (2) the Authorized Enforcement Official or Authorized Enforcement Staff determines that analyzing or monitoring is needed to assess the impacts of an illegal discharge on health, safety or the environment; or (3) an Illegal Discharge has not been eliminated after written notice by an Authorized Enforcement Official or Authorized Enforcement Staff; or (4) repeated violations have been documented by written notices from Authorized Enforcement Officials or Authorized Enforcement Staff; or (5) the RWQCB requires the City to provide any information related to the Discharger's activities. 
Analyzing and monitoring ordered pursuant to this Subsection may include the following: 
1.  Visual monitoring of dry weather flows, wet weather erosion, and/or BMPs; 
2.  Visual monitoring of premises for spills or discharges; 
3.  Laboratory analyses of stormwater or non-stormwater discharges for Pollutants; 
4.  Background or baseline monitoring or analysis; and 
5.  Monitoring of Receiving Waters or sediments that may be affected by Pollutant discharges by the Discharger (or by a group of Dischargers including the Discharger). 
The Authorized Enforcement Official or Authorized Enforcement Staff may direct the manner in which the results of required analyzing and monitoring are reported, and may determine when required sampling, analyzing or monitoring may be discontinued. 
G.  Mitigation. All Illegal Discharges must be mitigated within a reasonable period of time to correct or compensate for all damage to the environment caused by the illegal discharge. The Authorized Enforcement Official or Authorized Enforcement Staff, who issued notice to the Discharger that a discharge was illegal, or Authorized Enforcement Staff designated by that official, shall determine whether mitigation measures proposed Authorized Enforcement Official or Authorized Enforcement Staff shall require the Discharger to submit a mitigation plan and schedule by a specified date prior to taking action, and to submit a summary of completed mitigation by a specified date. 
H.  Access for Inspections. All dischargers shall provide access to authorized enforcement staff, upon reasonable notice, for inspection of facilities and discharges subject to this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 752; Ord. No. 839; Ord. No. 908)  
11.30.080 - Additional Minimum Best Management Practice Requirements for Residential Activities and Facilities. 
A.  Applicable Requirements. The requirements in this section apply to all Residential Dischargers and any Regulated Commercial Business conducting residential activities on behalf of a Residential Discharger. All Residential Dischargers conducting activities must install, implement and maintain the BMPs identified in Subsection B. of Section 11.30.070 for all Dischargers, and at least the additional minimum BMPs specified in the City's Stormwater Standards Manual for the category of activities conducted by that Discharger including but not limited to: 
1.  Vehicle maintenance; 
2.  Vehicle washing; 
3.  Irrigation practices and management; 
4.  Irrigation system testing; 
5.  Landscape maintenance; 
6.  Fertilizer application; 
7.  Pesticide application; 
8.  Pet waste disposal; 
9.  Power washing; 
10.  Septic system maintenance; 
11.  Sanitary sewer system maintenance; 
12.  Minor home maintenance, repair and upgrades. 
(Ord. No. 839; Ord. No. 908)  
11.30.090 - Additional Minimum Best Management Practice Requirements for Commercial Activities and Facilities. 
A.  Priorities and Requirements. Regulated Commercial Facilities are classified in this section as High Priority, and additional requirements are imposed on those facilities by this section based on those classifications. All commercial Dischargers must install, implement and maintain at least the additional minimum BMPs, if any, specified in this section or in the City Stormwater Standards Manuals for the priority classification and category of activity or facility owned or operated by that Discharger. All Regulated Commercial Facilities shall review their facilities, activities, operations and procedures at least annually to detect and eliminate illicit connections and illegal discharges. Corrective training shall be provided as needed (and documented in training records) whenever an illegal disposal practice is discovered. 
B.  High Priority Commercial Facilities Identified. As required by NPDES Permit No. CAS 0108758, facilities in the City having any of the following characteristics are High Priority Commercial Facilities: 
1.  The facility is a Regulated Commercial Facilities primarily engaged in any of the following commercial activities: 
• Airplane mechanical repair, maintenance, fueling, or cleaning; 
• Vehicle parking lots and storage facilities; 
• Vehicle body repair or painting; 
• Vehicle repair, maintenance, fueling, or cleaning; 
• Botanical or zoological gardens and exhibits; 
• Cement mixing or cutting; 
• Cemeteries; 
• Eating or drinking establishments, including food markets; 
• Golf courses, parks and other recreational areas/facilities; 
• Landscaping; 
• Marinas; 
• Masonry; 
• Mobile Vehicle washing; 
• Mobile carpet, drape or furniture cleaning; 
• Nurseries and greenhouses operations; 
• Painting and coating; 
• Pest control services; 
• Pool and fountain cleaning; 
• Portable sanitary services; 
• Retail or wholesale fueling; 
• Building material retailers and storage; 
• Animal facilities or services; or 
• Power washing services. 
2.  The facility is a Regulated Commercial Facility that has outdoor Industrial Areas totaling two acres or more or an outdoor parking lot for 100 or more vehicles; and stormwater or runoff from the facility may adversely affect impaired waters or waters within an ESA. 
3.  The facility is a Regulated Commercial Facility and has been notified in writing by an Authorized Enforcement Official or Authorized Enforcement Staff that it is a High Priority Commercial Facility. Such designations shall take effect 90 days after mailing or service of this notice. These designations shall be made where the facility discharges a pollutant load in stormwater or runoff that causes or contributes to the violation of water quality standards. 
C.  Additional Minimum Best Management Practices for All Regulated Commercial Facilities. All Regulated Commercial Facilities shall install, implement and maintain the BMPs specified in the City Stormwater Standards Manuals in the following areas or for these activities: 
• Employee training, including attendance logs; 
• Stormwater pollution prevention plans; 
• Storm drain tileage and signing; 
• Pollution prevention; 
• Materials and waste management loading and storage; 
• Vehicles and equipment storage and operations; 
• Building and Outdoor areas, including power washing and cleaning.  
11.30.100 - Additional Minimum Best Management Practice Requirements for Industrial Activities and Facilities. 
A.  Priorities and Requirements. Regulated Industrial Facilities are classified in this section as High Priority, and additional requirements are imposed on those facilities by this Section based on those classifications. All Industrial Dischargers must install, implement and maintain at least the additional minimum BMPs, if any, specified in this Section or in the City Stormwater Standards Manual for the priority classification and category of activity or facility owned or operated by that Discharger. All Regulated Industrial Facilities shall review their facilities, activities, operations and procedures at least annually to detect and eliminate illicit connections and illegal discharges. Corrective training shall be provided as needed (and documented in training records) whenever an illegal disposal practice is discovered. 
B.  High Priority Industrial Facilities. Regulated Industrial Facilities that have any of the characteristics listed below are High Priority Industrial Facilities: 
1.  The facility is subject to the State Industrial General Stormwater Permit, taking into account all of the provisions of that permit. 
2.  The facility is a Regulated Industrial Facility and urban runoff from the facility is Tributary To or discharges directly to an Impaired Water Body, and the facility generates a pollutant for which that water body is impaired. 
3.  The facility is a Regulated Industrial Facility and is located within or adjacent to (i.e., within 200 feet of), or discharges directly to, a WQSA. 
4.  The facility is subject to Section 313 of Title III of the Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986 (SARA). 
5.  The facility was notified in writing by an Authorized Enforcement Official or Authorized Enforcement Staff that it has been designated a High Priority Industrial Facility. Such designations shall take effect 90 days after mailing or service of notice. These designations shall be made where the facility discharges a pollutant load in stormwater or runoff that causes or contributes to the violation of water quality standards. 
C.  Additional Minimum BMPs and Other Additional Requirements for High Priority Industrial Facilities. 
1.  Notice of Intent. High Priority Industrial Dischargers required to comply with the State Industrial General Stormwater Permit shall maintain on site and make available for inspection on request by the City the State-issued Waste Discharge Identification Number (WDID) for the facility, and a copy of the Notice of Intent (NOI) filed with the SWRCB pursuant to comply with that permit. The Discharger shall submit the WDID and a copy of that NOI to the City by mail if directed to do so by an Authorized Enforcement Official or Authorized Enforcement Staff. 
2.  Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan. Dischargers required to prepare a SWPPP under the State Industrial General Stormwater Permit must prepare the Plan, implement the Plan and maintain it at the site readily available for review. If a High Priority Industrial Facility is not required to prepare a State SWPPP, the facility shall prepare a SWPPP, submit that SWPPP for approval or modification and approval, implement the SWPPP, and maintain it on site. Failure to comply with an applicable State-required or City-required SWPPP is a violation of this Chapter. 
3.  Pollution Prevention Practices. High Priority Industrial Facilities shall consider and where determined to be appropriate by the facility shall implement the following measures to prevent the pollution of stormwater and runoff: 
• The use of smaller quantities of toxic materials or substitution of less toxic materials; 
• Changes to production processes to reduce waste; 
• Decreases in waste water flows; 
• Recycling of wastes as part of the production process; 
• Segregation of wastes; and 
• Treatment of wastes on site to decrease volume and/or toxicity. 
4.  Non-Structural BMPs. High Priority Industrial Facilities shall incorporate into the SWPPP, and install implement and maintain, the following non-structural BMPs for the specified activities or areas. The implementation of these BMPs shall be consistent with specifications, if any, contained in the City Stormwater Standards Manual. 
• Material handling and storage; 
• Non-hazardous and hazardous waste handling and recycling; 
• Employee training programs; 
• Good housekeeping; 
• Equipment and building preventive maintenance; 
• Self inspection; and 
• Spill response planning and prevention. 
5.  BMPs for Specific Activities. High Priority Industrial Facilities shall incorporate into the SWPPP, and install implement and maintain BMPs as specified in the City Stormwater Standards Manuals for any commercial activities conducted at the facility (as identified in Subsection 11.30.090.C.), and for areas at the facility where industrial activities are conducted. Industrial areas or activities include but are not limited to the following: 
• Raw or processes materials bulk storage; 
• Mixing, where there is the potential for release of a pollutant; 
• Cutting, trimming or grinding in connection with a production process; 
• Casting, forging, or forming; 
• Hazardous materials storage (including tanks); 
• Construction, painting and coating; 
• Pesticide or other chemical products formulation or packaging; 
• Process water pre-treatment; 
• Solid waste storage; 
• Wastewater treatment; 
• Welding; 
• Blasting; 
• Chemical treatment; and 
• Power washing. 
6.  Additional Structural BMPs. High Priority Industrial Facilities shall incorporate into the SWPPP, and install, implement and maintain one or more of the additional structural BMPs listed below where practicable, if use of such BMPs would significantly reduce pollution in run-off from the facility. The Discharger shall determine in the first instance which of these BMPs to implement. However, an Authorized Enforcement Official or Authorized Enforcement Staff can order that additional BMPs be used at a particular facility pursuant to Subsection 11.30.040.I. 
• Overhead coverage of outdoor work areas or chemical storage; 
• Retention ponds, basins, or surface impoundments that confine stormwater to the site; 
• Berms and concrete swales or channels that divert run-on and runoff away from contact with pollutant sources; 
• Secondary containment structures; and 
• Treatment controls, e.g., infiltration devices and oil/water separators, to reduce pollutants in stormwater or authorized non-stormwater discharges. 
D.  Monitoring at High Priority Industrial Facilities. Dischargers owning or operating High Priority Industrial Facilities required to conduct monitoring under the State Industrial General Stormwater Permit shall make records of such monitoring available for inspection, and submit a copy of such records to the City if directed to do so by an Authorized Enforcement Official or Authorized Enforcement Staff. State exceptions from monitoring requirements are also applicable to this requirement, and group monitoring approved by the State is also acceptable to the City. The City may direct that any required records be submitted in a specified electronic format. Dischargers owning or operating manned High Priority Industrial Facilities that are not required to conduct monitoring under the State Industrial General Stormwater Permit, and which would not qualify for an exemption from monitoring under the terms of that permit if the permit were applicable, must develop and implement a monitoring program that meets the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Quantitative stormwater data must be obtained from two storm events in a year; 
2.  These monitoring events must address: 
• Pollutants listed in any effluent guidelines subcategories applicable to the facility; 
• Pollutants with effluent limits established by an existing NPDES permit for that facility; 
• Oil/grease or total organic carbon; 
• pH; 
• Total suspended solids; 
• Specific conductance; and 
• Toxic chemicals and other pollutants likely to be present in stormwater discharges. 
This monitoring must be conducted under the conditions set out in the State Industrial General Stormwater Permit. The Discharger must retain records of such monitoring on site, make such records available for inspection, and submit a copy of such records to the City if directed to do so by an Authorized Enforcement Official or Authorized Enforcement Staff. 
(Ord. No. 908)  
11.30.110 - Additional Minimum Best Management Practice Requirements for Agricultural Operations. 
A.  Nursery and Greenhouse Operations. Pursuant to NPDES Permit No. CAS0108758, nursery and greenhouse operations are classified as commercial operations for purposes of this Chapter, and are subject to all requirements for Regulated Commercial Facilities set out in this Chapter. 
B.  Agricultural Grading and Clearing. The BMP requirements imposed by Section 11.30.140 of this Chapter for land disturbance activities apply to agricultural grading and clearing, whether or not a City-issued grading and clearing permit is required for that activity. Tilling or cultivating land exclusively for the purpose of growing plants or animals is not considered to be grading or clearing, provided all disturbed material remains on the same site, the tilling or cultivating will not block or divert any natural drainage way, and the land to be tilled or cultivated has been in agricultural production for at least one of the preceding five years. 
C.  Land Development Associated with Agricultural Operations. The requirements imposed by Section 11.30.150 of this Chapter for land development activities apply to such activities when they are associated with agricultural operations. 
D.  Manure Management. 
1.  Where practicable, all runoff from areas where livestock, horses or other large animals are confined must be collected and managed in a manner that avoids a discharge to the stormwater conveyance system or receiving waters. Where this is not practicable, manure must be cleaned up at least twice weekly; and must either be composted, or stored prior to disposal. 
2.  Areas used for storing or composting manure must be located, configured or managed to prevent runoff to receiving waters or the stormwater conveyance system. 
3.  Animal wastes shall not be disposed to the stormwater conveyance system or receiving waters. 
E.  Other Agricultural Operations. Other agricultural operations are subject to the discharge prohibitions and other requirements set out in Sections 11.30.010 through 11.30.070 of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 908)  
11.30.120 - Additional Best Management Practice Requirements for Municipal Activities and Facilities. 
A.  Municipal Facilities. Municipal Facilities must meet the requirements set out in Sections 11.30.010 through 11.30.070, and where applicable, Sections 11.30.140 and 11.30.150 of this Chapter. In addition, these facilities and activities must install, implement and maintain at least the additional minimum BMPs, if any, specified in Section 11.30.090 or in the City Stormwater Standards Manual, for municipal areas and activities at the municipal facility. 
B.  Public Improvement Projects. It is the policy of the City that public improvement projects in the City shall conform to the requirements this Chapter would impose on similar private development projects within the City. These projects must meet the requirements set out in this Chapter, and must be designed and constructed in accordance with the City's Stormwater Standards Manual if applicable. 
(Ord. No. 752; Ord. No. 908)  
11.30.130 - City Stormwater Standards Manual. 
A.  City Stormwater Standards Manual. All Dischargers who are required by this Chapter to install, implement and maintain BMPs shall ensure that their selection of BMPs is consistent with the applicable specifications, if any, contained in the City Stormwater Standards Manual, for the category and priority of activity or facility owned or operated by that Discharger. All BMPs installed, implemented or maintained to meet the requirements of this Chapter must conform to the applicable specifications, if any, set out in the City Stormwater Standards Manual. 
B.  Existing Facilities. The City Stormwater Standards Manual sets out minimum BMPs and other objective specifications for specific types and categories of existing facilities and activities. Where minimum BMPs and objective specification are specified, they are mandatory. Where no minimum BMPs have been specified in the City Stormwater Standards Manuals for a type and category of facility or activity, only the requirements set out in this Chapter are applicable. Deviations from the minimum BMPs set out in the manuals are allowed in the following circumstances: (1) the City determines pursuant to Subsection 11.30.040.I. of this Chapter to issue an Order to require alternative BMPs, and provides the required written notice; or (2) a City Guidance Document prepared pursuant to Subsection 11.30.040.H. sets out additional compliance alternatives that may be used in lieu of the BMPs specified in the manuals, and the Discharger secures a permit enforceable by the City that requires the use of specific equally effective alternative BMPs. 
C.  Ministerial Land Development Projects. Requirements applicable to development projects requiring only the kinds of ministerial permits listed in Subsection 11.30.040.F.2. of this Chapter are set out in separately identified sections of the manuals. Other requirements in the manuals are not applicable to these projects during the development process. However, some additional requirements will apply to completed projects when they become subject to this Chapter as residential, commercial or industrial facilities. 
D.  Discretionary Land Development and Redevelopment Projects. The manuals set out minimum BMPs, other objective specifications, and Performance Standards for Land Development projects requiring one or more of discretionary permits listed in Subsection 11.30.040.F.1. of this Chapter. The minimum BMPs and other objective specifications in the manuals are applicable to both ministerial and discretionary land development projects. The Performance Standards in the manuals are applicable to projects that require a discretionary City permit or approval, and shall be implemented through specific permit conditions. Development project proponents must determine whether their project low impact development design, source control and any required treatment control BMPs will meet these Performance Standards for their facility or activity, and must redesign their project and/or install, implement and maintain additional BMPs where needed to meet applicable Performance Standards. 
(Ord. No. 908)  
11.30.140 - Additional Requirements for Land Disturbance Activities. 
A.  Permit Issuance. No land owner or development project proponent shall receive any City grading, clearing, building or other land development permit required for Land Disturbance Activity without first meeting the requirements of this Chapter with respect to the portion of the development project and the Land Disturbance Activity to which the permit at issue would apply. 
B.  Owners and Operators Both Responsible and Liable. Persons or entities performing Land Disturbance Activities (including but not limited to construction activities) in the City, and the owners of land on which Land Disturbance Activities are performed, are Dischargers for purposes of this Chapter; provided however that a local government or public authority is not a Discharger as to activities conducted by others in public rights-of-way. 
C.  Stormwater Management Plan. All applications to the City for a permit or approval associated with a Land Disturbance Activity must be accompanied by a Stormwater Management Plan, on a form or in a format specified by the City. The Stormwater Management Plan shall specify the manner in which the Discharger/Applicant will implement the BMPs required by this Chapter for the activity at issue, including but not limited to the applicable BMPs required by Subsection D. below. 
D.  Additional Minimum BMPs for Land Disturbance Activities. Whether a City permit or approval is required or not, and whether a Stormwater Management Plan is required to be submitted or not, all Discharges engaged in Land Disturbance Activities shall implement General Site Management and Erosion and Sediment Control BMPs as detailed in the City Stormwater Standards Manual. The BMPs shall be considered in the following additional areas if applicable to the project: 
1.  General Site Management. 
• Pollution prevention, where appropriate; 
• Development and implementation of a stormwater management plan; 
• Minimization of areas that are cleared and graded to only the portion of the site that is necessary for construction; 
• Minimization of exposure time of disturbed soil areas; 
• Minimization of grading during the rainy season and correlation of grading with seasonal dry weather periods to the extent feasible; 
• Limitation of grading to a maximum disturbed area as feasible for the site conditions and project phase before either temporary or permanent erosion controls are implemented to prevent stormwater pollution. The City may temporarily increasing the size of disturbed soil areas by a set amount beyond the defined maximum, if the individual site implemented initial adequate BMPs prevent stormwater pollution; 
• Temporary stabilization and reseeding of disturbed soil areas as rapidly as feasible; 
• Preservation of natural hydrologic features where feasible; 
• Preservation of riparian buffers and corridors where feasible; 
• Maintenance of all BMPs, until removed; and 
• Retention, reduction, and proper management of all pollutant discharges on site to the MEP standard. 
2.  Erosion and Sediment Controls. 
• Erosion prevention, as the primary BMP to keep sediment on site during construction; 
• Sediment controls, as a supplement BMPs to erosion prevention; 
• Slope stabilization on all inactive slopes during the rainy season and during rain events in the dry season; 
• Slope stabilization on all active slopes during rain events regardless of the season; and 
• Permanent revegetation or landscaping as early as feasible. 
E.  Advanced Treatment Control. The City will consider project Stormwater Management Plans using Advanced Treatment control for sediment as an alternative to the BMPs in Subsections 11.30.140.D.1. and 11.30.140.D.2. if the applicant can demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the City, that the Advanced Treatment Control is at least as effective as General Site Management and Erosion and Sediment Controls. 
F.  Control to the Maximum Extent Practicable. All Dischargers engaged in Land Disturbance Activities must install, implement and maintain those additional BMPs, if any that are needed to prevent or reduce pollutant discharges in stormwater from land disturbance to the MEP. 
G.  Notice of Intent. Dischargers required to comply with the State Construction General Stormwater Permit shall maintain on site and make available for inspection on request by the City any State-issued Waste Discharge Identification Number (WDID) for the site, and a copy of the Notice of Intent (NOI) filed with the SWRCB pursuant to that permit. 
H.  Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan. Dischargers required to prepare a SWPPP under the State General Construction Stormwater Permit must prepare the Plan, implement the Plan and maintain it at the site, readily available for review. Failure to comply with an applicable State-required SWPPP is a violation of this Chapter. 
I.  Facility Monitoring. Dischargers required to conduct monitoring under the State Construction General Stormwater Permit must conduct such monitoring in conformance with requirements specified by the State, retain records of such monitoring on site, and make such records available for inspection by an Authorized Enforcement Official or Authorized Enforcement Staff. 
(Ord. No. 752; Ord. No. 908)  
11.30.150 - Additional Planning, Design and Post-Construction Requirements for All Land Development and Redevelopment Projects. 
A.  Application to Development and Redevelopment Projects. No landowner or development project proponent in the City shall receive any City permit or approval listed in Subsection 11.30.040.F. of this Chapter for Land Development Activity or redevelopment activity unless the project meets or will meet the requirements of this Chapter. Post-Construction BMP requirements imposed by this section and by the City Stormwater Standards Manuals shall not apply to those physical aspects of the project that have been completed or substantially completed pursuant to and as required by a valid City permit or approval, at the time a complete application for a subsequent permit or approval is submitted. 
B.  Owners and Developers Responsible and Liable. Developers, Development Project Proponents, and Land Owners for land on which Development Activities are performed, are Dischargers for purposes of this Chapter; provided however that a local government or public authority is not a Discharger as to activities conducted by others in public rights-of-way. 
C.  Post-construction Best Management Practices Required. Land development and redevelopment projects with the potential to add pollutants to stormwater or to affect the flow rate or velocity of stormwater runoff after construction is completed, shall be designed to include and shall implement post-construction BMPs to ensure that pollutants and runoff from the development will be reduced to the MEP, will not significantly degrade receiving water quality, and will not cause or contribute to an exceedance of receiving water quality standards. 
D.  [Submittal of Plans; City Templates.] Post-construction BMPs shall be selected, designed, and sized for approval by the City as part of the development permit application by submitting the plans or documents specified in the City Stormwater Standards Manual and using the City templates or forms. 
E.  Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan. All applications to the City for a permit or approval associated with a land development or redevelopment activity must be accompanied by a Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan on a form or in a format specified by the City. The plan shall specify the manner in which the Discharger/Applicant will implement the post-construction BMPs required by this Chapter. The plan must address those aspects of the project that, at the time a complete application is submitted, are subject to further environmental review pursuant to Section 15162 of the California Environmental Quality Act. 
F.  Stormwater Management Plan Review Deposit. Stormwater Management Plan Review, including SWPPPs, fees may be set, from time to time, by resolution of the City Council. 
G.  Additional Minimum Post-Construction BMPs for Land Development Activities. Whether a City permit or approval is required or not, and whether a Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan is required to be submitted or not, all Dischargers engaged in land development or redevelopment activities in the City shall implement post-construction BMPs in the following areas if applicable to the project: 
1.  BMPs for permanent control of erosion from slopes. These BMPs can include structures to convey runoff safely from the tops of slopes, vegetation or alternative stabilization of all disturbed slopes, the use of natural drainage systems to the MEP, flow and velocity controls upstream of sites; and stabilization or permanent channel crossings, unless the crossing is not publicly accessible and is not frequently used. 
2.  BMPs to control flows, velocity and erosion. These BMPs can include but are not limited to the use of energy dissipaters, such as riprap, at the outlets of storm drains, culverts, conduits, or lined channels that enter unlined channels to minimize erosion; installation of retention or equalization basins, or other measures. Flow control and downstream erosion protection measures shall prevent any significant increase in downstream erosion as a result of the new development, but shall not prevent flows needed to sustain downstream riparian habitats or wetlands. 
3.  Pollution prevention and source control BMPs, to minimize the release of pollutants into Stormwater. 
4.  Site design BMPs, such as impervious surface minimization; and appropriate use of buffer areas to protect natural water bodies. 
5.  Site planning BMPs, such as siting and clustering of development to conserve natural areas to the extent practicable. 
6.  The installation of storm drain tiles or concrete stamping, and appropriate signage to discourage illegal discharges. 
7.  BMPs for trash storage and disposal and materials storage areas. 
8.  Structural BMPs to treat and/or to infiltrate stormwater where a development project would otherwise cause or contribute to a violation of water quality standards in receiving waters. Off-site structural BMPs may be used for treatment and infiltration necessary to meet water quality standards only if the conveyance of run-off to those facilities prior to treatment will not cause or contribute to an exceedance of water quality standards, or deprive wetlands or riparian habitats of needed flows. Offsite facilities shall not substitute for the use of any on-site source control BMPs required by the City Stormwater Standards Manuals. 
9.  When an Infiltration BMPs is used, related BMPs set out in the City Stormwater Standards Manuals (including but not limited to siting constraints), to protect present uses of ground water, and future uses of that ground water as currently designated in the applicable RWQCB Basin Plan. (Discharges to infiltration BMPs may also require an RWQCB permit, and additional State requirements may also be applicable to these discharges.) 
10.  Other applicable BMPs required by the City Stormwater Standards Manuals. 
H.  Control to the Maximum Extent Practicable. All Discharges engaged in Land Development and Redevelopment Activities shall install, implement and maintain post-construction BMPs as needed to prevent or reduce pollutant discharges in stormwater from land disturbance to the MEP. 
I.  Priority Development Projects. All priority development projects and redevelopment projects (including ministerial projects) shall be designed using the methods and including the studies and reviews described in the City Stormwater Standards Manual. 
(Ord. No. 752; Ord. No. 908)  
11.30.160 - Maintenance of BMPs. 
A.  Existing Development ..... .i Residential, commercial, industrial, agricultural and municipal dischargers shall maintain the BMPs implemented to achieve and maintain compliance with this Chapter. 
B.  New Development. The owners and occupants of lands on which structural post-construction BMPs have been installed to meet the requirements of this Chapter shall ensure the maintenance of those BMPs, and shall themselves maintain those BMPs if other persons or entities who are also obliged to maintain those BMPs (by contract or covenant, or pursuant to this Chapter) fail to do so. 
C.  Maintenance Obligations Assumed by Contract or Other Agreement. Primary responsibility to maintain a BMP may be transferred through a contract or other agreement. If that contract provides that it will be submitted to the City pursuant to this Chapter as part of a development permit application, and if that contract is so submitted, the person or entity accepting a maintenance obligation in such a contact or agreement will also be legally obliged to maintain that BMP pursuant to this Chapter. 
D.  Obligation to Maintain BMPs Not Avoided by Contracts or Other Agreements. For purposes of City enforcement, no contract or other agreement imposing an obligation to maintain a BMP can relieve a person or entity of any obligation to maintain a BMP imposed by this Chapter. 
E.  Disclosure of Maintenance Obligations. Any developer who transfers ownership of land on which a BMP is located or will be located, or who otherwise transfers ownership of a BMP or responsibility for the maintenance of a BMP to another person or entity, shall provide clear written notice of the maintenance obligations associated with that BMP to the new or additional responsible party prior to that transfer. 
F.  Maintenance Plans for Land Development Projects. The proponents of any land development project or redevelopment project that requires a discretionary City permit, shall provide to the City for review and approval prior to issuance of such permit, a plan for maintenance of all post-construction structural BMPs associated with the project. The plan shall specify the persons or entities responsible for maintenance activity, the persons or entities responsible for funding, schedules and procedures for inspection and maintenance of the BMPs, worker training requirements, and any other activities necessary to ensure BMP maintenance. The plan shall provide for servicing of all post-construction structural treatment BMPs at least annually and prior to the start of the rainy season, and for the retention of inspection and maintenance records for at least three years. 
G.  Access Easement/Agreement. The proponents of any land development project or redevelopment project that requires a discretionary City permit, shall provide to the City for review and approval prior to issuance of such permit an executed, permanent, easement onto the land on which post-construction structural BMPs will be located (and across other lands as necessary for access), to allow inspection, operation, and/or maintenance of those BMPs. 
H.  Assurance of Maintenance for Land Development Projects. The proponents of any land development or redevelopment project that requires a discretionary City permit, shall provide to the City prior to issuance of such permit, proof of a mechanism acceptable to the City which will ensure ongoing long-term maintenance of all structural post-construction BMPs associated with the proposed project. The proponents shall be responsible for maintenance of BMPs unless and until an alternative mechanism for ensuring maintenance is accepted by the City and becomes effective. 
(Ord. No. 908)  
11.30.170 - Inspection/Sampling. 
A.  Regulatory Inspections. Authorized Enforcement Officials and Authorized Enforcement Staff may inspect facilities, activities and residences subject to this Chapter at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner to carry out the purposes of this Chapter. If entry for a regulatory inspection is refused by the facility owner or operator, or by the occupant of a residence, an inspection warrant shall be obtained prior to inspection. 
B.  Access Easements. When any new structural BMP is installed on private property as part of a project that requires a City permit, in order to comply with this Chapter, the property owner shall grant to the City an easement to enter the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner to ensure that the BMP is working properly. This includes the right to enter the property without prior notice once per year for routine inspections, to enter as needed for additional inspections when the City has a reasonable basis to believe that the BMP is not working properly, to enter for any needed follow-up inspections, and to enter when necessary for abatement of a nuisance or correction of a violation of this Chapter. 
C.  Scope of Inspections. Inspections may include all actions necessary to determine whether any Illegal Discharges or Illegal Connections exist, whether the BMPs installed and implemented are adequate to comply with this Chapter, whether those BMPs are being properly operated and maintained, and whether the facility or activity complies with the other requirements of this Chapter. This may include but may not be limited to sampling, metering, visual inspections, and records review. Where samples are collected the owner or operator may request and receive split samples. Records, reports, analyses, or other information required under this Chapter may be inspected and copied, and photographs taken to document a condition and/or a violation of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 908)  
11.30.180 - Enforcement Authorized. 
Enforcement Officials and Authorized Enforcement Staff may enforce this Chapter and abate public nuisances as follows: 
A.  Administrative Authorities. 
1.  Administrative Penalties. Administrative penalties may be imposed pursuant to Del Mar Municipal Code Section 1.08.080 and Chapter 1.10. 
2.  Warning Notices. Written and/or verbal warning notices of a violation may be issued for any impending Violation or Violation of this Chapter including any Illegal Discharges and/or remove Illegal Connections. 
3.  Notices of Violation. Written and/or verbal notices of violation may be issued for any Violation of this Chapter including any Illegal Discharges and/or remove Illegal Connections. Issuance of a written and/or verbal Notice of Violation may also be subject to Enforcement provisions in Sections 1.08.010 through 1.08.050, and Administrative Citations in Chapter 1.10. 
4.  Cease and Desist Orders. Written and/or verbal orders may be issued to stop Illegal Discharges and/or remove Illegal Connections. 
5.  Notice and Order to Clean, Test, or Abate. Written and/or verbal orders may be issued to perform activities listed in Section 11.30.070 where conditions warrant. 
6.  Public Nuisance Abatement. Violations of this Chapter are deemed a threat to public health, safety, and welfare; and are identified as a public nuisance. If actions ordered pursuant to this chapter are not performed, the Authorized Enforcement Official may abate any public nuisance. City costs for pollution detection and abatement, if not paid in full by the Discharger in addition to any other penalties, may be made a lien against the property in accordance with this procedure. 
7.  Stop Work Orders. Whenever any work is being done contrary to the provisions of this Chapter, or other laws implemented through enforcement of this Chapter, an Authorized Enforcement Official may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on any person engaged in the doing or causing such work to be done, and any such person shall immediately stop such work until authorized by the Authorized Enforcement Official to proceed with the work. 
8.  Permit Suspension or Revocation. Violations of this Chapter may be grounds for permit and/or other City license suspension or revocation. 
B.  Judicial Authorities. 
1.  Civil Penalties and Remedies. The Del Mar City Attorney is hereby authorized to file civil actions in Superior Court to enforce this Chapter, seeking civil penalties and/or other remedies as provided in this section and in Section 11.30.200 of this Chapter. There is no requirement that administrative enforcement procedures be pursued before such actions are filed. 
2.  Injunctive Relief. Any violation of this Chapter may be enforced by a judicial action for injunctive relief. 
3.  Arrest or Issue Citations. The assistance of a peace officer may be enlisted to arrest violators as provided in California Penal Code, and/or a citation and notice to appear as prescribed in DMMC Chapter 1.08 and/or Title 3, Part 2 of the Penal Code, including Section 853.6 (or as amended) may be issued. There is no requirement that administrative enforcement authorities be used before such actions are filed. The immunities prescribed in Section 836.5 of the Penal Code are applicable to Authorized Enforcement Officials and Authorized Enforcement Staff acting in the course and scope of their employment pursuant to this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 908)  
11.30.190 - Other Acts and Omissions that are Violations. 
In addition to the violations identified in Sections 11.30.010 through 11.30.170 of this Chapter, the following acts and omissions are violations of this Chapter, whether committed by a Discharger or by another person or entity: 
A.  Causing, Permitting, Aiding, or Abetting Non-Compliance. Causing, permitting, aiding, or abetting non-compliance with any part of this Chapter constitutes a violation of this Chapter. 
B.  Concealment, Misrepresentation and False Statements. Any falsification or misrepresentation made to the City concerning compliance with this Chapter, including any misrepresentation in a voluntary disclosure, any submission of a report that omits required material facts without disclosing such omission, and any withholding of information required to be submitted by or pursuant to this Chapter in order to delay City enforcement action, is a violation of this Chapter. Concealing a violation of this Chapter is a violation of this Chapter. 
C.  Failure to Promptly Correct Non-compliance. Violations of this Chapter must be corrected with the time period specified by an Authorized Enforcement Official or Authorized Enforcement Staff. Each day (or part thereof) in excess of that period during which action necessary to correct a violation is not initiated and diligently pursued is a separate violation of this Chapter. 
D.  City Permits and SWPPPs. Any failure to conform to an applicable stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) prepared pursuant to this Chapter; any failure to comply with stormwater-related provisions of a City issued grading permit or grading plan prepared to secure such a permit; and any failure to comply with stormwater-related provisions in any other City permit or approval, is also a violation of this Chapter. For purposes of this Chapter a permit provision or condition of approval is "stormwater-related" if compliance with the provision or condition would have the effect of preventing or reducing contamination of stormwater or of moderating run-off flow rates or velocities, whether or not the provision or condition was initially imposed to promote those outcomes. 
(Ord. No. 908)  
11.30.200 - Penalties. 
A.  Administrative Penalties. Administrative penalties may be imposed pursuant to Del Mar Municipal Code Section 1.08.080 and Chapter 1.10 and shall also be applicable to Ordinance, unless otherwise provided therein. 
B.  Misdemeanor Penalties. Non-compliance with any part of this Chapter, other than Section 11.30.080 (Residential Activities), constitutes a misdemeanor and may be enforced and punished as prescribed in the Penal Code and Government Code of the State of California. 
C.  Penalties for Infractions. Authorized Enforcement Officials and Authorized Enforcement Staff may charge any violation of this Chapter as an infraction at their discretion. Infractions may be abated as a nuisance or enforced and punished as prescribed in the Penal Code and Government Code of the State of California. 
D.  For Civil Actions. In addition to other penalties and remedies permitted in this Chapter, a violation of this Chapter may result in civil actions. Except where a maximum monetary amount is specified, the following may also be awarded without monetary limitations in any civil action: 
• Injunctive relief; 
• Costs to investigate, inspect, monitor, survey, or litigate; 
• Costs to place or remove soils or erosion control materials, costs to correct any violation, and costs to restore environmental damage or to end any other adverse effects of a violation; 
• Compensatory damages for losses to the City or any other plaintiff caused by violations; and/or Restitution to third parties for losses caused by violations; and 
• Civil Penalties. 
As part of a civil action filed by the City to enforce provisions of this Chapter, a court may assess a maximum civil penalty of $2,500.00 per violation of this Chapter for each day during which any violation of any provision of this Chapter is committed, continued, permitted or maintained by such person(s). 
In determining the amount of any civil liability to be imposed pursuant to this Chapter, the superior court shall take into consideration the nature, circumstances, extent, and gravity of the violation or violations, whether any discharge caused the violation is susceptible to cleanup or abatement, and, with respect to the violator, the ability to pay, the effect on ability to continue in business, any voluntary cleanup efforts undertaken, any prior history of violations, the degree of culpability, economic savings, if any resulting from the violation, an such other matters as justice may require. 
Penalties and Remedies Not Exclusive. Penalties and remedies under this Article may be cumulative and in addition to other administrative, civil or criminal remedies. 
(Ord. No. 908)  
Chapter 11.32 - CLEAN WATER STORM DRAIN PROGRAM—GENERAL 
 
11.32.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this Section: 
A.  Consumer means any person who uses the water, sewer and storm drain systems of the City of Del Mar. 
B.  Department means the Department of Public Works of the City. Action of the Department may be taken by the Director of Public Works or his duly authorized representative. 
C.  General Business/Institutional shall mean all businesses, offices, governmental agencies offices and any other similar user not otherwise included in another category. 
D.  Hotel/Motel means all living units of a transient nature including hotel and motel rental room units, and also living units of a permanent nature which do not contain any kitchen facilities. Excluded from the category are Major Full Service Hotels. 
E.  Major Full Service Hotel shall mean a full service facility having rooms, restaurant(s) and/or bars serving food, and/or providing room service from an onsite kitchen. 
F.  Person means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. The masculine gender shall include the feminine, the singular shall include the plural where indicated by the context. 
G.  Residential shall refer to all living or dwelling units (as defined by the Uniform Building Code) of a permanent nature, rather than transient nature, including single-family residences, apartments, manufactured homes, townhouses and condominiums. 
H.  Restaurants shall mean all establishments whose principal activity involves on-premise service of meals and food, including coffee shops and cafes. Also included in this category are bakeries of baked goods onsite. 
I.  Shopping Center shall be defined as more than one commercial unit connected to the same water meter where at least one business exists whose principal activity falls into the restaurant category. 
(Ord. No. 755)  
11.32.015 - Service Charges—Notice of Hearing. 
The service charges for each residential, commercial or other persons using the storm drain system of the City shall be fixed by ordinance of the City Council, following notice of hearing pursuant to California Government Code § 54354.5.  
11.32.020 - Same—Billing and Payment. 
All Clean Water Program charges imposed under the provisions of this Chapter shall be due and payable at the time and in the manner provided for the payment of water and sewer bills. Such Clean Water charges shall be on the same bill on which the water and sewer are billed, and shall be subject to the same penalties for delinquency. Such combined bill for water consumed, for sewer service, and for the Clean Water program shall be paid in its entirety and may not be severed for the separate payment of any portion thereof.  
11.32.030 - Service Charges. 
The service charges for use of the storm drain system of the City shall be imposed upon all residential, commercial, and institutional consumers of the City's water service, set forth in Title 21 of this Code. The service charges shall be based on subsequent past meter sizes and commodity changes set forth in Titles 21 and 22 of this Code, and as set forth below: 
A.  Monthly Commodity Charge. The monthly commodity charge for residential, commercial, and institutional customers is based on 100 percent of water furnished, as measured through a water meter. The rate per unit (100 cubic feet "HCF") of water used shall be set as follows effective on January 1 of the years identified below: 
1/1/15 	1/1/16 	1/1/17 	1/1/18 	1/1/19 
$0.52 	$0.58 	$0.64 	$0.69 	$0.72 
 
B.  Monthly Service Charge. 
1.  Single-Family. The monthly fixed Clean Water Program service charge for single-family residences shall be set as follows, regardless of meter size, effective on January 1 of the years identified below: 
1/1/15 	1/1/16 	1/1/17 	1/1/18 	1/1/19 
$9.04 	$9.99 	$11.02 	$12.01 	$12.52 
 
2.  Multi-Family, Commercial, Institutional. The monthly rates shall be effective on January 1 of the years identified below: 
Meter 
Size 	1/1/15 	1/1/16 	1/1/17 	1/1/18 	1/1/19 
?" 	$9.04 	$9.99 	$11.02 	$12.01 	$12.52 
¾" 	14.13 	15.62 	17.22 	18.76 	19.56 
1" 	22.60 	24.99 	27.55 	30.01 	31.30 
1½" 	42.38 	46.85 	51.66 	56.28 	58.68 
2" 	73.45 	81.20 	89.54 	97.54 	101.71 
3" 	135.60 	149.91 	165.30 	180.08 	187.78 
 
3.  Sewer Only Customer. The monthly rates shall be increased yearly beginning January 1, 2015 and thereafter as identified below: 
	1/1/15 	1/1/16 	1/1/17 	1/1/18 	1/1/19 
Commodity Rate 	$0.52 	$0.58 	$0.64 	$0.69 	$0.72 
Service 	9.04 	9.99 	11.02 	12.01 	12.52 
Total/month 	9.56 	10.57 	11.66 	12.70 	13.24 
 
(Ord. No. 756; Ord. No. 819; Ord. No. 903)  
11.32.040 - Application of Revenues. 
Revenues derived under the provisions of this Chapter shall be used only for the operations, construction, re-construction, and maintenance of the Clean Water Program.  
11.32.050 - Notice to be Given When Premises are Vacated in Order for Water to be Cut Off. 
In case a house or place of business becomes vacant, the regular minimum Clean Water charge shall be charged and collected from the owner or the occupant of the property until the day upon which the office of the department is notified in writing of the fact that the property is unoccupied, and is requested to shut off water and sanitary service.  
Chapter 11.36 - SINGLE-USE PLASTIC CARRY-OUT BAG USE REDUCTION 
 
11.36.010 - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this Chapter is to protect the health, safety and general welfare of City of Del Mar residents and visitors; to conserve natural resources, to reduce beach litter and marine pollution, and to protect local wildlife. 
(Ord. No. 915 , § 1, 5-16-2016)  
11.36.020 - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall be applicable when the following words or phrases are used hereafter in this Chapter, whether or not these words or phrases are capitalized: 
Bag Cost Pass-Through means the cost which must be collected by retailers from their customers when providing a recycled paper bag or reusable bag. 
Food Vendor means any person or establishment in the City of Del Mar, that provides prepared food for public consumption on or off its premises and includes, without limitation, any store, shop, sales outlet, restaurant, grocery store, delicatessen, or catering truck or vehicle. 
Garment Bag means a bag designed to transport and protect suits, dresses, coats, or like without crushing or wrinkling. 
Grocery Store means any retail establishment that sells groceries, fresh, packaged, canned, dry, prepared or frozen food or beverage products and similar items, and includes without limitation, supermarkets, convenience stores, liquor stores and gasoline stations. 
Non-Profit Vendor means a recognized tax exempt organization which provides goods as part of its services. 
Pharmacy means any retail store, where prescriptions, medications, controlled or over the counter drugs, personal care products or health supplement goods or vitamins are sold, but excluding any licensed pharmacy located within a hospital. 
Product Bag means any bag, provided to a customer for use at a retail establishment or the Farmers Market to assist in the collection or transport of products such as liquid-based take-out foods, produce, bulk items, meat, fish or poultry to protect a purchased item from causing damage or contamination. 
Recyclable Paper Bag means a paper bag that meets all of the following requirements: 
A.  Contains no old growth fiber; 
B.  Is 100 percent recyclable overall and contains a minimum of 40 percent post-consumer recycled material; 
C.  Is capable of composting, consistent with the timeline and specifications of the American Society of Testing and Materials (ASTM) Standard D6400; 
D.  Is accepted for recycling in curbside programs in the City; 
E.  Has printed on the bag the name of the manufacturer, the location where the bag was manufactured, and the percentage of post-consumer recycled material used; and 
F.  Displays the word "Recyclable" in a highly visible manner on the outside of the bag. 
Restaurant means any person or establishment doing business within the City of Del Mar that provides prepared food or beverages for consumption on or off its premises such as a restaurant, café, bakery, grocery or convenience store food counter or delicatessen, or catering truck vehicle. 
Retail Establishment means any person, including any corporation, partnership, business, facility, vendor, organization or individual that sells or provides merchandise, goods, services, or materials, including, without limitation, clothing, food, or personal items of any kind, directly to a customer; retail establishment includes, without limitation, any grocery store, department store, hardware store, pharmacy, liquor store, restaurant, catering truck, convenience store, and any other retail store or vendor. 
Reusable Bag means a bag with handles that is specifically designed and manufactured for multiple reuse and meets all of the following requirements: 
A.  Is machine washable or is made from a material that can be cleaned or disinfected; 
B.  Is manufactured in compliance with State, Federal, and local laws; and 
C.  If made of plastic, is a minimum of at least two and one-fourth mils thick. 
Single-Use Plastic Carry-Out Bag means any bag that is less than two and one-fourth mils thick and is made predominately of plastic derived from petroleum or from bio-based sources, such as corn or other plant sources. 
Vendor means any store, shop, restaurant, sales outlet or other commercial establishment located within or doing business within the City of Del Mar, which provides perishable or nonperishable goods. 
(Ord. No. 915 , § 2, 5-16-2016)  
11.36.030 - Prohibitions. 
A.  No Retail Establishment in the City shall provide a Single-Use Plastic Carry-Out Bag to a customer unless otherwise permitted pursuant to DMMC Section 11.36.050. 
B.  No Retail Establishment in the City shall provide any type of bag to a customer at the point of sale except a Reusable Bag or a Recycled Paper Bag unless otherwise permitted pursuant to DMMC Section 11.36.050. 
C.  No person shall distribute a Single-Use Plastic Carry-Out Bag at any City Facility, City-managed concession, City sponsored event, or City permitted event unless otherwise permitted pursuant to DMMC Section 11.36.050. 
D.  No person shall distribute a Single-Use Plastic Carry-Out Bag at any Farmers Market within the City of Del Mar unless otherwise permitted pursuant to DMMC Section 11.36.050. 
E.  Nothing in this Chapter shall prohibit the provision of bags, including plastic carry-out bags, as may be necessary to comply with the California Retail Food Code or any other State or Federal law. 
(Ord. No. 915 , § 3, 5-16-2016)  
11.36.040 - Incentives for use of reusable bags. 
A.  Affected retail establishments are strongly encouraged to provide incentives for the use of reusable bags through passing through the cost of recyclable paper bags and/or reusable bags, through credits or rebates for customers that use reusable bags, and/or through education. Such incentives may include one or more of the following: 
1.  An affected Retail Establishment may provide a Recyclable Paper Bag or a Reusable Bag to a customer if it collects a Bag Cost Pass-through from the customer for each Recyclable Paper Bag or Reusable Bag provided. The Bag Cost Pass-Through for Recyclable Paper Bags and Reusable Bags shall be at least $0.10 each. 
2.  Rebate. An affected retail establishment may rebate or otherwise reimburse a customer for use of a reusable bag brought with them to the point of sale prior to the transaction instead of needing a new Reusable Bag or Recyclable Paper Bag. 
3.  Education. Each retail establishment is strongly encouraged to educate its staff to promote reusable bags and to post signs encouraging customers to use reusable bags or to choose to not receive a bag at all. 
(Ord. No. 915 , § 4, 5-16-2016)  
11.36.050 - Exemptions. 
Notwithstanding the requirements contained in DMMC 11.36.030: 
A.  A retail establishment shall provide a customer participating in the California Special Supplemental Food Program for Women, Infants, and Children pursuant to Article 2 (commencing with Section 123275) of Chapter 1 of Part 2 of Division 106 of the California Health and Safety Code and a customer participating in the Supplemental Food Program pursuant to Chapter 10 (commencing with Section 15500) of Part 3 of Division 9 of the California Welfare and Institutions Code, with a reusable bag or a recycled paper bag at no cost at the point of sale. 
B.  The City Manager, or his or her designee, may exempt an affected retail establishment, vendor or non-profit vendor from the requirements of this chapter for a period of up to one additional year after the operative date of this Chapter, upon sufficient showing by the applicant that the provisions of this Chapter would cause undue hardship. The phrase undue hardship includes: 
1.  Situations where there are no acceptable alternatives to plastic carry-out bags for reasons which are unique to the retail establishment, vendor, or non-profit vendor; 
2.  Situations where compliance with the requirements of this code would deprive a person of a legally protected right. 
C.  The provision of Product Bags as defined in this Chapter and Garment Bags by dry cleaners are not prohibited. 
D.  The provision of single-use bags for the collection and disposal of pet waste is not prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 915 , § 5, 5-16-2016)  
11.36.060 - Remedies. 
A.  The City Manager, or his or her designee, is authorized to establish regulations and to take any and all actions reasonable and necessary to obtain compliance with this Chapter, including, but not limited to, inspecting any retail establishment's premises to verify compliance. 
B.  The City Manager, or his or her designee, may require a business to disclose the manufacturer they are purchasing their Reusable Bags from and to provide the specifications describing the materials from which the bag is made and/or the thickness of plastic of the bag (if applicable) to verify the bag meets the Reusable Bag definition requirements. 
C.  The City Manager, or his or her designee, may allow businesses to request an extension to deplete their current inventory of single-use plastic carry out bags. 
D.  Any person violating this section shall be guilty of an infraction, which shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $100.00 for the first offense, $200.00 for the second offense within one year, and $500.00 for each additional violation within one year; or a misdemeanor, which shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding six months or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
E.  The City Attorney may seek legal, injunctive, or other equitable relief to enforce this chapter. 
F.  Administrative enforcement of this Chapter shall proceed pursuant to Del Mar Municipal Code Chapter 1.08. 
G.  Each violation of this Chapter shall be considered a separate offense. 
H.  The remedies and penalties provided in this Section are cumulative and not exclusive, and nothing in this Chapter shall preclude any person from pursuing any other remedies provided by law. 
I.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter, this Chapter may be enforced through any remedy as provided for in this Section upon its effective date. 
(Ord. No. 915 , § 6, 5-16-2016)  
11.36.070 - Effective date. 
This Chapter shall become effective and operative as to: 
A.  Retail stores including grocery stores, pharmacies, City facilities, non-profit vendors, and all other retail establishments except for restaurants, food vendors, farmer's markets, and catering food trucks six months after its adoption by the City Council. 
B.  Restaurants, food vendors, catering food trucks, and farmer's markets 12 months after its adoption by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 915 , § 7, 5-16-2016)  
Chapter 11.40 - USE OF EXPANDED POLYSTRENE AND NON-RECYCLABLE PLASTIC DISPOSABLE FOOD SERVICE WARE 
 
11.40.010 - Purpose and Intent. 
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish standards and procedures for environmental waste and litter reduction measures, plan and promote environmentally sustainable practices throughout the City by prohibiting the use of expanded polystyrene and non-recyclable plastic disposable food service ware by food providers, businesses and vendors within the City of Del Mar. 
(Ord. No. 944 , § 1, 12-3-2018)  
11.40.020 - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall be applicable when the following words or phrases are used hereafter in this Chapter, whether or not these words or phrases are capitalized: 
Biodegradable refers to the ability of a material to decompose into elements normally found in nature within a reasonably short period of time after disposal. 
City means the City of Del Mar. 
City contractor means any person that enters into an agreement with the City to furnish products or services to or for the City. 
City facility means any building, structure, property, park, open space, or vehicle, owned, leased or operated by the City, its agents, agencies, departments or franchisees. 
City-sponsored event means any event, activity or meeting organized or sponsored, in whole or in part, by the City or any department of the City. 
Customer means any person obtaining prepared food from a restaurant or retail food vendor. 
Disposable food service ware or disposables means single-use disposable products used in the restaurant and food service industry for serving or transporting prepared, ready-to-consume food or beverages. This includes but is not limited to plates, cups or drinkware, bowls, trays, wrappers or wrapping, platters, cartons, condiment containers, hinged or lidded containers or any other container in or on which prepared foods are placed or packaged for consumption. This does not include single-use disposable items such as straws, cup lids, or utensils, nor does it include single-use disposable packaging for unprepared foods. 
Event means an organized recreational activity that includes 25 or more participants. 
Expanded polystyrene (EPS) means polystyrene that has been expanded or "blown" using a gaseous blowing agent into a solid foam. EPS is sometimes called "Styrofoam," a Dow Chemical Co. trademark form of polystyrene foam insulation. 
Food provider means any person or establishment that provides or sells prepared food within the City to the general public to be consumed on the premises or for take-away consumption. Food provider includes but is not limited to (1) a grocery store, supermarket, delicatessen, restaurant, café, cafeteria, coffee shop, snack shop, public food market, farmers' market, convenience store, or similar fixed place where prepared food is available for sale on the premises or for take-away consumption; and (2) any mobile store, food vendor, caterer, food truck, vending machine or similar mobile outlet. Food provider also includes any organization, group or individual that regularly provides prepared food to its members or the general public as a part of its activities or services. 
Non-recyclable plastic refers to any plastic which cannot be feasibly recycled by a municipal recycling program in the state of California, including polystyrene and expanded polystyrene. 
Person means any person, business corporation, or event organizer or promoter; public, nonprofit or private entity, agency or institution; or partnership, association or other organization group, however organized. 
Polystyrene means and includes expanded polystyrene which is a thermoplastic petrochemical material utilizing a styrene monomer and processed by any number of techniques including, but not limited to, fusion of polymer spheres (expandable bead polystyrene), injection molding, form molding, and extrusion-blow molding (extruded foam polystyrene). The term "polystyrene" also includes clear or solid polystyrene which is known as "oriented polystyrene." 
Prepared food means any food or beverage that is (1) ready to consume without any further food preparation, alteration or repackaging; and (2) prepared, provided, sold or served by a food provider using any cooking, packaging or food preparation technique. Prepared food may be eaten either on or off the food provider's premises. For purposes of this Chapter, prepared food does not include (1) any raw uncooked meat, poultry, fish or eggs, unless provided for consumption without further food preparation; and (2) fresh produce provided for consumption without food preparation or repackaging, including fruits, vegetables, and herbs, sold by grocery stores, supermarkets, food markets, farmers' markets and other food vendors. 
Recyclable plastic means any plastic which can be feasibly recycled by a municipal recycling program in the state of California. 
Restaurant means any person or establishment doing business within the City of Del Mar that provides prepared food or beverages for consumption on or off its premises such as a restaurant, cafe, bakery, grocery or convenience store food counter or delicatessen, or catering truck vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 944 , § 2, 12-3-2018)  
11.40.030 - Prohibition on Use of Non-recyclable Plastic Disposable Food Service Ware. 
A.  Except as provided in DMMC Section 11.40.050 food providers are prohibited from dispensing prepared food to customers in disposable food service ware made from expanded polystyrene (EPS). 
B.  Except as provided in DMMC Section 11.40.050 food providers are prohibited from dispensing prepared food to customers in disposable food service ware made from non-recyclable plastic. 
C.  All City facilities, City-managed concessions, City-sponsored and co-sponsored events, and City-permitted events are prohibited from using disposable food service ware made from expanded polystyrene or non-recyclable plastic within the City. 
(Ord. No. 944 , § 3, 12-3-2018)  
11.40.040 - Prohibition on Expanded Polystyrene Packing Materials. 
No business or vendor in the City, unless exempt pursuant to Section 11.40.050, shall use expanded polystyrene loose-fill packaging and cushioning material, such as foam peanuts, packing peanuts, foam popcorn or packing noodles, in the packaging of products, equipment or other items. 
(Ord. No. 944 , § 4, 12-3-2018)  
11.40.050 - Exemptions. 
A.  Automatic Exemptions. The following uses are exempt from the provisions of this Chapter: 
1.  Food prepared or packaged outside the City, provided such food is not altered, packaged or repackaged within the City limits. Purveyors of food prepared or packaged outside the City are encouraged to follow the provisions of this Section. 
2.  Products, equipment, or other items prepared or packaged outside the City of Del Mar. 
3.  Polystyrene coolers and ice chests or other food containers intended for reuse. 
B.  Food providers that are obligated to purchase or have purchased EPS food service ware under a contract entered into with the year prior to the operative date of the ordinance codified in this Chapter are exempt from the provisions of this Chapter for six months following its operative date. 
C.  Undue Hardship. The City Manager, or designee, may exempt any food provider or person from the requirements of this Chapter for a one-year period, upon written request by applicant that the conditions of this Chapter would cause undue hardship following the operative date of the ordinance codified in this Chapter, as follows: 
1.  A request for an exemption shall be filed in writing with the City Manager or designee and shall include documentation of the reason for the claimed exemption and any other information necessary for the City to make its decision. An exemption application shall include all information necessary for the City to make its decision, including, but not limited to, documentation showing the factual support for the claimed exemption. The City may require the applicant to provide additional information as necessary to make the required determinations. 
2.  The City Manager or designee may approve the exemption application for one year, with or without conditions, upon finding that compliance would create an undue hardship. Undue hardship shall be construed to include, but not limited to, situations where: 
a.  Situations unique to the food provider or non-food provider where there are no reasonable alternatives to expanded polystyrene or non-recyclable plastic disposable food service containers and compliance with this Chapter would cause significant economic hardship to that food provider; 
b.  Situations where no reasonably feasible available alternatives exist to a specific and necessary expanded polystyrene or non-recyclable plastic disposable food service container. 
3.  A food provider granted an exemption by the City must reapply prior to the end of the one-year exemption period and demonstrate continued undue hardship, if it wishes to have the exemption extended. Extensions may only be granted for intervals not to exceed one year. 
4.  Exemption decisions by the City Manager or designee are effective immediately and final and are not appealable. 
5.  The City Council may by resolution establish a fee for exemption applications. The application fee shall be an amount sufficient to cover the costs of processing the exemption application. 
D.  This Chapter does not apply to activities on the property of the 22nd District Agricultural Association (Fairgrounds) lying within the City of Del Mar boundaries, although the City encourages the Fairgrounds to impose similar requirements on all its facilities. 
(Ord. No. 944 , § 5, 12-3-2018)  
11.40.060 - Enforcement and Administrative Remedies. 
A.  The City Manager, or designee, is authorized to establish regulations and to take any and all actions reasonable and necessary to obtain compliance with this Chapter, including, but not limited to, inspecting any food provider and commercial business premises to verify compliance. 
B.  Any violation of this Chapter shall be enforced through the administrative citation program set forth in Chapter 1.10 of the Del Mar Municipal Code. 
C.  Each violation of this Chapter shall be considered a separate offense. 
D.  The remedies and penalties provided in this Section are cumulative and not exclusive, and nothing in this Chapter shall preclude any person from pursuing any other remedies provided by law. The City Attorney may seek legal, injunctive, or other equitable relief to enforce the provisions of this Chapter and any regulations or administrative procedure developed pursuant hereto. 
In addition to any other applicable civil or criminal penalty, any person convicted of a violation of this Chapter shall be guilty of an infraction, which shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $250.00, or a misdemeanor, which shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding six months or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
E.  Administrative enforcement of this Chapter shall proceed pursuant to Chapter 1.10 of the DMMC. 
F.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter, this Chapter may be enforced through any remedy as provided for in this Section upon its effective date. 
(Ord. No. 944 , § 6, 12-3-2018)  
Chapter 11.44 - PROHIBITING THE USAGE OF PLASTIC STRAWS AND STIRRERS, AND PROHIBITING THE DISTRIBUTION OF PAPER, BIODEGRADABLE OR REUSABLE STRAWS UNLESS REQUESTED BY CUSTOMER 
 
11.44.010 - Purpose and Intent. 
The purpose of this Chapter is to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the City of Del Mar residents and visitors; conserve natural resources, reduce beach litter and marine pollution, protect local wildlife, and to increase awareness in our citizens of what they can do to reduce waste. 
(Ord. No. 946 , § 1, 3-4-2019)  
11.44.020 - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall be applicable when the following words or phrases are used hereafter in this Chapter, whether or not these words or phrases are capitalized: 
Plastic straw means a tube made of plastic for transferring a beverage from its container to the mouth of the drinker. 
Paper or biodegradable straw means a tube made of paper or of biodegradable material for transferring a beverage from its container to the mouth of the drinker. 
Reusable straw means a tube made of metal or other durable material that will be used repeatedly for transferring a beverage from its container to the mouth of the drinker. 
Person means an individual, business, event promoter, trust, firm, joint stock company, corporation, non-profit, including a government corporation, partnership, or association. 
Prepared food means food or beverage prepared for consumption on the restaurant's premises, using any cooking or food preparation technique. 
Restaurant means any vendor located or providing food within the City of Del Mar which provides prepared food for public consumption on or off its premises. 
Single-use means a product that is designed to be only used one time in its same form by the customer, food vendor or other entity. 
(Ord. No. 946 , § 2, 3-4-2019)  
11.44.030 - Straws Upon Request Only. 
Six months after the effective date of this ordinance by the City Council, restaurants shall not provide plastic straws or stirrers to their customers, and if customers request a straw, they will be provided with a paper, biodegradable or reusable straw. 
(Ord. No. 946 , § 3, 3-4-2019)  
11.44.040 - Exemptions. 
A.  Restaurants that are obligated to purchase or have purchased plastic straws under a contract entered into within the year prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Chapter are exempt from the provisions of this Chapter for six months following its operative date. 
B.  Undue Hardship. The City Manager, or designee, may exempt any Restaurant or person from the requirements of this Chapter for a one-year period, upon written request by applicant that the conditions of this Chapter would cause undue hardship following the operative date of the ordinance codified in this Chapter, as follows: 
1.  A request for an exemption shall be filed in writing with the City Manager or designee and shall include documentation of the reason for the claimed exemption and any other information necessary for the City to make its decision. An exemption application shall include all information necessary for the City to make its decision, including, but not limited to, documentation showing the factual support for the claimed exemption. The City may require the applicant to provide additional information as necessary to make the required determinations. 
2.  The City Manager or designee may approve the exemption application for one year, with or without conditions, upon finding that compliance would create an undue hardship. Undue hardship shall be construed to include, but not limited to, situations where: 
a.  Situations unique to the restaurant or individual where there are no reasonable alternatives to plastic straws and compliance with this Chapter would cause significant economic hardship to that restaurant or individual; 
b.  Situations where no reasonably feasible available alternatives exist to the use of plastic straws. 
3.  A restaurant granted an exemption by the City must reapply prior to the end of the one-year exemption period and demonstrate continued undue hardship, if it wishes to have the exemption extended. Extensions may only be granted for intervals not to exceed one year. 
4.  Exemption decisions by the City Manager or designee are effective immediately and final and are not appealable. 
5.  The City Council may by resolution establish a fee for exemption applications. The application fee shall be an amount sufficient to cover the costs of processing the exemption application. 
C.  This Chapter does not apply to activities on the property of the 22nd District Agricultural Association (Fairgrounds) lying within the City of Del Mar boundaries, although the City encourages the Fairgrounds to impose similar requirements on all its facilities. 
(Ord. No. 946 , § 4, 3-4-2019)  
11.44.050 - Enforcement and Administrative Remedies. 
A.  The City Manager, or designee, is authorized to establish regulations and to take any and all actions reasonable and necessary to obtain compliance with this Chapter, including, but not limited to, inspecting any food provider and commercial business premises to verify compliance. 
B.  Any violation of this Chapter shall be enforced through the administrative citation program set forth in Chapter 1.10 of the Del Mar Municipal Code. 
C.  Each violation of this Chapter shall be considered a separate offense. 
D.  The remedies and penalties provided in this Section are cumulative and not exclusive, and nothing in this Chapter shall preclude any person from pursuing any other remedies provided by law. The city attorney may seek legal, injunctive, or other equitable relief to enforce the provisions of this Chapter and any regulations or administrative procedure developed pursuant hereto. 
E.  In addition to any other applicable civil or criminal penalty, any person convicted of a violation of this Chapter shall be guilty of an infraction, which shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $250.00, or a misdemeanor, which shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00. 
F.  Administrative enforcement of this Chapter shall proceed pursuant to Chapter 1.10 of the Del Mar Municipal Code. 
G.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter, this Chapter may be enforced through any remedy as provided for in this Section upon its effective date. 
(Ord. No. 946 , § 5, 3-4-2019)  
TITLE 14 - TRAFFIC CODE  
Chapter 14.04 - TRAFFIC CONTROL 
 
14.04.010 - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this Title to establish the regulations governing traffic within the City. 
(Ord. No. 508)  
14.04.020 - Definitions. 
A.  The definition of words and phrases contained in the Vehicle Code of the State of California are deemed to apply to such words and phrases as used in this Title unless a broader meaning is ascribed in this Title. 
B.  Highway shall mean the entire width between boundary lines of every way set apart for public travel when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
C.  Holidays shall mean the holidays designated by the City Council. 
D.  Road Commissioner shall mean the City Manager or the Manager's designee. 
E.  Road Department shall mean the City's Department of Public Works. 
F.  State shall mean the State of California. 
G.  In applying those provisions of the San Diego County Traffic Code incorporated herein by reference, the terms used therein shall have the meaning ascribed to them in the San Diego County Traffic Code except: 
1.  Board or Board of Supervisors shall mean the City Council. 
2.  County shall mean "City." 
3.  County Highway shall mean "City street." 
4.  County Traffic Code shall mean "Title 14." 
5.  Division shall mean "Chapter."  
14.04.030 - Enforcement. 
A.  Any person performing any act forbidden or failing to perform any act required by this Title shall be deemed guilty of an infraction. 
B.  Each day on which a violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
C.  No person shall be found in violation of a regulation of this Title unless a traffic control device or sign has been established to give notice of the regulation.  
14.04.040 - Exemptions. 
A.  The provisions of this Title regulating the operation, parking, or standing of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle that has qualified under the Vehicle Code as an authorized emergency vehicle, when such vehicle is operated in the manner specified in the California Vehicle in response to an emergency call. 
B.  The provisions of this Title regulating parking or standing of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle necessarily in use for construction or repair work on any highway. 
C.  The provisions of this Title regulating parking or standing of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle owned by the United States Postal Service while in use for the collection, transportation or delivery of the United States mail.  
14.04.050 - Nonexclusive Jurisdiction. 
Whenever a regulation is proposed in accordance with this Title on any street or highway not under the exclusive jurisdiction of the City, a draft of the regulation shall first be submitted to the Department of Transportation for approval prior to the enactment thereof. (Vehicle Code §§ 21104, 21353)  
Chapter 14.06 - MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS 
 
14.06.010 - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this Chapter to provide additional regulations controlling traffic. 
(Ord. No. 508)  
14.06.020 - Adoption of Code by Reference. 
There is hereby adopted by reference, by the City of Del Mar, for the purpose of prescribing rules and regulations for the control of traffic within the City of Del Mar, the following portions of the San Diego Traffic Code, together with such secondary references as are included in those portions, effective as of the date set forth in Section 14.06.030 below. The provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the City of Del Mar to include, without limitation, regulatory provisions, and definitions. 
A.  Title 7, Division 2, Article 18 commencing with Section 72.230 through 72.249 regarding miscellaneous regulations. 
B.  Title 7, Division 2, Article 16, Sections 72.210 and 72.211 regarding weight and speed limits on bridges. 
C.  Title 7, Division 2, Article 4 relating to turning movements. 
D.  Title 7, Division 2, Article 5 relating to one-way streets. 
E.  Title 7, Division 2, Article 6 relating to stop and yield intersections.  
14.06.030 - Effective Date. 
The effective date of these regulations is July 18, 1990. 
(Ord. No. 563)  
14.06.040 - Destruction or Removal of Traffic Control Devices. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to maliciously tear down, damage, mutilate, deface or destroy any sign, notice or traffic control device erected under the authority of this Title. 
B.  Any person who willfully or negligently damages any traffic control device is liable for the reasonable cost of the repair or the replacement thereof. (Vehicle Code § 17300)  
14.06.050 - Operating Vehicles on Private or Public Property. 
No person shall operate or drive a motor vehicle, motorcycle, mini-bike, dune buggy, motor scooter, jeep or other form of motorized transportation upon the private property of another or upon any public property, which is not held open to the public for any vehicular use and which is not subject to provisions of the Vehicle Code, without having, and upon request of a peace officer, displaying written permission from the owner of such property or his agent or the person in lawful possession thereof, provided, however, the provisions of this Section shall not apply to emergency vehicles, governmental agencies or to other persons driving upon such property with the written consent of the owner or person in lawful possession of such property, or to the owner himself, his family, employees, agents or lessees.  
Chapter 14.08 - SPEED LAWS 
 
14.08.010 - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this Chapter to establish regulations to control the speed of vehicles in accordance with the authority granted to the City by the Vehicle Code of the State of California. 
(Ord. No. 508)  
14.08.020 - Streets. 
A.  The City Council may establish by ordinance a speed limit greater than 25 miles per hour for any street that would otherwise be subject to the State's limit of 25 miles per hour. (Vehicle Code § 22357) 
B.  The City Council may establish by ordinance a speed limit of less than 65 miles per hour for any street that would otherwise be subject to the State limit of 65 miles per hour. (Vehicle Code § 22358)  
14.08.030 - School Area. 
The City Council may establish by resolution a speed limit of less than 25 miles per hour for any street near a school that would otherwise be subject to the State limit of 25 miles per hour. (Vehicle Code § 22358.4)  
14.08.040 - Business/Residential/Park Areas and Narrow Streets. 
The City Council may establish by resolution a speed limit of less than 25 miles per hour for any street in a business or residential area or in a park, or having a width of business or residential area or in a park or having a width of 25 feet or less than would otherwise be subject to the State limit of 25 miles per hour. (Vehicle Code § 22358.3)  
14.08.050 - On Grades. 
The City Council may establish by ordinance a speed limit of less than 25 miles per hour on any street having a grade in excess of ten percent that would otherwise be subject to the State limit of 25 miles per hour. (Vehicle Code § 22413)  
14.08.060 - Large Trucks. 
The City Council may establish by resolution a speed limit of less than 55 miles per hour for large trucks on any street that would otherwise be subject to the State limit of 55 miles per hour. (Vehicle Code § 22407)  
14.08.070 - Bridges. 
The City Council may establish by resolution a speed limit of not less than five miles per hour for any bridge, elevated structure, tube or tunnel. (Vehicle Code §§ 22403, 22404 and 22405)  
Chapter 14.12 - TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES 
 
14.12.010 - Purpose. 
A.  It is the purpose of this Chapter to establish the procedures for placement of traffic control devices to facilitate the safe movement of traffic. 
B.  Traffic control devices include, without limitation, signs, signals, crosswalks, street markings, one-way streets, no-turn limitation, one-way turn only limitation, and lights intended to regulate, guide or warn traffic. 
(Ord. No. 508)  
14.12.020 - Placement of Traffic Control Devices. 
A.  The City Council may establish by resolution the locations for traffic control devices. (Vehicle Code §§ 21100(d), 21350 et seq., 21400) 
B.  In addition to those traffic control devices established by the City Council, the Road Commissioner may place and maintain such traffic control devices which the Commissioner deems necessary to regulate, guide or warn traffic. The Road Commissioner's determination shall be made only upon the basis of traffic engineering principles and traffic investigations, and in accordance with such standards, limitations and rules as may be established by this Title and the City Council.  
14.12.030 - Equestrian Crossings. 
The City Council may by resolution designate equestrian crossings. (Vehicle Code § 21805)  
14.12.040 - Suspension of Regulations. 
A.  Based upon a determination of emergency or public necessity, the Road Commissioner is authorized to suspend one or more of the provisions of this Chapter for a temporary period for the purpose of protecting the public. 
B.  When acting under the authority of this section, the Road Commissioner shall remove or cover existing signs or other traffic control devices and erect temporary traffic control devices as necessary. 
C.  For the duration of closure of any street, the Road Commissioner shall erect signs and barricades, as necessary, to give notice of the closure to the public.  
14.12.050 - [Permit for school district to maintain portable school crossing sign, flash or flasher.] 
Upon approval of the City Council, the Road Commissioner may issue a permit to any school district authorizing such district to maintain a portable school crossing sign and flash or flasher. Such permit may be issued on the terms and conditions deemed necessary or appropriate by the Road Commissioner for the protection of the public. Any such permit issued by the Road Commissioner shall contain a provision that it may be revoked by the Road Commissioner for violation of any of the terms or conditions of such permit.  
14.12.060 - Temporary Closing of Streets. 
The Road Commissioner may temporarily close a portion of the street when, in the Road Commissioner's opinion, such closure is necessary for the safety and protection of persons using that portion of the street during the temporary closing. No such closure shall be for a period in excess of 24 hours except by approval of the City Council.  
Chapter 14.16 - REGULATIONS AGAINST STOPPING, STANDING, PARKING 
 
14.16.010 - Adoption of Code by Reference. 
There is hereby adopted by reference, by the City of Del Mar for the purpose of prescribing rules and regulations for the control of traffic within the City of Del Mar, the following portions of the San Diego County Traffic Code, together with such secondary references as are included in those portions, effective as of the date set forth on Section 14.16.030 below. The provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the City of Del Mar to include, without limitation, regulatory provisions, and definitions. 
A.  Title 7, Division 2, Article 7 commencing with Section 72.110 regarding stopping, standing and parking. 
B.  Title 7, Division 2, Article 8 commencing with Section 72.130 relating to loading or unloading. Except that Section 72.135 is amended to add: 
iii.  Except in areas of parks, designated by signs, loading and unloading is the only allowable activity, with no exception. 
C.  Title 7, Division 2, Article 9 commencing with Section 72.140 relating to parking time limits. 
D.  Title 7, Division 2, Article 10 commencing with Section 72.150 relating to angle parking. 
E.  Title 7, Division 2, Article 14 commencing with Section 72.190 regarding taxicab stands. 
(Ord. No. 508)  
14.16.020 - Effective Date. 
The effective date of these regulations is September 15, 1993. 
(Ord. No. 632)  
14.16.030 - Procedures. 
A.  The City Council may establish by resolution, regulations which prohibit or restrict the parking or standing of vehicles. (Vehicle Code §§ 22507, 22507.5) 
B.  The City Council may establish by ordinance, parking meter zones and fix the rate of fees for such zones. (Vehicle Code § 22508) 
C.  The City Council may establish by resolution, parking spaces for the exclusive use of vehicles which display a distinguishing license plate or placard of a disabled person in accordance with the provisions of Section 22511.7 of the Vehicle Code. 
D.  The City Council may, by ordinance, cause streets and highways to be marked with white lines designating parking spaces and require vehicles to park within the parking spaces. (Vehicle Code § 22508)  
14.16.040 - Curb Markings. 
Curb markings authorized and established under this Chapter shall comply with Section 21458 of the Vehicle Code, and shall be effective upon such days and during such hours or times as may be prescribed by ordinance.  
14.16.050 - No Entrance Into Intersection That Would Obstruct Traffic. 
No operator of any vehicle shall enter any intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection of crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed.  
14.16.060 - Prohibition of Parking of Oversized or Non-Motorized Vehicles. 
No person shall park or leave standing upon any public street or alley any oversized or non-motorized vehicle for a period longer than four hours. 
(Ord. No. 742)  
14.16.070 - Definitions. 
A.  Oversized Vehicle shall mean any vehicle that exceeds 20 feet in length, or 84 inches in width, or 78 inches in height. Any extension(s) caused by mirrors or accessories attached to the side(s) of such vehicle shall not be considered part of the measured width area. 
B.  Non-Motorized Vehicle shall mean any trailer, camp trailer, semi-trailer, or trailer coach as defined by the California Vehicle Code, and any recreational vehicle as defined in Subsection 30.04.170.A. of this Code.  
14.16.080 - Exceptions to Prohibition on Parking of Oversized and Non-Motorized Vehicles. 
The provisions of Section 14.16.060 shall not apply to any of the following: 
A.  Oversized vehicles making pick-ups or deliveries of goods, wares, or merchandise from or to any building or structure. 
B.  Any vehicle involved in an emergency or any vehicle being repaired under emergency conditions. 
C.  Any vehicle belonging to Federal, State, or local authorities. 
D.  Any vehicle displaying a valid permit issued pursuant to Section 14.16.090. 
(Ord. No. 742)  
14.16.090 - Permit Process for Temporary Overnight Parking. 
A.  The Parking Enforcement Division of the Community Services Department shall issue a permit for an oversized vehicle or non-motorized vehicle to any resident of the City, or a bona fide guest of such resident, if (1) the appropriate fees as described in this subsection are paid; and (2) the Parking Enforcement Division determines that the vehicle will not create a safety hazard. The permit shall state the address of the resident and shall state: "OVERSIZED OR NON-MOTORIZED VEHICLE PERMIT." 
B.  The duration of the permit shall not exceed 48 hours. 
C.  No more than six permits shall be issued to any person described in Subsection A in any one-year period. Permits may not be issued for consecutive periods. 
D.  The fee for obtaining a permit shall be determined by the Del Mar City Council. 
E.  The vehicle shall not be used for overnight camping, lodging, residing in or using for accommodation purposes. 
(Ord. No. 742)  
14.16.100 - Posting of Signs. 
A.  Signs giving adequate notice of the prohibitions contained in this chapter shall be placed at the city limits. The signs shall state: "NO PARKING OF OVERSIZED OR NON-MOTORIZED VEHICLES WITHOUT VALID PERMIT FOR MORE THAN FOUR HOURS." 
B.  Signs may, at the discretion of the Parking Enforcement Division, be placed on City streets. These signs shall read as described in Subsection A. with the following additional language: "IMMEDIATE TOWING AUTHORIZED." 
(Ord. No. 742)  
14.16.110 - Vehicle Removal and Penalties. 
A.  Vehicles parked in violation of this chapter may be cited immediately and fined $75.00 for each violation. 
B.  Vehicles parked in violation of this chapter may be removed after 72 hours, pursuant to Vehicle Code § 22651(k). 
C.  Vehicles parked in violation of this Chapter may be removed immediately if a sign is posted in accordance with Subsection 14.16.100.B., pursuant to Vehicle Code § 22651(n). 
D.  Each violation shall be considered a separate offense per Section 1.08.030 of this Code.  
Chapter 14.20 - PARKING METERS 
 
14.20.010 - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this Chapter to establish procedures and regulations applicable to parking meters. 
(Ord. No. 508)  
14.20.020 - Zones and Rates Established. 
A.  To authorize the establishment of a zone in which parking meters are to be installed, the City Council shall adopt an ordinance specifying: 
1.  The area included in the zone; 
2.  Whether white lines designating parking spaces to be established; 
3.  The hours of operations of the meter; and 
4.  The rate of fee. 
B.  The Road Commissioner shall establish the parking meter zone and cause to be installed meters, signs and markings in accordance with the authorizing ordinance.  
14.20.030 - Administration of Meters. 
A.  The Road Commissioner shall insure that money deposited into meters is collected as to the Finance Director. 
B.  The Road Commissioner shall insure that meter, signs and markings are maintained in good condition.  
14.20.040 - Expired Meter, Display of Valid Ticket/Receipt. 
A.  Parking Space Regulated by a Parking Meter. 
1.  It is unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in a parking space that is regulated by a parking meter requiring a parking meter fee to be paid to allow the vehicle to remain in that area, unless: 
a.  The parking meter regulation is not in effect at the time; or 
b.  The fee has been paid and the parking meter is displaying a sign or signal indicating the entitlement to use the parking spaces is legal and unexpired. 
2.  The registered owner of a vehicle is in violation of the law if such vehicle is in a parking space that is being regulated by a parking meter requiring a parking meter fee to be paid to allow the vehicle to remain in that area, unless: 
a.  The parking meter regulation is not in effect at the time, or 
b.  The fee has been paid and the parking meter is displaying a sign or signal indicating the entitlement to use the parking space is legal and unexpired. 
B.  Parking Space Regulated by Parking Machine. 
1.  It is unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in a parking space that is regulated by a parking machine which dispenses a ticket/receipt upon the payment of a parking fee to allow the vehicle to remain in that area, unless: 
a.  The parking machine regulation is not in effect at the time; or 
b.  A valid, unexpired ticket/receipt is displayed in the vehicle, viewable to the public. 
2.  The registered owner of a vehicle is in violation of the law if such vehicle is in a parking space that is being regulated by a parking machine which dispenses a ticket/receipt upon the payment of a parking fee to allow the vehicle to remain in that area; unless: 
a.  The parking machine regulation is not in effect at the time; or 
b.  A valid, unexpired ticket/receipt is displayed in the vehicle, viewable to the public. 
3.  Unless authorized by the City in writing, it is unlawful for any person to transfer or exchange with some other person a parking machine ticket/receipt issued by the City. 
(Ord. No. 646)  
14.20.050 - Tampering with Meters. 
It is unlawful for any unauthorized person to open, for any person to deface, injure, tamper with, or willfully break, destroy, impair the usefulness of, or tamper with any parking meter installed pursuant to this Chapter. Such prohibited tampering shall include, but is not limited to, depositing or causing to be deposited any slug, device or metallic object as a substitute for a coin of the United States. A violation of this Section shall be a misdemeanor.  
14.20.060 - Rule of Evidence. 
The parking or standing of any vehicle in a parking space, at which space the parking meter displays the sign or signal indicating illegal parking, shall constitute a prima facie presumption that the vehicle has been parked or allowed to stand in such space in violation of the City's Traffic Code.  
14.20.070 - Enforcement. 
The Road Commissioner shall establish an enforced program whereby the enforcing authority will record the number of the meter at which vehicle is overparked, take the State vehicle license of such vehicle, and issue in writing a citation for illegal parking in the same for and subject to the same procedure provided for by the laws of the State of California, applicable to traffic violations within this City; except when the vehicle is an official City vehicle parked while the operator is performing official duties in the vicinity.  
Chapter 14.24 - REMOVAL OF VEHICLES 
 
14.24.010 - Purpose. 
A.  It is the purpose of this Chapter to provide regulations controlling the removal of vehicles from streets, highways, and private property. 
B.  The City Manager is the designated authority for administering the provisions of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 508)  
14.24.020 - Removal of Vehicles, Generally. 
The City Manager is authorized to cause the removal of a vehicle from a street, highway or private property in accordance with the authority granted in Article I, Chapter 10 of the California Vehicle Code commencing with Section 22650.  
14.24.030 - Removal of Abandoned Vehicles. 
In accordance with the authority of Section 22660 of the California Vehicle Code, the City Manager shall cause abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof to be removed as a public nuisance from streets, highways or private property as follows: 
A.  Notice shall be given in accordance with Vehicle Code § 22661(a). 
B.  This Section is not applicable to vehicles or portions thereof exempted by Vehicle Code § 22661(b). 
C.  A ten-day Notice of Intention shall be accomplished in accordance with Vehicle Code § 22661(c). 
D.  The ten-day Notice of Intention shall be accomplished in accordance with Vehicle Code § 22661(d). 
E.  The City Manager shall conduct a public hearing in accordance with Vehicle Code § 22661(e). 
F.  Reconstruction of the removed vehicle or parts shall be limited by the provisions of Vehicle Code § 22661(f). The owner of the land on which the vehicle is located may participate in the public hearing in accordance with Government Code § 22661(g). 
G.  In accordance with Vehicle Code § 22661(g), the City Manager may assess the costs of administration and removal of the vehicle against the property upon which the vehicle is located and against the owner of the vehicle, who may be made jointly and severally liable for such assessment.  
14.24.040 - Storage of Removed Vehicles. 
The City Manager shall cause the moved vehicles to be stored in accordance with the provisions of Article 3, Chapter 10, Division 11 of the California Vehicle Code commencing at Section 22850.  
Chapter 14.32 - INTERSTATE TRUCK TERMINAL DESIGNATION AND TERMINAL ACCESS 
 
14.32.010 - Intent and Purpose. 
It shall be the intent and purpose of this ordinance to provide for the public necessity, health, safety or general welfare through the establishment of procedures for terminal designation and truck route designation to terminals for interstate trucks. 
(Ord. No. 380)  
14.32.020 - [Applications.] 
A.  Those persons qualifying as a terminal and requiring terminal access from federally-designated highways, shall submit an application on a form as provided by the City and the application fee to the City Clerk, City Hall, 1050 Camino del Mar, Del Mar, California. 
B.  Upon receipt of the application, the City Manager will determine the applicant's conformance with the "terminal" designation and if so approved, will then determine the capability of the route requested and/or alternate routes. Capability will be determined by the adequate turning radii and lane widths of ramps, inter-sections, and highways will require Cal Trans (District 11) approval. 
C.  If the requested route passes through several jurisdictions, applicant shall comply with that juris-diction's application process.  
14.32.030 - Definitions. 
A.  Terminal is a facility at which freight is consolidated to be shipped, or where full load consignments may be loaded and off-loaded, or at which vehicles are regularly maintained, stored, or manufactured. 
B.  Interstate Truck is a tractor semi or double with unlimited length as regulated by California Vehicle Code § 35401.5(a)(1) and (2).  
14.32.040 - Cost Recovery. 
A.  The application fee will cover the cost of reviewing route(s) and terminal designation to be established by City Council resolution. The application fee is nonrefundable. 
B.  If the application for a terminal designation is approved, the applicant will be required to pay for the purchase and installation of terminal access signs. Trailblazer signs will be required at every decision point on the route to the terminal. Said costs to be determined by the City Manager.  
14.32.050 - Revocation of Route. 
The City Manager is authorized to revoke any approved route if said route proves to be a safety hazard for any vehicular traffic. A safety hazard is defined as inability of interstate trucks to negotiate route and/or said trucks causing unsafe driving conditions for other vehicular traffic and/or pedestrians.  
14.32.060 - Retrofitting Ramps, Intersections and Roadways. 
If all feasible routes to a requested terminal are deemed unsatisfactory to the City Manager, the applicant may request retrofitting the deficiencies, but all costs of engineering, construction, and inspection will be borne by the applicant. Upon request, the City will make a substantial effort to form a benefit district to assist in cost recovery by any other terminal(s) using the improved route. Said benefit district costs would be in proportion to the Section of route utilized.  
Chapter 14.36 - TRUCK ROUTES 
 
14.36.010 - Purpose. 
A.  The purpose of this Chapter is to regulate truck traffic on streets within the City. (Vehicle Code § 35701) 
B.  The provisions of this Chapter will be applied to State highways within the City only after approval of the California Department of Transportation. (Vehicle Code § 35702) 
C.  "Truck" as used in this Chapter means a commercial truck and trailer combination, a commercial tractor and trailer combination, or any truck in excess of 14,000 pounds. 
(Ord. No. 508)  
14.36.020 - Regulation. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a truck on City streets unless in accordance with an exception provided in this Chapter.  
14.36.030 - Exceptions. 
A.  Trucks may be operated on streets which have been designated by resolution of the City Council as truck routes. 
B.  Any vehicle owned, operated, controlled or used by a public utility in connection with the construction, installation, operation, maintenance or repair of any public utility facility is not subject to the provisions of this Chapter. (Vehicle Code §§ 35701, 35704) 
C.  For the purpose of making pickups and deliveries, a person may operate a truck on a restricted street in accordance with Vehicle Code § 35703. 
D.  A person may operate an interstate truck on a route designated by the City when traveling to or from an interstate truck terminal. (Vehicle Code § 35401.5)  
Chapter 14.50 - SKATEBOARDS 
 
14.50.010 - Purpose. 
No person shall use, propel, ride upon or otherwise operate a skateboard within the City: 
A.  On or across any street where the prima facie or posted speed limit exceeds 25 miles per hour. 
B.  On or across any street along which a paved public sidewalk is provided. 
C.  In violation of a traffic control sign or signal. 
D.  In a manner that interferes with pedestrian traffic. 
E.  On public property anywhere within the City from 30 minutes after sunset to 30 minutes after sunrise. 
F.  Anywhere within the Central Commercial Zone. 
G.  By using a motor vehicle to pull or tow the skateboard. 
(Ord. No. 508)  
Chapter 14.60 - PILOT BIKE SHARE PROGRAM 
 
14.60.010 - Purpose and Intent. 
The purpose of this Chapter is consistent with the City's goals of enhancing mobility and access, easing traffic congestion, and promoting sustainability. This Chapter creates a limited term pilot program to facilitate the use of shared mobility devices while ensuring the protection of public health and safety, including the safety of the public traveling by foot, bicycle, or any vehicle on public sidewalks, streets, and other public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 947 , § 2, 4-1-2019)  
14.60.020 - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall be applicable when the following words or phrases are used hereafter in this ordinance, whether or not these words or phrases are capitalized: 
Abandon shall mean leaving any item unattended for any length of time. 
City Manager shall mean the City Manager or his or her designee. 
Operator shall mean the person or business entity licensed by the City to operate the pilot bike share program pursuant to this Chapter. 
Pilot bike share program shall mean a pilot program establishing a single licensee under a license agreement to rent, use, locate, display, offer or place for rent unpowered bicycles and/or "Class 1" or "Class 2" electric bicycles within City boundaries. The pilot bike share program requires the City Manager or delegated staff to monitor and assess the overall performance, safety and benefits of the pilot program and provide City Council with a report. 
Public area shall mean any outdoor area that is open to the public for public use, whether owned or operated by the City or a private party. 
Public right-of-way shall mean any public alley, parkway, public transportation path, roadway, sidewalk or street that is owned, granted by easement, operated or controlled by the City. This includes, but is not limited to, those private areas adjacent to public property. 
Bike shall mean a pedaled bicycle that is rented, used, located, displayed, offered or placed for rent in any public area or public right-of-way by operator under a City Council approved operator license agreement. A bike shall meet the safety standards outlined in the International Standardization Organization (ISO) 43.150 - Cycles; the standards outlined in Code of Federal Regulations Title 16, Chapter II, Subchapter C, Part 1512 - Requirements for Bicycles; and the standards established in CVC section 21201, including for lighting during operation, or equivalent recognized standards and requirements. If powered, a shared mobility device shall be limited to "Class 1" or "Class 2" electric bicycles, as defined in California Vehicle Code (CVC) Section 312.5. 
Prohibited mobility device shall mean any dockless device other than a bike by which a person can be transported, propelled, moved or drawn, that is rented, used, located, displayed, offered or placed for rent or use in any public area or public right-of-way, except that a prohibited mobility device does not include a rental car, taxi cab or car matched through a peer-to-peer ridesharing application. 
Restricted areas shall mean any area within the City that has been deemed off limits to pilot bike share program bike use and/or parking. 
(Ord. No. 947 , § 2, 4-1-2019)  
14.60.030 - Administrative Regulations. 
A.  The City may at its discretion develop administrative regulations to implement the provisions of this Chapter, which may include regulations relating to lawful conduct, prohibited conduct, public safety, data sharing, data privacy and/or the timely removal of hazards. 
B.  No person shall fail to comply with the City's administrative regulations, if adopted. Any violation of any administrative regulation issued pursuant to this Chapter shall constitute a violation of this Code and shall subject the violator to the penalties set forth in this Code. 
C.  The City Council may establish operator fees and charges by resolution which shall: 
1.  Defray the City's costs in administering and enforcing the provisions of this Chapter; and 
2.  Reflect charges associated with use of public property pursuant to this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 947 , § 2, 4-1-2019)  
14.60.040 - Prohibited Conduct. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, no person may: 
A.  Deploy, drop, abandon, leave, dock or otherwise place or encourage the use of any prohibited mobility device within City Boundaries. 
B.  Deploy, drop, abandon, leave, dock or otherwise place any pilot bike share program bikes within restricted areas. 
C.  Abandon or temporarily park any pilot bike share program bike or prohibited mobility device, in the City public right-of-way or a City public area in a manner that: (1) obstructs travel upon or blocks access to a public area or public right-of-way; (2) violates ADA or any other disability access and path of travel laws, requirements and/or regulations; (3) poses an immediate public safety hazard or nuisance; or (4) is otherwise prohibited by applicable local, State or Federal laws or administrative regulations. 
D.  Use or aid, abet or encourage the use of any prohibited mobility device in violation this Code or impair any license, permit, applicable law or administrative regulation. 
E.  Use or aid, abet or encourage the use of any pilot bike share program bikes in restricted areas in violation this Code. 
F.  This Section is not intended to prohibit or limit the lawful private non-commercial use, ownership or operation of a mobility device within City limits. 
(Ord. No. 947 , § 2, 4-1-2019)  
14.60.050 - Pilot Bike Share Program Operator License Agreement. 
A.  Under this pilot bike share program, the City Manager is authorized to negotiate one shared pilot bike share program operator license agreement ("license agreement") authorizing a single operator to deploy bikes within designated City locations. 
B.  The City Manager may impose, as part of the license agreement issued, any and all conditions that are determined necessary to effectuate the purposes of this Chapter, consider accessibility of any public area, public right-of-way and the availability of public space for shared use by all, and to protect City and the health, welfare, and safety of the public. 
C.  When presenting the negotiated license agreement to City Council for approval, the City Manager shall report, in writing, the reasons supporting the license agreement terms, conditions and operator selection. 
D.  The number, location, technical requirements and mode(s) of pilot bike share program bikes and related applications shall be set forth in the negotiated license agreement approved by City Council. 
E.  At any time, in the City Council's discretion, the City Council may reassess the approved operator license agreement and its terms, consistent with the approved agreement. 
F.  The City Council approved license agreement and its determinations under this Section shall constitute the final decision of the City and shall not be subject to further administrative review. 
G.  Before bike deployment, the operator must execute a license agreement in a final form approved by City Council, comply with all license agreement conditions, provide evidence of insurance as required by this Chapter and license agreement and obtain a City business license. 
(Ord. No. 947 , § 2, 4-1-2019)  
14.60.060 - Operator Indemnity and Insurance Requirements. 
To the fullest extent permitted by law, the City shall not assume any liability whatsoever with respect to having issued a pilot bike share program operator license or otherwise approving the operation of any bike or other shared mobility device. As a condition to the issuance of any pilot bike share program operator license or any bike or other shared mobility device, the operator shall at a minimum be required to meet all of the following conditions: 
A.  The operator shall, in language approved by the City Risk Manager, agree to indemnify, defend (at operator's sole cost and expense), and hold harmless the City, and its officers, officials, employees, representatives, and agents from any and all claims, losses, damages, injuries, liabilities or losses which arise out of, or which are in any way related to, the City's issuance of or decision to enter into a pilot bike share program operator license agreement, the process used by the City in making its decision, any alleged violation of any Federal, State or local laws by operator, and for any and all claims, losses, damages, injuries, liabilities or losses to any bike user or any third party, arising out of, or which are in any way related to, operator activities and operations, including, but not limited to, under the pilot program bike share operator license agreement. 
B.  Maintain insurance at coverage limits, and with conditions thereon, as determined by the City Risk Manager as necessary and appropriate, including naming City of Del Mar as an additional insured. The operator's insurance policy shall be endorsed to state that coverage shall not be cancelled except after 30 days' prior written notice has been given to the City. If any insurance policy issued to an operator is cancelled for any reason, the license issued under this Chapter is automatically suspended and all operator operations shall cease. In order to reinstate the license, the licensee shall provide a new certificate and policy of insurance to the City. 
(Ord. No. 947 , § 2, 4-1-2019)  
14.60.070 - Grounds for License Agreement Termination, Revocation, or Suspension. 
A license agreement may be revoked, suspended, or denied by the City Manager consistent with the terms of the license agreement approved by City Council or for violation of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 947 , § 2, 4-1-2019)  
14.60.080 - Pilot Bike Share Program Assessment. 
The City Manager shall monitor and assess the overall performance, safety and benefits of the pilot program and provide City Council with a report approximately one year after bike deployment. The report shall include, but is not limited to, recommendations whether to maintain, modify, eliminate the program or modify the program to expand City authorization of the use of other shared mobility devices or other developing clean modes of transportation. The report shall also address and recommend revisions to this Chapter, if applicable. 
(Ord. No. 947 , § 2, 4-1-2019)  
14.60.090 - Device Impoundment. 
A.  Except for any bike authorized by a City Council under a City pilot bike share program license agreement, prohibited shared mobility devices that are rented, used, dropped, left, located, displayed, offered or made available for rent, or abandoned, in the public right-of-way, public area, or is otherwise determined to constitute a public nuisance shall be subject to immediate impoundment by the City. 
B.  The City Council may adopt impound fees by resolution, which shall reflect the City's enforcement, investigation, administration, storage and impound costs. 
C.  No person shall retrieve any impounded prohibited shared mobility device or pilot bike share program bike except upon demonstrating proper proof of ownership of the device and payment of applicable impound fees. 
D.  Any prohibited shared mobility device or pilot bike share program bike not retrieved from impound for more than 30 calendar days may, in the City Manager's discretion, be repurposed, recycled, destroyed, or auctioned in accordance with applicable state law. 
(Ord. No. 947 , § 2, 4-1-2019)  
14.60.100 - Enforcement. 
A.  Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter, shall be guilty of an infraction or a misdemeanor, which shall be punishable pursuant to Chapter 1.08 of this Code. 
B.  Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter, including any permit condition, shall be subject to administrative fines and administrative penalties pursuant to Chapter 1.10 of this Code. 
C.  Any person convicted of violating this Chapter in a criminal case, or found to be in violation of this Chapter in a civil or administrative case brought by a law enforcement agency, shall be ordered to reimburse the City and other participating law enforcement agencies their full investigative costs. 
(Ord. No. 947 , § 2, 4-1-2019)  
14.60.110 - Severability. 
In the event that any court of competent jurisdiction holds any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase in this Chapter to be unconstitutional, preempted or otherwise invalid, the invalid portion shall be severed from this Chapter and shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Chapter. The City hereby declares that it would have adopted each section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase in this Chapter irrespective of whether any one or more sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases in this Chapter might be declared unconstitutional, preempted, or otherwise invalid. 
(Ord. No. 947 , § 2, 4-1-2019)  
14.60.120 - Conflicts with Prior Ordinances. 
In the event that any City ordinance or regulation, in whole or in part, adopted prior to the effective date of this Ordinance, conflicts with any provisions in this Ordinance, the provisions in this Ordinance will control. 
(Ord. No. 947 , § 2, 4-1-2019)  
TITLE 21 - WATER SUPPLY  
Chapter 21.04 - WATER SUPPLY—GENERAL 
 
21.04.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this Section. 
A.  Consumer. Any person to whom the City supplies water service under a contract, either expressed or implied, to make payment therefore. 
B.  Department. The Public Works Department of the City. Actions of the Department may be taken only by the Superintendent of Public Works or his duly authorized representative. 
C.  Extension. A water main extension. 
D.  Legal Or Equitable Owner. Any owner of record, mortgagee, trustee or contract purchaser. 
E.  Main. An existing water main in the water distribution system of the City, as acquired from the Del Mar Utilities or added thereafter. 
F.  Service Connection. The tapping of water mains and the laying of pipes from the main to the curb or to the meter. 
(Ord. No. 472)  
21.04.020 - Applicability of Chapter. 
The provisions in this Chapter are established for the regulation, use and operation of the water system of the City, as acquired from the Del Mar Utilities, together with any additions thereto, and shall apply to all water service provided by the City from the date of acquisition of the water system from the Del Mar Utilities.  
21.04.030 - To Make Rules; Effect. 
The City Manager may make, from time to time, rules and regulations not in conflict with this Chapter or any other Section of this Code, governing the Department and the use and consumption of water, subject to the approval by resolution of the City Council; and all consumers shall observe such rules and regulations to the same extent as though set forth in this Chapter.  
21.04.040 - Wasting Water Prohibited; Report to Department. 
No person shall willfully or neglectfully waste water in any manner whatsoever.  
21.04.050 - Water Supplied From Hydrants; Water Supply for Construction Purposes; Restrictions. 
A.  Persons wishing to take a supply of water from a fire hydrant shall make application to the Department for such service. The Department will make the necessary connections and install a meter of required size, upon payment of charges determined by the City Council. 
B.  When water is required for construction purposes of any type, upon making proper application, a service connection will be made with a main or at a hydrant at the most accessible point to the construction work. When the connection is not sufficiently accessible and water must be taken to the work in a tank wagon or barrel, such supply shall be taken through the meter as installed. In no case will water be furnished for any purpose except through a meter. 
C.  It shall be unlawful for any person to open or use a fire hydrant except the Fire Department and Public Works Department, or such other persons as are specially authorized by the Department, upon such person making application at the main office of the Department. 
D.  To insure safety of fire hydrants for fire protection, any person authorized by the Department to open fire hydrants will be required to use only an approved Spanner wrench, and to replace the caps on outlets when the same are not in use. Failure to meet this requirement will be sufficient cause to prohibit further use of the hydrants, and the refusal of subsequent authorization for use of the fire hydrants.  
21.04.060 - Obstructing Fire Hydrants, Meters, Pipes, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place upon or about any fire hydrant, gate, valve, manhole, stopcock, meter or meter box connected with water pipes of the system of water works, any material, debris or structure of any kind so as to prevent free access to the same at all times.  
21.04.070 - Turning Water On and Off From Premises. 
It shall be unlawful for any person except an authorized employee of the Water Utilities Department, to turn water on or off from any building or premises at the service gate valve or curb angle stop. Water service shall be rendered to buildings not then having water service only upon proper application for such service.  
21.04.080 - Persons Not To Interfere With City Waterworks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, in any manner whatever, to meddle or tamper with or interfere with any part of the waterworks of the City.  
21.04.090 - Entrance Upon Private Property by Employees of the Department. 
Any authorized employee of the City shall be admitted at all reasonable hours to all parts of any premises supplied with water by the Department, to determine whether regulations are being obeyed.  
21.04.100 - Failure to Comply With the Rules or Pay Rates; Penalty. 
On failure to comply with the rules and regulations established by the Department as a condition precedent to the right to the use of water, or to pay rates or any charges imposed, in the time and manner stated in this Chapter, and subject to the provisions of State law, the water may be shut off until payment of amount due is made, with a fee for the expense of turning the water off and on. The amount of connection, use charges, and fees shall be established by ordinance.  
21.04.110 - Right of Department to Enter Premises, Install Meters and Enforce Collection of Charges. 
The City shall have the right at any time, and at any point where water is used, to install a water meter of adequate size, and enforce collection for the amount of water that shall be used, in accordance with all the ordinances, rules and regulations of the Department governing the consumption of water, and for that purpose may go upon the premises of the consumer of water.  
21.04.120 - Interference With Inspection; Stoppage of Service; Notice Required. 
A.  If an authorized inspector, foreman or employee of the Department is refused admittance to any premises supplied with water by the City, or on being admitted is hindered or prevented from making an examination or inspection, the City Manager may cause the service of water to such premises to be discontinued, after giving written notice, in accordance with State law, to the owner or occupant thereof. 
B.  Service of water may be discontinued until the owner or occupant has given satisfactory assurance to the superintendent that any such inspector, foreman or employee will not be hindered or prevented from making such examination or inspection.  
21.04.130 - City Not Responsible For Damage Beyond Meter. 
The Department's jurisdiction and responsibility ends at the meter, and the Department will in no case be liable for damages occasioned by water running from open or faulty fixtures, or from broken or damaged pipes beyond the Department's meter.  
21.04.140 - Authority to Reduce or Turn Off Water in Emergency, for Repairs, Etc. 
The City in cases of emergency, whenever the public safety, health or the equitable distribution of water so demands, may change, reduce or limit the time in which the water may be used, or discontinue the use of water entirely during the emergency. The Department also reserves the right, upon notice at any time, to shut off the water supply because of repairs, extensions, or other similar reason.  
21.04.150 - Water Not to be Turned On When Property is Vacant. 
Whenever, in response to a turn-on order, a Department employee shall find the house or property vacant, he shall endeavor to ascertain that the water is not running on the inside of the building. If this is found to be the case, the water will be left shut off at the meter and a notice shall be left at the house stating why the water was not turned on.  
21.04.160 - Responsibility for Damage Resulting From Turning Off Water. 
The City shall not be responsible for any damage, such as bursting of boilers supplied by direct pressure, the breaking of any pipe or fixture, stoppage or interruption of water supply, or any other damage resulting from the shutting off of water.  
21.04.170 - Steam Boilers, Hydraulic Elevators, Etc.—Generally. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to draw water from any City main directly into any stationary steam boiler, hydraulic elevator, power pump or similar apparatus. 
B.  The Department reserves the right to install at a convenient place on the consumer's premises, a pressure recorder to determine if the preceding Section is being violated. 
C.  Where City water is used to supply a steam boiler, hydraulic elevator or power pump, its owner shall provide a tank of sufficient capacity to afford a supply of at least 12 hours into which the service pipe shall be discharged.  
21.04.180 - Emergency Regulations During Water Shortages. 
The City Manager is hereby authorized to determine and declare that a water shortage emergency exists in any or all parts of the City, and upon such determination, to promulgate such regulations, rules and conditions relative to the time of using water, the purposes for which it may be used, and such other necessary limitations as will, in his opinion, relieve the water shortage in any such sections of the City. 
Upon such emergency declaration, it shall be the duty of the City Manager to publish a notice giving the extent, terms and conditions respecting the use and consumption of water at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the City.  
21.04.190 - Water Pipes on Public Property Become Property of the City. 
All water pipes which have been approved by the Department, laid in streets, alleys or other public thoroughfares within the City, shall become the property of the City, unless private ownership is specifically provided as a condition of an Encroachment Permit which has been approved by the City Council.  
21.04.200 - Notice to City and Encroachment Permit Required Before Excavating in Streets; Liability for Damage. 
All contractors or other persons who open, grade, regrade, fill, excavate or otherwise work a street shall obtain an Encroachment Permit from the City for the removal, raising, lowering or otherwise displacement of any water mains, pipes, fittings, meters or other water system property that may interfere with such street work. All work which may involve City water facilities shall be performed in strict accordance with all requirements, restrictions and limitations which may be imposed by the Department.  
Chapter 21.08 - WATER SUPPLY—SERVICE CONNECTIONS 
 
21.08.010 - Application for Service Connection; Conditions Applicable Upon Making Connection. 
A.  Application for all water service shall be made on a form furnished by the City. 
B.  Should the service connection installed pursuant to the request of an applicant be of the wrong size or installed at a wrong location, the cost of all changes required shall be paid by the applicant; except, the provisions of this Subsection shall not apply where the application is made in writing and there is no error in such application. 
C.  Every service connection made upon receipt of an application as provided above shall be subject to the following conditions: 
1.  The applicant shall pay the stipulated rates at the time and in the manner provided in this Code. 
2.  The City may change rates and temporarily discontinue the service at any time to the consumer, as provided in this Chapter and applicable to State law. 
3.  The City shall not be liable for any damage by water or otherwise resulting from defective plumbing, broken or faulty services or water mains, or resulting from any condition of the water itself, or any substance that may be mixed with or be in the water as delivered to any consumer. 
(Ord. No. 472; Ord. No. 650; Ord. No. 828)  
21.08.020 - Size of Connection, Service Pipe, Water Meter and Backflow Protection. 
The department reserves the right to determine the size of the service connection, the service pipe and of the water meter, and shall also have the right to determine kind and size of backflow protection and all appurtenances to the service.  
21.08.030 - Check Valves. 
For any house or building where heaters of any description are used, the owner shall have a check valve installed on the inlet service pipe to protect meters and City service mains.  
21.08.040 - Stopcocks—For City. 
There shall be a stopcock in every attachment on the sidewalk just inside the curb, or in the alley, or at a point to be designated by the Superintendent of the Department, which stopcock and its box shall be supplied by the Department, and shall be for its exclusive use and under its exclusive control.  
21.08.050 - Same—For Consumers. 
The water consumers are hereby required, for their own protection, to provide at their own expense a stopcock to be placed on the property served within three feet of the water meter.  
21.08.060 - Service Pipe Extended Through Basement Walls. 
When the applicant requires the service connection pipe to be extended through a basement wall, the owner of the property shall provide the entrance way through such wall and assume all responsibility for any damage caused by leakage through such entrance way, and shall assume all liability for damage caused by leaking pipes, fittings, or meter installed inside of such basement wall.  
21.08.070 - Conditions of Service Relative to Pressure. 
All applicants for service connections or water service shall be required to accept such conditions of pressure and service as are provided by the distributing system at the location of the proposed service connection, and to hold the City harmless from all damage arising from low pressure or high pressure conditions or interruptions of service.  
21.08.080 - Service Connections Serving More Than One Building; More Than One Connection to Same Building. 
A.  Each house or building under separate ownership shall be provided with a separate service connection and meter. Two or more houses under one ownership and on the same lot or parcel of land shall be supplied by individual or separate service connections and meters, except in the case of a court or in case a house be located on the rear of an inside lot, one service and meter may be installed by the owner to cover more than one house or building. 
B.  The City reserves the right to limit the number of houses or the area of land under one ownership to be supplied by one service connection. 
C.  Not more than one service connection for domestic or commercial supply shall be installed for one building, except under special conditions. 
D.  A service connection shall not be used to supply adjoining property of a different owner, or to supply property of the same owner across a street or alley. 
E.  When property provided with a service connection is subdivided, such service connection shall be considered as belonging to the lot or parcel of land which it directly enters.  
21.08.090 - Fire Service Connections; Restrictions; Detector Check Valve Required. 
A.  When a fire service connection is installed, the valve governing same will be closed and sealed and remain so until a written order is received from the owner of the premises to have the water turned on. After the water is turned on, the Department shall not be held liable for damages of any kind whatsoever that may occur to the premises serviced by reason of the installation, maintenance, use, fluctuation of pressure or interruption of supply. 
B.  In no case shall any connection be made with any sprinkler or fire service without the written consent of the department, and should it be found that any such unauthorized connection has been made, or that water has been used from a sprinkler or fire service for any other purpose than extinguishing a fire, the water service shall be shut off and not turned on again until a sum equivalent to the monthly minimum provided for in this Chapter effective at that time, for a similar sized regular installation, is paid covering the entire period during which the service has been installed. A standard meter of the equivalent size of the service pipe shall be installed by the Department at the owner's expense at rates provided in this Chapter. 
C.  All fire service connections are required to have a detector check valve with isolation valve and bypass meter, installed within a vault or other suitable location acceptable to the Department.  
21.08.100 - All Water Consumed to Pass Through Meters Exception. 
A.  All services not otherwise provided for in this Chapter shall be metered, and all City water used on any premises shall pass through a meter. 
B.  No bypass or connection between the meter and the main shall be made, maintained or permitted, except as may be installed by the Department for sprinkler or fire service.  
21.08.110 - New Water Service. 
The connection fee for a new connection needing to acquire capacity in the water system for the first time or upsizing an existing connection will be set as follows: 
Meter Size 
(inches) 	Effective Date 
	7/1/09 	7/1/10 	7/1/11 	7/1/12 	7/1/13 
? 	$3,104 	$3,197 	$3,293 	$3,391 	$3,493 
¾ 	$4,655 	$4,795 	$4,939 	$5,087 	$5,240 
1 	$7,759 	$7,992 	$8,231 	$8,478 	$8,733 
1½ 	$15,518 	$15,983 	$16,463 	$16,956 	$17,465 
2 	$24,828 	$25,573 	$26,340 	$27,130 	$27,944 
3 	$49,656 	$51,146 	$52,680 	$54,261 	$55,889 
4 	$77,588 	$79,916 	$82,313 	$84,782 	$87,326 
 
This connection fee does not include the San Diego County System Capacity Charge or the San Diego County Water Treatment Capacity Charge. Both of these charges are charged to the City of Del Mar for new development and will be passed through to new development. 
The connection fee does not include the actual labor and materials costs for the installation of the water meter charged against applicant deposits. 
Existing customers upsizing their water meter will be given a credit commensurate with the connection fee for the current meter.  
Chapter 21.12 - WATER SUPPLY—WATER RATES AND CHARGES 
 
21.12.010 - Purpose. 
A.  The purpose of this Chapter is to provide water rates and charges. 
B.  Deposit and Documentation Required Upon Application for Service; Refund of Deposit. All applicants for water service shall complete the required forms supplied by the City before approval of water service can be given. Forms will be returned to the City within ten working days of application of service. Applicants failing to return the required forms will be subject to discontinuation of service. All applicants for water service shall deposit with the City a deposit for water service as provided in this Code. After the deposit has been held for 12 consecutive billing periods, during which time service has been continuous and bills have been paid within the allowable period without incurring a late penalty, the deposit will be automatically refunded without interest. 
(Ord. No. 554; Ord. No. 664; Ord. No. 687; Ord. No. 768; Ord. No. 828)  
21.12.020 - Rates and Charges for Water Service. 
The minimum bimonthly rate for all water furnished to a consumer through a water meter shall be determined by the size of water meter combined with usage as follows: 
A.  Bimonthly Service Charge. All water service customers of the City shall be subject to a fixed bimonthly service charge. The amount of the service charge shall be determined by the size of the water meter as follows: 
Meter 
Size 	Meter Bimonthly Service Charge Effective: 
	7/1/19 	1/1/20 	1/1/21 	1/1/22 	1/1/23 	1/1/24 
?" 	$66.66 	$70.74 	$75.18 	$79.90 	$83.88 	$88.04 
¾" 	99.98 	106.10 	112.76 	119.86 	125.80 	132.06 
1" 	166.64 	176.82 	187.94 	199.74 	209.66 	220.08 
1 ½" 	333.26 	353.62 	375.88 	399.48 	419.32 	440.16 
2" 	533.22 	565.78 	601.40 	639.16 	670.92 	704.24 
3" 	1,066.42 	1,131.54 	1,202.78 	1,278.32 	1,341.82 	1,408.46 
4" 	1,666.26 	1,768.02 	1,879.34 	1,997.36 	2,096.58 	2,200.72 
22nd DAA* 	51,656 	54,590 	57,946 	61,498 	64,668 	67,968 
*Total bimonthly charge for all meters 
 
B.  Bimonthly Commodity Charge. All water service customers of the City shall be subject to commodity rates for each unit (100 cubic feet, 748 gallons) of water used. Commodity rates applicable to water service customers are as follows: 
1.  Residential. 
Bimonthly 
Usage 	Bimonthly Rate per Unit of Water Used, Effective: 
	7/1/19 	1/1/20 	1/1/21 	1/1/22 	1/1/23 	1/1/24 
Single-Family 
Tier 1  1-20 units 	$4.99 	$5.18 	$5.40 	$5.63 	$5.91 	6.22 
Tier 2  21-500 units 	5.97 	6.10 	6.48 	6.76 	7.10 	7.47 
Multi-Family 
All usage/per unit 	$5.14 	$5.34 	$5.57 	$5.80 	$6.10 	6.41 
 
2.  Non-Residential. Commercial, Institutional, Fairgrounds, Irrigation. 
The commodity rate per unit of water use is as follows: 
	7/1/19 	1/1/20 	1/1/21 	1/1/22 	1/1/23 	1/1/24 
Commercial/ 
Institutional 	$5.22 	$5.43 	$5.66 	$5.90 	$6.20 	$6.52 
Irrigation 	5.57 	5.79 	6.04 	6.30 	6.62 	6.96 
Fairgrounds 	5.22 	5.43 	5.66 	5.90 	6.20 	6.52 
 
3.  Billing. Charges for water service are billed on a bi-monthly basis. Tier rate usage limits shall be double the monthly values for bi-monthly billing purposes. Further adjustments of usage limits shall be made on a proportional basis only if the actual billing period exceeds 70 days. 
C.  Special Use Charges. 
1.  Fire Service charges will be assessed as follows: 
Service Size 	Monthly Charge 
2—4" 	$18.26 
6" 	 23.08 
 
2.  A monthly service charge of $4.25 per backflow prevention device will be assessed. 
D.  Outside City Users. When it appears to be in the best interest of the City and the people thereof, and when approved in writing by the City Manager, the owner or occupant of property situated outside the City may be permitted to have such property connected to the water system of the City. In addition to other fees, assessments or charges provided by this Chapter, the owner or occupant of property situated outside the City shall pay a water service charge equal to 100 percent of the charge for applicable service established by this Section. 
In the event that the owner or occupant of such property fails to pay such water service charge, the City Manager shall have the right, upon five days notice, to disconnect the owner's or occupant's property from the water system. 
E.  Pass Through Fees and Charges for Wholesale Water and Water Treatment and Delivery. In accordance with Government Code § 53756, as it may be amended from time to time, all San Diego County Water Authority, Metropolitan Water District of Southern California, and the City of San Diego fees and charges for wholesale water, water related services and the treatment and delivery of water shall be passed through to Del Mar water utility customers. 
(Ord. No. 488; Ord. No. 554; Ord. No. 564; Ord. No. 628; Ord. No. 650; Ord. No. 654; Ord. No. 664; Ord. No. 687; Ord. No. 713; Ord. No. 730; Ord. No. 768; Ord. No. 828; Ord. No. 903; Ord. No 948 , § 2, Exh. A, 6-3-2019)  
21.12.030 - Procedure for Altering Water Rates. 
The City Manager shall, from time to time, prepare a recommendation for any change as deemed to be necessary for the ensuing fiscal year. Such recommendation shall be based upon a study of any increase or decrease in the cost of maintenance, repair and replacement of the water system. 
The City Council shall, after public notice and hearing thereon, by ordinance, approve, disapprove or modify the recommendation of the City Manager. The effective date of any change in the water rates shall be specified in the ordinance passed by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 472)  
21.12.040 - Same—Fire Service and Automatic Fire Sprinkler Service. 
The rates to be so charged and collected each month for fire service and automatic fire sprinkler service within the City shall be established by ordinance.  
21.12.050 - Same—Construction of Water Service. 
The rates to be charged and collected for construction of water service and meter installation shall be established by ordinance.  
21.12.060 - Same—Service to City Departments. 
The rates for water and water service supplied to the various departments of the City shall be the same as those rates in effect for all other consumers within the City, as in this Chapter specified, and the water and water service so furnished shall be charged to their respective budget accounts and paid for monthly from such funds into the fund provided for by the receipts from sale of water.  
21.12.070 - Reading of Meters; Average Bills When Meters Not Read; Billing When Meter Fails to Function; Where Water Bills to be Mailed. 
Under ordinary conditions, continuous service meters shall be read monthly on approximately the same day of the month, and a bill issued showing the period covered by the meter readings, the quantity of water used, and the total charge for the service rendered. When it is impossible to read the meter due to any obstructions, an average bill, or a series of average bills, will be rendered, will be adjusted at the next actual reading date. If the meter fails to register, the charge for water will be based upon the average of the comparable period of the preceding year, taking into consideration the volume of business, weather conditions, and any other factors that may assist in determining an equitable charge. Unless the applicant for water service shall direct otherwise, all bills will be mailed to the premises where service is furnished.  
21.12.080 - Testing of Water Meters. 
When the accuracy of a water meter is questioned, the department shall, upon the request of a consumer on the form provided, cause an official test to be made upon deposit by the consumer, an amount determined by the meter size and as established by ordinance. 
If, upon examination of the meter to ascertain the accuracy of its operation, it shall be found to register over three percent more water than actually passed through it, another meter will be substituted therefor, and the fee charged for such test will be refunded to the person making the application. An adjustment for a period of three months prior to the test will be made on the basis of the percentage the meter is in error.  
21.12.090 - When Bills to be Mailed; When Bills Due; Re-establishment of Service. 
A.  Water bills based on meter readings shall be prepared and mailed to the consumers bi-monthly. Bills will be due and payable upon receipt. No less than 19 days shall be allowed from the date of mailing such bills for payment thereof, and bills will be deemed delinquent thereafter. A ten percent penalty per billing period will be charged on all delinquent bills. 
B.  If service is terminated in accordance with the provisions of the Title, service will not be renewed until the delinquent bill is paid together with penalties and charges, including the cost of reconnection as defined in this Title. An additional deposit will also be required pursuant to the rates established in this Chapter. 
C.  In the case of service to rental property, the property owner shall be liable for any billings not paid by the tenant. 
(Ord. No. 554)  
21.12.100 - Adjustment of Bills. 
Water bill adjustments may be made by the City in accordance with administrative regulations approved by the City Manager.  
21.12.110 - Persons Using Water Without Proper Application Liable for All Water Chargeable to Premises. 
A person taking possession of any premises and using water through an active service connection without having made application to the City for water service shall be held liable for the water delivered from the date of the last recorded meter reading, and if the meter was found inoperative, the quantity of water consumed shall be estimated. 
If proper application for water service is not made promptly upon notification to do so by the department without further notice.  
21.12.120 - Service May Be Denied Former Consumers Having Outstanding Bills. 
When an application for water service is made by a former consumer who has failed to pay all bills for service previously rendered, the City may refuse to furnish water to such applicant until the outstanding bills are paid, plus any applicable penalties.  
21.12.130 - Department May Render Additional Services; Charges. 
A.  The department may render any reasonable service in connection with the supply of water service to consumers upon application at the main office of the department; provided that reasonable charges may be made for any expense involved in rendering the service. 
B.  All bills for labor, material furnished, or other charges not provided for otherwise, shall become due and payable at the same time and in the same manner as the next regular billing for water, and shall become delinquent at the same time as is provided for delinquent payments on regular water bills.  
21.12.140 - Water Rates and Charges. 
The following rates and charges are established: 
A.  Refundable Water Deposit. The deposit shall be the greater of three times the base monthly service charge or $100.00 for new accounts, with a refund upon request after two years of acceptable payment history or upon termination of the account. If a customer's service is discontinued because of nonpayment, the customer is required to deposit with the City an amount equal to the greater of three times the base monthly service charge or $100.00. When two consecutive years of acceptable payments have been made or upon termination of the account, the deposit will be refunded at the request of the customer. 
B.  Notification to Pay Bill (Door Hangers). If a door hanger or any other personally delivered form of notification is required to notify customers of pending water shutoff, a $25.00 charge will be paid before the water will be reconnected. 
C.  Water Reconnect Penalties. When it is necessary to shut off a customer's water because of nonpayment, the City will impose a penalty of $50.00 and customer will be billed at actual costs of labor and vehicle for after hours reconnection. The penalty and all outstanding charges must be paid before the water will be reconnected. 
If a disconnected service is illegally reconnected by the customer, a penalty of $100.00 will be assessed. If it is necessary to remove the meter to prevent the customer from reconnecting the water, the customer will be required to pay $150.00 and all outstanding charges before the meter can be reinstalled. 
D.  Testing of Water Meters. When the accuracy of a water meter is questioned by the customer, the City will remove the meter and send it out to be calibrated if requested by the customer and the meter is found to be in good working order, the customer will be charged the actual cost of the testing to the City. If the meter is found to be faulty, the City will incur the cost of calibration. 
(Ord. No. 512; Ord. No. 828)  
Chapter 21.16 - WATER SUPPLY—EXTENSIONS OF WATER MAINS 
 
21.16.010 - Applications For Extension of Water Main; Contents. 
Any person who desires to extend a water main shall file an application with the City in which he will describe the area to be served and the approximate length of the proposed extension. 
(Ord. No. 472)  
21.16.020 - Deposit and Cost Estimate for Construction. 
After such application as provided for in Section 29.16.010, there may be scheduled a predesign conference with the City Engineer. The design and cost estimate must then be prepared by a registered civil engineer and submitted with a deposit to the City for review and approval by the City Engineer prior to construction. Additional deposit will be required for City administration, engineering, and inspection costs.  
21.16.030 - Design and Construction of Water Main Extensions. 
All water main extensions shall be designed and constructed according to City of Del Mar standards and as provided by this Chapter.  
21.16.040 - Installation of Mains Prior to Paving. 
Before any City street is paved with a permanent type of pavement, a main shall be installed in the street. The cost of installation of such water main shall be borne by the property to be benefitted by the water main. 
(Ord. No. 107)  
21.16.050 - Work to be Performed by City; Work by Others. 
The applicant has the option to either: 
A.  Deposit with City; Refund. Deposit with the City the amount of the estimate approved by the Engineer, plus the estimated cost for City administration, engineering, and inspection, and request the City to proceed with construction of the requested water main extension. The City, upon completion of such extension, shall refund to the applicant any money in excess of the total cost of construction of the water service connection. If the total cost of construction exceeds the deposit, the applicant shall be liable for any additional costs. 
B.  Work by Contractor; Inspection by City. The applicant may make or cause such water main extension to be made by a competent licensed contractor, but all such work shall be done under the inspection of the City Engineer. The applicant shall also post a faithful performance with the City to guarantee the completion of such work and pay such damages that may be caused to public right-of-way as a result of such construction. The applicant shall also pay all costs for City engineering and inspection, and shall provide the City with a one-year guarantee for all work performed.  
21.16.060 - Design and Specifications. 
A.  The design, location, materials, and standards of construction of all extensions shall be approved by the City Engineer and shall conform to City standards. 
B.  The design of an extension shall be based upon considerations of adequate capacity to meet the present and future requirements of the area to be benefitted, of distribution system operation and efficiency, of maintenance requirements, and of anticipated life of such extension. 
C.  Under no circumstances shall any structure be placed over or around any water main or extension, or within a City utility easement, unless provision is made for ready and easy access to any and all parts or points of such main or extension, and an appropriate encroachment permit has been granted by resolution of the City Council. 
D.  Materials and standards of construction shall be those which have been adopted and are used by the department for the area and class of service to be provided.  
21.16.070 - Water Utility Easements. 
Water utility easements shall be obtained for all water main extensions, except for water mains to be located within a public street; all utility easements shall be a minimum of 15 feet in width, except where, due to exceptional physical limitations, the City Engineer approves the acceptance of a ten-foot wide easement. In no case shall said easement be less than ten feet in width. Applicant shall be required to dedicate to the City all required water utility easements where such easements cross property owned by the applicant. Otherwise, the City shall acquire all required easements, and the cost of easement acquisition shall be included as a part of the total cost of the water main extension.  
21.16.080 - Application For Reimbursement. 
If any properties other than the applicants will benefit from such extension, then the application may apply for reimbursement agreement according to Section 21.16.080.  
21.16.090 - Acceptance By City. 
Upon completion of work and acceptance by the City, the water main will become the property of the City. All maintenance and future replacement will then become the responsibility of the City.  
21.16.100 - Reimbursement Agreement For Water Main Extensions. 
Upon application and after payment of appropriate application fees, the City Engineer shall prepare a written reimbursement agreement and a plat, and indicate the boundaries of the area that will be benefitted by the water main extension. The City Engineer shall then determine a pro rata share of the costs of main extension for each benefitting property based on estimated water demands per square footage of area. Benefitting properties shall then be required to pay this cost as a reimbursement charge, in addition to any water main connection charges required by the Code or any other ordinance of the City, before connecting service to the water main extension. The City shall establish a separate fund account for receipt of all reimbursement charges and shall return the reimbursement charges to the applicant, less administration fees and any other costs or fees, in accordance with the terms of the reimbursement agreement. Prior to becoming effective, all reimbursement agreements must be approved by the City Council.  
21.16.110 - Temporary Connections. 
When water service is required by an owner of real property on which there now exists or is planned for immediate construction, a dwelling, other structure or improvement requiring domestic water service and there is no water main adjacent to such property, the department may grant permission to such applicant to have a service connection and meter set at the nearest existing water main. The applicant shall agree in writing to the following conditions: to pay all costs of installation and maintenance of a pipeline from the service connection and meter to his property, and assume all responsibility, liability for, and the payment of, all costs and damages growing out of the installation, operation or failure of such pipeline. Such connection and pipeline shall be installed and used as a temporary arrangement only. No water shall be conveyed therethrough for the use of any residence or property other than the property for which it was originally intended. At such time as a regular permanent water main may be installed to serve the property under this agreement, and on written demand of the department, the applicant shall bear his proportionate share of the costs of such main extension and at his expense shall install a regular domestic water service, and shall discontinue the use of such temporary service connections and pipeline. 
(Ord. No. 107)  
Chapter 21.20 - WATER SUPPLY—BACKFLOW PREVENTION 
 
21.20.010 - Purpose. 
A.  The purpose of this Chapter is to: 
1.  Protect the public potable water supply of the City from the possibility of contamination or pollution by isolating within the customer's internal distribution system(s) such contaminants or pollutants which could backflow into the public water systems; 
2.  Promote the elimination or control of existing cross-connections, actual or potential, between the customer's in-plant potable water system(s) and nonpotable water system(s), plumbing fixtures, and industrial piping systems; and 
3.  Provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross-connection control which will systematically and effectively prevent the contamination or pollution of all potable water systems to the greatest extent feasible. 
B.  Responsibility. The Responsible Official shall be responsible for the protection of the public potable water distribution system from pollutants through any water service connection. If, in the judgement of the Responsible Official, an approved backflow prevention assembly is required at the customer's water service connection; or within the customer's private water system for the safety of the City water system, the Responsible Official shall give notice in writing to said customer to install an approved backflow prevention assembly(s) at specific location(s) on the premises. The customer shall immediately install such approved assembly(s) at the customer's own expense; and, failure, refusal or inability on the part of the customer to install, have tested and maintain said assembly(s) shall constitute a ground for discontinuing water service to the premises until such requirements have been satisfactorily met. 
C.  Reference. The provisions of the California Administrative Code, Title 17, §§ 758 et seq., as amended from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference. The Manual of Cross-Connection Control as published by the Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research, latest edition, is hereby adopted by reference. 
(Ord. No. 550)  
21.20.020 - Definitions. 
A.  Responsible Official means the City Manager, or the City Manager's designated agent, is invested with the authority and responsibility for the implementation of an effective cross-connection control program and for the enforcement of the provision of this Chapter. 
B.  Approved means accepted by the Responsible Official as meeting an applicable specification stated or cited in the ordinance, or as suitable for the proposed use. 
C.  Auxiliary Water Supply means any water supply on or available to the premises other than the City's water supply will be considered as an auxiliary water supply. These auxiliary waters may include water from another purveyor's public potable water supply or any natural source(s) such as a well, spring, river, stream, harbor, etc., or "reclaimed or recycled waters" or "industrial fluids." These waters may be contaminated or polluted or they may be objectionable and constitute an unacceptable water source over which the City does not have sanitary control. 
D.  Backflow means the reversal of the normal flow of water caused by either back-pressure or back-siphonage. 
E.  Back-Pressure means the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances under pressure into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply system from any source or sources other than the intended source. 
F.  Back-Siphonage means the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply from any source other than its intended source caused by the reduction of pressure in the potable water supply system. 
G.  Backflow Preventer means an assembly or means designated to prevent backflow. 
1.  Air-Gap means an unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water to a tank, plumbing, fixture, or other device and the flood level rim of said vessel. An approved air-gap shall be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe, measured vertically, above the overflow rim of the vessel; and in no case less than one inch. 
2.  Reduced Pressure Principle Assembly means an assembly of two independently acting approved check valves together with a hydraulically operating, mechanically independent differential pressure relief valve located between the check valves and at the same time below the first check valve. The unit shall include properly located test cocks and tightly closing shut-off valves at each end of the assembly. The entire assembly shall meet the design and performance specifications as determined by a laboratory and a field evaluation program resulting in approval by a recognized and City-approved testing agency for backflow prevention assemblies. 
3.  Double Check Valve Assembly means an assembly of two independently operating approved check valves with tightly closing shut-off valves on each end of the check valves, plus properly located test cocks for the testing of each check valve. The entire assembly shall meet the design and performance specifications as determined by a laboratory and field evaluation program resulting in approval by a recognized and City-approved testing agency for backflow prevention assemblies. To be approved, these assemblies must be readily accessible for in-line testing and maintenance. 
H.  Contamination - An impairment of the quality of the potable water by sewage, industrial fluids or waste liquids, compounds or other materials to a degree which creates an actual or potential hazard to the public health through poisoning or through the spread of disease, or through other deleterious effects. 
I.  Cross-Connection means any physical connection or arrangement of piping or fixtures between two otherwise separate piping systems, one of which contains potable water and the other non-potable water or industrial fluids of questionable safety, through which, or because of which, backflow may occur into the potable water system. This would include any temporary connections, such as swing connections, removable sections, four-way plug valves, spools, dummy sections of pipe, swivel or change-over devices or sliding multiport tubes. 
J.  Cross-Connections—Controlled means a connection between a potable water system and a non-potable water system with an approved backflow prevention assembly properly installed and maintained so that it will continuously afford the protection commensurate with the degree of hazard. 
K.  Cross-Connection Control by Containment means the installation of an approved backflow prevention assembly at the water service connection to any customer's premises where it is physically and economically unfeasible to find and permanently eliminate or control all actual or potential cross-connections within the customer's water system; or, it shall mean the installation of an approved backflow prevention assembly on the service line leading to and supplying a portion of a customer's water system where there are actual or potential cross-connections which cannot be effectively eliminated or controlled at the point of the cross-connection. 
L.  Hazard, Degree of means an evaluation of the potential risk to public health and the adverse effect of the hazard upon the potable water system as defined below: 
1.  Hazard—Health means any condition, device, or practice in the water supply system and its operation which could create, or in the judgement of the Responsible Official, may create a danger to the health and well-being of the water consumer. 
2.  Hazard—Plumbing means a plumbing type cross-connection in a customer's potable water system that has not been properly protected by an approved air-gap or approved backflow prevention assembly. 
3.  Hazard—Pollutional means an actual or potential threat to the physical properties of the water system or to the potability of the public or the customer's potable water system but which would constitute a nuisance or be aesthetically objectionable or could cause damage to the system or its appurtenances, but would not be dangerous to health. 
4.  Hazard—System means an actual or potential threat of severe damage to the physical properties of the public potable water system or the customer's potable water system or of a pollution or contamination which would have a protracted affect on the quality of the potable water in the system. 
M.  Industrial Fluids System means any system containing a fluid or solution which may be chemically, biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration such as would constitute a health, system, pollutional or plumbing hazard introduced into an approved water supply. This may include, but not be limited to: polluted or contaminated waters; all types of process waters and "used waters" originating from the public potable water system which may have deteriorated in sanitary quality; sewage; chemicals in fluid form; plating acids and alkalies, circulating cooling water connected to an open cooling tower and/or cooling towers that are chemically or biologically treated or stabilized with toxic substances; contaminated natural waters such as from wells, springs, streams, rivers, bays, harbors, seas, irrigation canals or systems, etc., oils, gases, glycerin, paraffins, caustic and acid solutions and other liquid and gaseous fluids used in industrial or other purposes or for fire-fighting purposes. 
N.  Pollution means the presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic, or biological) in water which tends to degrade its quality so as to constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness or quality of the water to a degree which does not create an actual hazard to the public health, but which does adversely and unreasonably affect such waters for domestic use. 
O.  Water—Potable means any water which, according to recognized standards, is safe for human consumption. 
P.  Water—Non-Potable means water which is not safe for human consumption or which is of questionable potability. 
Q.  Water—Service Connection means the terminal end of a service connection from the City's water system; i.e., where the City loses jurisdiction and sanitary control over the water at its point of delivery service connection, then the service connection shall mean the downstream end of the meter. There should be no unprotected take-offs from the service line ahead of any meter or any backflow prevention assembly located at the point of delivery to the customer's water system. A service connection shall also include a water service connection from a fire hydrant and all other City-approved temporary or emergency water service connections from the public potable water system. 
R.  Water—Used means any water supplied by a City from its public potable water system to a consumer's water system after it has passed through the point of delivery and is no longer under the sanitary control of the City. 
S.  Approved Backflow Prevention Assembly shall mean an assembly that has been manufactured in full conformance with the standards established by the American Water Works Association entitled: 
AWWA C506-84 Standards for Reduced Pressure Principle and Double Check Valve Backflow Prevention Devices; 
and, have met completely the laboratory and field performance specifications of the Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research of the University of Southern California established by: 
Specifications of Backflow Prevention Assemblies Section 10 of the most current issue of the MANUAL OF CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL. 
Said AWWA and FCCC and HR specifications are hereby adopted by the City. 
T.  Approved Testing Laboratory is a person or firm found on the County of San Diego Cross-Connection Control Program's list of certified testers.  
21.20.030 - Requirements. 
A.  No water service connection to any premises shall be installed or maintained by the City unless the water supply is protected as required by State laws and regulations and this Chapter. Service of water to any premises shall be discontinued by the City if a back-flow prevention assembly required by the Chapter is not installed, tested and maintained, or if it is found that a backflow prevention assembly has been removed, bypassed, made nonfunctional or if an unprotected cross-connection exists on the premises. Service will not be restored until such conditions or defects are corrected. 
B.  Upon reasonable notice, the customer's system shall be open for inspection at all reasonable times to authorized representatives of the City to determine whether cross-connections or other structural or sanitary hazards, including violations of these regulations, exist. When such a condition becomes known, the Responsible Official may, if in the Responsible Officials' opinion a hazard to public health exists, deny or immediately discontinue service to the premises by providing for a physical break in the service line until the customer has corrected the condition(s) in conformance with State and City statutes relating to plumbing and water supplies and the regulations adopted pursuant thereto. 
C.  An approved backflow prevention assembly shall also be installed on each service line to a customer's water system at or near the property line or immediately inside the building being served; but, in all cases, in an easily accessible location before the first branch line leading off the service line wherever the following conditions exist: 
1.  Any premises having an auxiliary water supply which is not or may not be of safe bacteriological or chemical quality and which is not acceptable as an additional source by the State Department of Health Services. 
2.  Any premises on which any industrial fluids or any other objectionable substance is handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard to the public water system. This shall include the handling of process waters and waters originating from the utility system which have been subject to deterioration in quality. 
3.  Any premises having (1) internal cross-connection that cannot be permanently corrected or controlled, or (2) intricate plumbing and piping arrangements or where entry to all proportions of the premises is not readily accessible for inspection purposes, making it impracticable or impossible to ascertain whether or not dangerous cross-connections exist. 
4.  Any premises having a separate irrigation system(s).  
21.20.040 - List of Facilities. 
Plants or facilities where backflow prevention assemblies will usually be required are without limitation: 
1.  Auxiliary Water Systems. 
2.  Buildings—Hotels, Apartment Houses, Public and Private Buildings, or any other structures having unprotected cross-connections. 
3.  Car Wash Facilities. 
4.  Chemical Plants—Manufacturing, Processing, Compounding or Treatment. 
5.  Chemically Contaminated Water Systems. 
6.  Civil Works. 
7.  Film Laboratories. 
8.  Fire Systems. 
9.  Hospitals, Medical Buildings, Sanitariums, Morgues, Mortuaries, Autopsy Facilities, Nursing and Convalescent Homes and Clinics. 
10.  Irrigation Systems—Premises Having Separate Systems (i.e. Parks, Playgrounds, Cemeteries, Golf Courses, Schools, Estates, Ranches, etc.). 
11.  Laundries and Dye Works. 
12.  Metal Manufacturing, Cleaning, Processing and Fabricating Plants. 
13.  Multi-storied Buildings. 
14.  Multiple Services—Interconnected. 
15.  Oil and Gas Production, Storage or Transmission Properties. 
16.  Paper and Paper Products Plants. 
17.  Plating Plants. 
18.  Power Plants. 
19.  Radioactive Materials or Substances—Plants or Facilities Handling. 
20.  Restricted, Classified or other Closed Facilities. 
21.  Rubber Plants—Natural or Synthetic. 
22.  Sand and Gravel Plants. 
23.  Schools and Colleges. 
24.  Sewage and Storm Drain Facilities, Reclaimed Water Plants. 
25.  Solar Heating Systems—Direct Auxiliary. 
26.  Temporary Service. 
27.  Waterfront Facilities and Industries, Marinas. 
28.  Any other facility required by State law, local ordinances, or the Responsible Official. 
Note: A detailed discussion of plants and facilities that usually require backflow prevention assemblies and the degree of protection required can be found in Section 7 of the Manual of Cross Connection Control, which is adopted by reference in Subsection 21.20.010.C.  
21.20.050 - Types of Protective Assemblies. 
The type of protective assembly required shall depend upon the degree of hazard which exists as follows: 
A.  In the case of any premises where there is an auxiliary water supply which is not subject to any of the following rules, the public water system shall be protected by an approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly. 
B.  In the case of any premises where there is water or substance that would be objectionable, but not hazardous to health, if introduced into the public water system, the public water system shall be protected by an approved double check valve assembly. 
C.  In the case of any premises where there is any material dangerous to health which is handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard to the public water system, the public water system shall be protected by an approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly. Examples where these conditions will exist include sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations, chemical manufacturing plants, hospitals, dental and medical offices, mortuaries and plating plants. 
D.  In the case of any premises where there are "uncontrolled" cross-connections, either actual or potential, the public water system shall be protected by an approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly at the service connection. 
E.  In the case of any premises where, because of security requirements or other prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a complete in-plant cross-connection survey, the public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by either an approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly on each service to the premises.  
21.20.060 - Approval of Assembly. 
A.  Any backflow prevention assembly required herein shall be a model and size approved by the Responsible Official. 
B.  Final approval shall be evidenced by a "Certificate of Approval" issued by an approved testing laboratory certifying full compliance with the said AWWA standards and FCCC & HR specifications. 
C.  Backflow preventers which may be subjected to back-pressure or back-siphonage that have been fully tested and have been granted a Certificate of Approval by an approved testing laboratory and are listed on the laboratory's current list of "Approved Backflow Prevention Assemblies" may be used without further test or qualification. 
D.  Any newly installed backflow prevention assembly must be tested and certified by an approved testing laboratory prior to being connected to the City water system.  
21.20.070 - Maintenance of Assembly. 
A.  It is the responsibility of the customer at any premises where backflow prevention assemblies are installed to maintain the assemblies in full operating condition at all times and to have certified inspections and operational tests made at least once per year. In those instances where the Responsible Official deems the hazard to be great enough, he/she may require certified inspections at more frequent intervals. These inspections and tests shall be at the expense of the customer and shall be performed by an approved testing laboratory. It shall be the duty of the Responsible Official to see that these tests are made in a timely manner. The City shall maintain records of the tests. Customers will be notified by the City approximately one month prior to the backflow test due date. The customer-user shall notify the Responsible Official at least one week in advance of the retest date so that a representative of the City may witness the tests, if desired. 
B.  Assemblies shall be repaired, overhauled or replaced at the expense of the customer-user whenever said assemblies are found to be defective. Records of such tests, repairs and overhaul shall be kept by the customer and a copy shall be sent to the City. 
C.  If the Responsible Official has reason to question the accuracy of the tests or certification, the Responsible Official may require the customer to retest the backflow prevention assemblies. 
D.  The City may require the payment of a fee for the administration, notification and other City costs associated with regulation of backflow prevention devices and compliance with this Chapter. 
E.  A non-compliance fee of $15.00 will be assessed to those customers who fail to certify that their backflow preventive devices have been tested within the 45 days provided from the time of notification by the City. If certification is not received within 15 days after the 45-day fee is imposed, service will be subject to termination under the conditions stipulated in Subsections 21.12.130.B., C. 
(Ord. No. 650, § 4)  
Chapter 21.24 - ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT 
 
21.24.010 - Revocation or Suspension of Permits—Disconnection of Facilities (Government Code §§ 60370 et seq.). 
A.  The City Manager may revoke or suspend a permit issued to any permittee in the event of a violation by the permittee of any provision of any of the rules and regulations adopted in the manner provided for herein. 
B.  In accordance with the procedures in this Chapter, the City Manager may terminate service and disconnect from the public water system any connection that is connected or used without a required permit; or constructed, connected or used contrary to any of the provisions of any applicable state, federal or local law or this Code, or the rules and regulations adopted for herein. 
C.  When a premise has been disconnected, it shall not be reconnected until the violation for which it was disconnected has ceased or has been remedied and a reasonable charge for such disconnection and reconnection, as established by the City Manager, has been paid. 
(Ord. No. 472)  
21.24.020 - Notice of Termination. 
A.  No earlier than 19 days following the date of mailing of the City's bill for services and before termination or disconnection of service, the City Manager shall cause to be mailed a Notice of Termination to the customer to whom the service is billed, and if there is no customer, then to the owner of the premises. The Notice of Termination shall be mailed, postage prepaid at least 15 days prior to the scheduled day of termination. 
B.  At least 48 hours prior to any termination of service, the City Manager shall cause to be made a reasonable good faith effort to contact by telephone or in person an adult person residing at the premises to be disconnected to provide a second Notice of Termination. 
C.  A Notice of Termination shall contain: 
1.  The customer of record's name and address; 
2.  The amount of the delinquency; 
3.  The date by which payment or arrangements for payment is required in order to avoid termination; 
4.  The procedure by which the customer may initiate a complaint or request an investigation concerning service or charges, except unless the bill for service contains a description of that procedure; 
5.  The procedure by which the customer may request amortization of the unpaid charges; 
6.  The procedure for the customer to obtain information on the availability for financial assistance, including private, local, state or federal sources, if applicable; and 
7.  The telephone number of the City Manager who can provide additional information or institute arrangements for payment.  
21.24.030 - Requirements and Restrictions on Termination. 
A.  The City shall not terminate residential service for nonpayment in any of the following situations: 
1.  During the pendency of an investigation by the City of a customer dispute or complaint; 
2.  When a customer has been granted an extension of the period for payment of a bill; or 
3.  On the certification of a licensed physician and surgeon that to do so will be life threatening to the customer, and the customer is financially unable to pay for service within the normal payment period and is willing to enter into an amortization agreement with the City pursuant to this Chapter with respect to all charges that the customer is unable to pay prior to delinquency. 
B.  The City shall not, by reason of delinquency in payment for service, cause cessation of the service on any Saturday, Sunday, legal holiday, or at any time during which the business offices of the City are not open to the public.  
21.24.040 - Disconnection of Multi-Unit Services. 
A.  For termination of nonpayment of master-metered residential units where the owner, manager or management company is listed by the City as the customer of record, the City shall make every good faith effort to inform the actual users of the services, when the account is in arrears, by means of a notice that such users have the right to become customers of the City without being required to pay the amount due on the delinquent account. 
B.  The City is not required to make service available to the actual users unless each actual user agrees to the terms and conditions of service, and meets the requirements of the City's rules and tariffs. However, if one or more actual users are willing and able to assume responsibility for the entire account to the satisfaction of the City of selectively terminating service to those actual users who have not met the requirements of the City's rules and tariffs, the City shall make service available to the actual users who have met those requirements. 
C.  Where prior service for a period of time is a condition for establishing credit with the City, residence and proof of prompt payment of rent for that period of time is a satisfactory equivalent. 
D.  Any actual user who becomes a customer of the City pursuant to this Section whose periodic payments, such as rental payments, include charges for residential sewer service, where these charges are not separately stated, may deduct from the periodic payment for each payment period all reasonable charges paid to the City for those services during the preceding payment period.  
21.24.050 - Customer Complaint, Investigation, Request. 
A.  Any residential customer who has initiated a complaint or requested an investigation within five working days of receiving the disputed bill, or who has, within 13 days of mailing of the Notice of Termination, made a request for amortization of the payment period of a bill asserted to be beyond the means of the customer to pay in full during the normal period for payment, shall be given an opportunity to have the City Manager review the complaint, the investigation, or the customer's request. The review shall include consideration of whether the customer shall be permitted to amortize the unpaid balance of the account over a reasonable period of time, not to exceed 12 months. 
B.  Any customer whose complaint or request for an investigation pursuant to Subsection A. of this Section has resulted in an adverse determination to the Board.  
21.24.060 - Amortization of Customer Obligation. 
A.  Any customer meeting the requirements of this Chapter shall, upon the customer's request, be permitted to amortize, over a period not to exceed 12 months, the unpaid balance of any bill asserted to be beyond the means of the customer to pay within the normal period for payment. 
B.  No termination of service shall be effected for any customer complying with an amortization agreement, if the customer also keeps the account current as charges accrue in each subsequent billing period. 
C.  If a residential customer fails to comply with an amortization agreement, the City shall not terminate service without first giving written notice to the customer, at least 48 hours prior to termination, which identifies the conditions which the customer is required to meet to avoid termination. The customer is not entitled to further investigation by the City.  
Chapter 21.60 - WATER CONSERVATION PROGRAM 
 
21.60.010 - Purpose. 
A.  This Chapter establishes a water conservation program with requirements intended to conserve water supplies, minimize the effects of water supply shortages, recognizing the semi-arid nature of the area, the heavy dependence on imported water and the limitations on supplies. 
B.  To the degree that the requirements imposed in this Chapter are more stringent than the requirements contained in the State Building Standards Code, the requirements of this Chapter shall prevail and shall be applicable within the City. The City finds that these more stringent requirements are necessary to respond to the semi-arid, climatic conditions of the region in which the City is located which require existing and future development to be served by imported water. (Health and Safety Code § 17958.5.) 
C.  To the degree that the requirements contained in this Chapter are more stringent than the regulations contained elsewhere in the Municipal Code of the City, the requirements of this Chapter shall prevail and shall be applicable within the City. 
(Ord. No. 603)  
21.60.020 - Scope of Chapter. 
The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to the construction of new structures and to the alteration of existing structures, as specified in this Chapter.  
21.60.030 - Policy. 
A.  It is the policy of the City that all public and private users of water within the City shall use such water for reasonable purposes and in a reasonable and conscientious effort to conserve water. 
B.  While this Chapter may not require some construction and structural alteration projects to meet the requirements herein, these requirements should still be considered as recommended for conserving water. 
C.  The City Council may initiate and maintain education programs to encourage the conservation of water.  
21.60.034 - Conservation Practices. 
No person shall knowingly use water or permit the use of water supplied by the City for residential, commercial, industrial, agricultural, governmental or any other purpose in a manner which does not reflect sound conservation practices. The following general guidelines are recommended to promote reasonable use of water: 
A.  Toilets. 
1.  Check toilet tanks for leaks with food coloring or a dye tablet. 
2.  Flush toilets only when necessary. Do not use toilets as ashtrays or for trash disposal. 
3.  Consider installing water displacing bags or bottles in tanks or replace toilets with low flush one and one-sixth gal/flush toilets or flushometers with low volume one gal/flush valves. 
B.  Showers. 
1.  Limit shower time and install a push type shutoff on the showerhead. 
2.  Consider installing low flow showerheads. 
3.  Catch the water flow in a bucket while waiting for warmup and use the water for landscaping or flushing. 
C.  Run only fully loaded washing machines and dishwashers. 
D.  Turn off water while shaving or brushing teeth. 
E.  Retrofit pre-1991 reverse osmosis water treatment units with an automatic shutoff valve. 
F.  Water softeners should be demand initiated regeneration type or controlled manually. 
G.  Repair all water leaks promptly. 
H.  Landscaping. 
1.  Irrigate only between 4:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. except for drip or micro irrigation systems. 
2.  Consider retrofitting non-turf irrigation with low volume drip or micro irrigation systems. 
3.  Adjust automatic irrigation systems based on the season and weather conditions. 
4.  Convert turf areas to drought tolerant varieties or change plantings to drought tolerant varieties. 
5.  Control irrigation to avoid runoff to adjacent properties or public or private roadways. 
I.  Use brooms to clean outdoor paved areas and do not water wash except to alleviate immediate safety or sanitation hazards. 
J.  Wash cars only using hand held hoses with positive shut off nozzles. 
K.  Only operate ornamental fountains that recirculate water. 
L.  Restaurants should serve water only upon request.  
21.60.040 - Requirements. 
Where applicable, the construction of new structures and the modification/sale of existing structures shall comply with the following provisions: 
A.  Showerheads. All showerheads for all shower fixtures shall be certified as having a maximum flow rate of no more than two and one-half gallons per minute. 
B.  Water Closets, Urinals and Associated Flushometer Valves. All water closets and associated flushometer valves, if any, shall be certified as using no more than one and one-sixth gallons per flush and shall meet the performance standards established by the "American Society of Mechanical Engineers" A112.19.2. All urinals and associated flushometer valves, if any, shall be certified as using no more than one gallon per flush and shall meet the performance standards established by the "American Society of Mechanical Engineers" A112.19.2. 
C.  Faucets. All lavatory and sink faucets shall be fitted with flow-restricting aerators with a certified, maximum flow rate of no more than two and two-tenths gallons per minute. 
D.  Meters. All service connections within the City shall be metered. The City shall determine the number of dwelling units or land area to be supplied through each service connection. 
E.  Landscaping and Irrigation. 
1.  No more than 15 percent of lot area of a building site shall be used for the installation and maintenance of grasses or turf. Grass and turf areas shall be separated from other vegetation so that the turf can be irrigated separately. 
2.  Only low volume drip or micro irrigation systems shall be used to irrigate non-turf, outside landscaping areas.  
21.60.050 - New Construction. 
A building permit shall not be issued for the construction of a new structure until the applicant has demonstrated that the proposed new structure and site will be in compliance with the requirements of Section 21.60.040 of this Chapter.  
21.60.060 - Modification of Existing Structures. 
A building permit shall not be issued for a project which adds 500 square feet of floor area to an existing structure (to be calculated pursuant to the provisions of the DMMC) until the applicant has demonstrated that the proposed work will include bringing the structure into compliance with the requirements of Subsections A., B. and C. of Section 21.60.040.  
21.60.070 - Sale of Existing Structure. 
A.  Seller. 
1.  It shall be unlawful for any seller of real property within the City, developed with a structure containing one or more fixtures which do not comply with the requirements of this Chapter, to convey such property without first bringing all such fixtures into conformity with the provisions of Subsections A., B. and C. of Section 21.60.040. 
2.  It shall be unlawful for any seller of real property within the City, developed with one or more fixtures which do not comply with the requirements of this Chapter, to fail to provide the buyer with a certificate, signed by the seller, and presented prior to the closing of the sale of the property, specifying that the seller has complied with seller's requirements imposed by this Chapter. 
B.  Buyer. It shall be unlawful for any person who purchases property within the City after April 15, 1992, developed with a structure containing one of more fixtures which do not comply with the requirements of this Chapter, to occupy such property when such fixtures are not in conformance with the requirements of this Chapter. 
C.  Real Estate Agents. It shall be unlawful for any real estate agent, real estate broker or a real estate sales person, whether representing a seller or a buyer, who is involved in the sale of real property within the City, to fail to give written notice to the party which such agent, broker, or sales person represents of the requirements of this Chapter, prior to the closing of the sale of the property.  
21.60.080 - Prohibitions. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to remove all or part of a fixture which complies with the requirements of this Chapter, and replace such fixture in such a manner that the fixture does not comply with the requirements of this Chapter. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any person to install a fixture which does not comply with the requirements of this Chapter.  
21.60.090 - Modification of Regulation as Applied in Special Circumstances. 
A.  Appeals Board. The City Council shall be the Appeals Board for this Chapter. 
B.  Appeal. 
1.  Any person subject to the regulations and decisions imposed in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter may submit an appeal, in writing, to the City Clerk. 
2.  The City Manager may render a decision or set the matter to be heard by the Appeals Board which will render a written decision within 30 calendar days of the receipt of the appeal. 
3.  If the appellant is dissatisfied with the City Manager's determination, the appellant may seek a review by the Appeals Board. 
C.  Modification Authorized. In accordance with the procedures provided above, the City Manager and the Appeals Board are authorized to make minor and limited modifications to any regulation in this Chapter when it has been demonstrated that due to special circumstances as applied to a particular case, the application of the unmodified regulation constitutes a threat to health, safety or welfare or will result in an undue, unreasonable hardship. Provided, however, that such modification shall not cause water to be wasted or used in an unreasonable manner and the purposes of this Chapter can be accomplished.  
Chapter 21.70 - EMERGENCY WATER MANAGEMENT 
 
21.70.010 - Purpose. 
This Chapter establishes an emergency water management program in order to conserve water supplies, minimize the effects of water supply shortages, and allow the City to respond to water emergency conditions. (Cal. Const. Art. X, §§ 2 and 7; and Water Code § 375.) 
(Ord. No. 603; Ord. No. 816; Ord. No. 828; Ord. No. 903)  
21.70.020 - Scope of Chapter. 
The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to all persons using water delivered by the City.  
21.70.030 - Water Conservation Policy. 
A.  It is the policy of the City that all public and private users of water delivered by the City shall use such water for reasonable purposes and in a reasonable manner in a conscientious effort to conserve water. 
B.  When the emergency water use regulations in this Chapter are not declared to be in effect, those regulations may still be considered as recommended methods for voluntarily conserving water. 
C.  The City may initiate and maintain education programs to encourage the conservation of water. 
Cross reference— Water conservation program, Ch. 21.60.  
21.70.040 - Water Management Regulations. 
A.  Stages. During water shortages, the City shall impose water use regulations in stages. Sections 21.70.100 et seq. of this Chapter contain a sequential, regulatory program of increasingly more stringent prohibitions on the use of water delivered within the City. When the City declares that a particular water management stage is in effect, the regulations contained in a declared stage shall be complied with by all persons using water delivered by the City. 
B.  Declaration of Stage. 
1.  The City shall monitor the projected supply of water and the demand for water by persons within its jurisdiction and, in consultation with those agencies providing water to City, determine when water management regulations are required in order for the City to deal with water shortages. 
2.  When it is determined that a particular stage of water management regulation is required, either the City Council or the City Manager may issue a declaration which will announce the stage of regulatory management that is to be imposed. 
3.  The declaration shall be made by public announcement posted at City Hall. Also, notice shall be published a minimum of three consecutive times in a newspaper of general circulation. 
4.  If the declaration is made by the City Manager, the matter shall be placed on the agenda of the City Council at its next meeting. The City Council shall thereupon ratify the City Manager's declaration, rescind the declaration, or issue its own declaration. 
5.  The regulatory stage announced in the declaration shall become effective seven days following the date of posting; except, when a water emergency is declared, the regulatory Stage shall become effective immediately upon posting.  
21.70.050 - Modification of Regulation as Applied In Special Circumstance. 
A.  Appeals Board. An Appeals Board for this Chapter shall consist of the City Council. 
B.  Appeal. 
1.  Any person subject to the regulations and decisions imposed in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter may submit an appeal, in writing, to the City Clerk. 
2.  The City Manager may render a decision or set the matter to be heard by the Appeals Board which will render a written decision within 30 calendar days of the receipt of the appeal. 
3.  If the appellant is dissatisfied with the City Manager's determination, the appellant may seek a review by the Appeals Board. 
C.  Modification Authorized. In accordance with the procedures provided above, the City Manager and the Appeals Board are authorized to make minor and limited modifications to any regulation in this Chapter when it has been demonstrated that due to special circumstances as applied to a particular case, the application of the unmodified regulation constitutes a threat to health, safety or welfare or will result in an undue, unreasonable hardship. Provided, however, that such modification shall not cause water to be wasted or used in an unreasonable manner and the purposes of this Chapter can be accomplished.  
21.70.060 - Prohibition. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to knowingly use water or permit the use of water supplied by the City in a manner contrary to any provision of this Chapter declared to be in effect. (Misdemeanor in accordance with Water Code § 377.) 
B.  The use of reclaimed or "grey" water in accordance with the regulations of the Department of Health Services and in accordance with any other applicable regulations, is not subject to the regulations of this Chapter. 
C.  It is a misdemeanor for anyone to tamper with or otherwise interfere with the operation of a water meter without the express authority, in writing, of the City. 
D.  It is unlawful for any person to knowingly present false information to the City when information is requested by the City in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. 
E.  Compliance with this Section is a condition imposed upon the continued uninterrupted delivery of water.  
21.70.090 - Enforcement—Restricting or Discontinuing Water Service. 
A.  A continued, willful failure to comply with the conditions imposed upon the continued, uninterrupted delivery of water may result in a Notice of Violation being mailed to the metered customer, accompanied by a copy of relevant portions of these regulations. 
B.  Failure to correct the violation by bringing water use into compliance with the conditions imposed upon the continued, uninterrupted delivery of water will result in a Notice of Hearing Re: Violation being mailed to the metered customer. 
C.  The City Manager shall conduct the hearing. The noticed person shall have the opportunity to present information and arguments in response to the notice. 
D.  Following the hearing, if an uncured violation is found to exist, the City Manager may order either: 
1.  The installation of a flow restrictor in the meter for a minimum of 72 hours; or 
2.  Discontinuance of water service for a specified period of time. 
E.  When it is necessary to install a flow restrictor or to discontinue service, a metered customer shall pay a fee of $250.00 to the City. When it is necessary to remove a flow restrictor or to re-establish water service, a metered customer shall pay a fee of $250.00 to the City. The fees referenced in this subparagraph are payable by the metered customer when the service is rendered. Further, payment in full of all outstanding fees is a condition to the restoration of full service.  
21.70.110 - Demand Management/Drought Response Stage 1—Drought Watch Condition. 
A.  A Demand Management/Drought Response Stage 1 condition is also referred to as a "Drought Watch" condition. A Stage 1 shall be declared to encourage voluntary water conservation. This Stage 1 condition applies when the Water Authority notifies its member agencies that due to drought or other supply reductions, there is a reasonable probability there will be supply shortages and that a consumer demand reduction of up to ten percent is required in order to ensure that sufficient supplies will be available to meet anticipated demands. 
B.  When Stage 1 is declared and in effect, all persons shall be urged to comply, on a voluntary basis, with the water usage reduction and other conditions contained in the declarations. 
Additional Conditions on Uninterrupted Delivery: None. 
(Ord. No. 816; Ord. No. 828; Ord. No 948 , § 2, Exh. B, 6-3-2019)  
21.70.120 - Demand Management/Drought Response Stage 2—Drought Alert Condition. 
A.  A Demand Management/Drought Response Stage 2 condition is also referred to as a "Drought Alert" condition. A Stage 2 shall be declared when the City determines that water usage should be reduced up to 20 percent from the ordinary demand requirement, as determined by the City. 
B.  When Stage 2 is declared and in effect, metered customers of the City shall receive uninterrupted water delivery subject to the modified surcharge rate structure set as follows: 
Meter 
Size 	Bimonthly Fixed Surcharge During Demand Management/Drought: 
	7/1/19 	1/1/20 	1/1/21 	1/1/22 	1/1/23 	1/1/24 
?" 	$2.98 	$3.14 	$3.26 	$3.40 	$3.64 	$3.84 
¾" 	4.48 	4.70 	4.90 	5.10 	5.46 	5.76 
1" 	7.46 	7.84 	8.16 	8.50 	9.10 	9.58 
1 ½" 	14.90 	15.68 	16.30 	17.00 	18.20 	19.14 
2" 	23.84 	25.08 	26.08 	27.20 	29.10 	30.64 
3" 	47.68 	50.14 	52.16 	54.40 	58.20 	61.26 
4" 	74.48 	78.32 	81.48 	84.98 	90.94 	95.70 
22nd DAA* 	953.24 	1,002.48 	1,042.94 	1,087.64 	1,163.98 	1,224.84 
One 8" meter and two 10" meters 
 
Volumetric Surcharge applied to all units of usage by all customer classes. 
Volumetric Surcharge During Demand Management/Drought Periods: 
7/1/19 	1/1/20 	1/1/21 	1/1/22 	1/1/23 	1/1/24 
$0.23 	$0.25 	$0.26 	$0.27 	$0.29 	$0.30 
 
(Ord. No. 816; Ord. No. 828; Ord. No. 903; Ord. No 948 , § 2, Exh. B, 6-3-2019)  
21.70.130 - Demand Management/Drought Response Stage 3—Drought Critical Condition. 
A.  A Demand Management/Drought Response Stage 3 condition is also referred to as a "Drought Critical" condition. Stage 3 shall be declared when the City determines that water usage should be reduced up to 40 percent from the ordinary demand requirement, as determined by the City. 
B.  When a Stage 3 is declared and in effect, metered customers of the City shall receive uninterrupted water delivery subject to the modified surcharge rate structure set as follows: 
Meter Size 	Bimonthly Fixed Surcharge During Demand Management/Drought: 
	7/1/19 	1/1/20 	1/1/21 	1/1/22 	1/1/23 	1/1/24 
?" 	$4.84 	$5.04 	$5.26 	$5.44 	$5.86 	$6.20 
¾" 	7.24 	7.56 	7.88 	8.22 	8.78 	9.30 
1" 	12.08 	12.60 	13.12 	13.70 	14.62 	15.48 
1 ½" 	24.14 	25.18 	26.24 	27.38 	29.24 	30.94 
2" 	38.62 	40.28 	41.98 	43.82 	46.80 	49.52 
3" 	77.22 	80.54 	83.94 	87.62 	93.58 	99.02 
4" 	120.64 	125.84 	131.16 	136.90 	146.20 	154.70 
22nd DAA* 	1,544.08 	1,610.52 	1,678.80 	1,752.30 	1,871.32 1,980.06 	
*One 8" meter and two 10" meters 
 
Volumetric Surcharge applied to all units of usage by all customer classes. 
Volumetric Surcharge During Demand Management/Drought Periods: 
7/1/19 	1/1/20 	1/1/21 	1/1/22 	1/1/23 	1/1/24 
$0.42 	$0.44 	$0.46 	$0.48 	$0.52 	$0.55 
 
(Ord. No. 816; Ord. No. 828; Ord. No. 903; Ord. No 948 , § 2, Exh. B, 6-3-2019)  
21.70.140 - Demand Management/Drought Response Stage 4—Drought Emergency Condition. 
A.  A Demand Management/Drought Response Stage 4 condition is also referred to as a "Drought Emergency" condition. A Stage 4 shall be declared when the City declares a water shortage emergency pursuant to California Water Code Section 350 which requires a demand reduction of more than 40 percent in order for the City of Del Mar to have maximum supplies available to meet anticipated demands from the ordinary demand requirement, as determined by the City. 
B.  When a Stage 4 is declared and in effect, metered customers of the City shall receive uninterrupted water delivery subject to the modified surcharge rate structure set as follows: 
Meter Size 	Bimonthly Fixed Surcharge During Demand Management/Drought: 
	7/1/19 	1/1/20 	1/1/21 	1/1/22 	1/1/23 	1/1/24 
5/8" 	$6.64 	$6.94 	$7.24 	$7.56 	$8.06 	$8.56 
3/4" 	9.96 	10.40 	10.86 	11.34 	12.10 	12.84 
1" 	16.60 	17.34 	18.10 	18.90 	20.16 	21.38 
1 1/2" 	33.20 	34.68 	36.18 	37.78 	40.30 	42.74 
2" 	53.12 	55.48 	57.88 	60.44 	64.48 	68.40 
3" 	106.22 	110.94 	115.74 	120.86 	128.94 	136.78 
4" 	165.96 	173.34 	180.84 	188.84 	201.46 	213.70 
22nd DAA* 	2,124.18 	2,218.54 	2,314.68 	2,416.94 	2,578.68 	2,735.28 
*One 8" meter and two 10" meters 
 
Volumetric Surcharge applied to all units of usage by all customer classes. 
Volumetric Surcharge During Demand Management/Drought Periods: 
7/1/19 	1/1/20 	1/1/21 	1/1/22 	1/1/23 	1/1/24 
$0.66 	$0.69 	$0.72 	$0.76 	$0.81 	$0.86 
 
(Ord. No. 816; Ord. No. 828; Ord. No. 903; Ord. No 948 , § 2, Exh. B, 6-3-2019)  
21.70.150 - Wastewater Utility Rates During Demand Management/Drought Conditions. 
A.  Wastewater customers are billed for sewer service based on their water usage. During demand management/drought periods, water usage will decline and threaten the fiscal stability of the wastewater utility. Therefore, during demand management/drought periods, wastewater charges will be calculated based on the assumption that sewer usage is the same as the commensurate month from the last non-drought fiscal year. Drought sewer charges will be lifted after one full year of non-drought consumption records can be established. 
1.  Residential. Sewer discharges will be estimated based on the assumed sewage usage during the last non-drought year. 
2.  Commercial. Sewer discharges will be estimated based on 90 percent of the water usage during the last non-drought year. A user may petition to have their sewer discharge (water usage) assumption lowered if their annual water demand drops below their non-drought water demands by a level below the drought reduction levels plus an additional 20 percent. As a user can meet the previously defined criteria, their sewage discharge assumptions will be lowered to the current water demands, adding back any water savings required under the drought requirements. As an example, if the drought reductions are 20 percent, and the user drops their water consumption by 45 percent, then the resulting sewer will be calculated based on 120 percent of the current water consumption. 
3.  Fairgrounds. Sewer commodity charges during drought conditions will be calculated based on the greater of (1) the rolling average of the past same bi-monthly period during the last three fiscal years or (2) the actual metered sewage. 
(Ord. No 948 , § 2, Exh. B, 6-3-2019)  
21.70.160 - Additional Conditions on Uninterrupted Delivery. 
In accordance with California Government Code § 53756, the rates posted above will be adjusted accordingly to account for any increases in the purchase cost of wholesale water, or increases in inflationary measure.  
TITLE 22 - SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL  
Chapter 22.04 - GENERAL 
 
22.04.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this Section. 
A.  Unless otherwise defined herein, terms related to water quality shall be as adopted in the latest edition of Standard Methods for Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water Environment Federation. The testing procedures for waste constituents and characteristics shall be as provided in 40 CFR 136 (Code of Federal Regulations). 
B.  Other terms not herein specifically defined shall have the same definition as set forth in the latest adopted editions of the California Codes of Regulations applicable to building construction adopted pursuant to the California Building Standards Law. 
C.  Subject to the foregoing provisions, the following definitions shall apply in these regulations: 
1.  Applicant means any person who applies for connections to the sewer system. 
2.  Assessment means a levy of special assessment which is shown on the records of the City. Any other assessment for a sewer main shall be construed as a nominal or partial assessment for the purposes of this Chapter. 
3.  Best Management Practices means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures and other management practices to prevent or reduce the introduction of Fats, Oils, and Grease (FOG) to the sewer facilities as more specifically provided for in Subsection 22.08.051.B. of these regulations. 
4.  Change in Operations. Any change in the ownership, food types, operational procedures or business practices that have the potential to increase the amount of FOG generated and/or discharged by Food Service Establishments in an amount that alone or in conjunction with other FOG discharges causes or creates a potential for sanitary sewer overflows (SSOs) to occur. 
5.  City. The City of Del Mar or the City Council of Del Mar. 
6.  Composite Sample. A collection of individual samples obtained at selected intervals based on an increment of either flow or time. The resulting mixture (composite sample) forms a representative sample of the waste stream discharged during the sample period. 
7.  Department. The Department of Public Works of the City. Action of the Department may be taken by the Director of Public Works or his duly authorized representative. 
8.  Director. The person designated by the City Manager to have charge of the administration and supervision of the Public Works Department, and such other duties as the City Manager may prescribe. 
9.  Discharger. Any person who discharges or causes a discharge of wastewater or waste directly or indirectly to the sewer facilities. Discharger shall mean the same as User. 
10.  Effluent. Any liquid outflow from a Food Service Establishment that is discharged to the sewer facilities. 
11.  Equivalent Dwelling Unit means the unit of measure which is based on the flow characteristics of an average single-family residence in terms of sewage quantity and constituent quality. 
12.  Extension means an extension of an existing sewer main. 
13.  Fats, Oils, and Grease ("FOG") means any substance such as a vegetable or animal product that is used in, or is a by-product of, the cooking or food preparation process, and that turns or may turn viscous or solidifies or may solidify with a change in temperature or due to other conditions. Discharges of FOG to the sewer system from a Food Service Establishment constitute the discharge of industrial waste. 
14.  FOG Control Program means the FOG control program required by and developed pursuant to SWRCB Order No. 2006-0003-DWQ, Section (D)(13)(vii) and by the RWQCB directive R9-2007-0005. 
15.  FOG Control Program Administrator means the individual designated by the City Manager to administer the FOG Control Program. Except as otherwise set forth in this Chapter, the FOG Control Program Administrator is responsible for all determinations of compliance with the FOG control program. 
16.  Food Service Establishment means facilities defined in California Uniform Retail Food Facilities Law (CURFFL), California Health and Safety Code Section 113785, and any commercial entity discharging directly or indirectly to the City's sewer system, operating in a permanently constructed structure such as a room, building, or place, or portion thereof, maintained, used, or operated for the purpose of storing, preparing, serving, manufacturing, packaging, or otherwise handling food for sale to other entities, or for consumption by the public, its members or employees, and which has any process or device that uses or produces FOG, or grease vapors, steam, fumes, smoke or odors that are required to be removed by a Type I or Type II hood. 
17.  Food Grinder means any device installed for the purpose of grinding food waste or food preparation by-products for disposal to the sewer system. 
18.  General Business/Institutional shall mean all businesses, offices, governmental agency offices and any other similar user not otherwise included in another category and with a combined sewer strength of less than or equal to a Single-Family Residence. 
19.  Grab Sample. A sample taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis without regard to the flow in the waste stream and without consideration of time. 
20.  Gravity Grease Interceptor means a multi-compartment device that is constructed in different sizes and is generally required to be located, according to the California Plumbing Code, underground between a Food Service Establishment and the connection to the sewer system. These devices primarily use gravity to separate FOG from the wastewater as it moves from one compartment to the next. These devices must be cleaned, maintained, and have the FOG removed and disposed of in a proper manner on regular intervals to be effective. 
21.  Grease means any material which is extractable from an acidified sample of a waste by hexane or other designated solvent and as determined by the appropriate procedure in "Standard Methods" (includes fats and oils). 
22.  Grease Control Device means any gravity grease interceptor, hydromechanical grease interceptor or other mechanism, device, or process, which attaches to, or is applied to, wastewater plumbing fixtures and lines, the purpose of which is to trap, collect or treat FOG prior to discharge into the sewer system. "Grease control device" may also include any other proven method to reduce FOG subject to the approval of the City. 
23.  Hotel/Motel means all living units of a transient nature including hotel and motel rental room units, and also living units of a permanent nature which do not contain any kitchen facilities. Excluded from the category are Major Full Service Hotels. 
24.  Hot Spots means areas in sewer lines that have experienced sanitary sewer overflows or that must be cleaned or maintained frequently to avoid blockages of the sewer system. 
25.  Hydromechanical Grease Interceptor means a grease control device that is used to serve individual fixtures and have limited effect and should only be used in those cases where the use of a gravity grease interceptor or other grease control device is determined to be impossible or impracticable. Formerly referred to as a grease trap. 
26.  Industrial Wastewater means all water-carried wastes and wastewater of the community, excluding domestic wastewater and uncontaminated water. Includes all waste-water from any producing, manufacturing, processing, institutional, commercial or agricultural source. 
27.  Inflow means surface, storm water or urban runoff which enters the sewer system. Inflow may, in certain circumstances, cause a rapid increase in wastewater flows. 
28.  Infiltration means water entering the sewer system from the ground through such means as defective pipes, pipe joints, connections, or manhole walls. 
29.  Inspector means a person authorized by the City Manager to inspect any existing or proposed wastewater or waste generation, conveyance, processing and/or disposal facilities. 
30.  Interceptor means a hydromechanical or gravity grease interceptor. 
31.  Interference means any discharge which, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the City's sewer system, collection processes or operations; or is a cause of violation of Chapter 22 of the City of Del Mar Municipal Code. 
32.  Limited Food Preparation Establishment means an establishment engaged only in reheating, hot holding or assembly of ready-to-eat (precooked and prepackaged) food products from which establishment there is only a de minimus discharge of FOG to the sewer system. A limited food service preparation establishment is not considered a Food Service Establishment under this Chapter. A limited food preparation establishment does not include any preparation that changes the form, flavor or consistency of food. Any person who contends that he/she/it meets the definition of a limited food preparation establishment shall have the burden to establish that he/she/it meets the criteria set forth in this definition. 
33.  Main means an existing sewer main in the sanitary sewer system of the City. 
34.  Major Full Service Hotel shall mean a full service facility having rooms, restaurant(s) and/or bars serving food, and/or providing room service from an onsite kitchen. 
35.  Manifest means that receipt to be retained by the generator of wastes for disposing of recyclable wastes or other liquid or solid wastes as required by the City or a regulatory agency. 
36.  New Construction means any structure planned or under construction for which a sewer connection permit has not been issued. 
37.  Person means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. The masculine gender shall include the feminine, the singular shall include the plural where indicated by the context. 
38.  Pretreatment or Treatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing to the sewer system. 
39.  Regulatory Agencies means regulatory Agencies shall mean those agencies having regulatory jurisdiction over environmental quality matters, including, but not limited to: 
a.  United States Environmental Protection Agency, Region IX, San Francisco and Washington, DC (EPA). 
b.  California State Water Resources Control Board (SWRCB). 
c.  California Regional Water Quality Control Board, San Diego Region (RWQCB). 
d.  Air Pollution Control District County of San Diego, Air Quality Management District (AQMD). 
e.  California Department of Health Services (DOHS). 
f.  San Diego County Department of Environmental Health (DEH). 
40.  Remodeling means a physical or operational change (a) causing an increase in the amount of FOG discharged to the sewer system by a Food Service Establishment which amount, alone or in conjunction with other FOG discharges, causes or creates a potential for an SSO to occur; or (b) exceeding a cost of $50,000.00 to a Food Service Establishment, requiring a building permit, and involving any one or combination of the following: (1) under slab plumbing in the food processing area, (2) a 30 percent increase in the net public seating area, (3) a 30 percent increase in the size of the kitchen area, or (4) any change in the size or type of food preparation equipment. 
41.  Residential shall refer to all living or dwelling units (as defined by the Uniform Building Code) of a permanent, rather than transient nature, including single-family residences, apartments, manufactured homes, townhouses and condominiums. 
42.  Restaurant shall mean all establishments whose principal activity involves on-premise service of meals and food, including coffee shops and cafes. Also included in this category are bakeries whose principal activity involves the production of baked goods onsite. 
43.  Sample Point means a location approved by the City, from which industrial wastewater can be collected that is representative in content and consistency of the entire flow of industrial wastewater being discharged to the sewer system. 
44.  Sampling Facilities means structure(s) provided at the user's expense for the City or user to measure and record wastewater constituent mass concentrations, collect a representative sample, or provide access to plug or terminate the discharge to the sewer system. 
45.  Sewage means wastewater. 
46.  Sewer Connection or lateral means the service pipes extending from the private property line to the public sewer main in a public street, alley or easement. 
47.  Sewer System means the sewer system of the City, as acquired by the City from the Del Mar Utilities, together with any additions thereto. 
48.  Shopping Center shall be defined as more than one commercial unit connected to the same water meter where at least one business exists whose principal activity falls into the restaurant category. Also included in this category are any businesses defined as a Take-Out-Food Business. 
49.  Sludge means any solid, semi-solid or liquid decant, subnate or supernate from a manufacturing process, utility service, or pretreatment facility. 
50.  Supermarket shall mean all businesses whose principal activity involves retail sale of groceries and which have onsite waste grinders attached to the sanitary sewer system. 
51.  Take-Out-Food Business shall be defined as all drive-ins, sandwich shops, fast food outlets and similar businesses whose principal activity involves food services but which do not provide on-premises eating facilities or which provide only disposable eating implements (paper plates, plastic utensils, etc.) 
52.  Twenty-five percent (25%) Rule. Requirement for gravity grease interceptors to be maintained such that the combined FOG and solids accumulation does not exceed 25 percent of the design hydraulic depth of the gravity grease interceptor. This is to ensure that the minimum hydraulic retention time and required available hydraulic volume is maintained to effectively intercept and retain FOG prior to entry into the public sewer system. 
53.  User means any person who discharges or causes a discharge of wastewater or waste directly or indirectly to sewer facilities. "User" shall mean the same as Discharger. 
54.  Waste means sewage and any and all other waste substances, liquid, solid, gaseous or radioactive, associated with human habitation or of human or animal nature, including such wastes placed within containers of whatever nature prior to and for the purpose of disposal. 
55.  Wastewater means the liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed into or permitted to enter the sewer system. 
56.  Waste Minimization Practices means plans or programs intended to reduce or eliminate discharges to the sewer system or to conserve water, including, but not limited to, product substitutions, housekeeping practices, inventory control, employee education, and other steps as necessary to minimize waste or wastewater produced. 
57.  Wastehauler means any person carrying on or engaging in vehicular transport of waste as part of, or incidental to, any business for that purpose. 
58.  Wastewater means the liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed into or permitted to enter the sewer system. 
59.  Wastewater Constituents and Characteristics means the individual chemical, physical and bacteriological parameters, including volume and flow rate, and such other parameters that serve to define, classify or measure the quality and quantity of wastewater. 
D.  Words used in these regulations in the singular may include the plural and the plural the singular. Use of masculine shall mean feminine and use of feminine shall mean masculine. Shall is mandatory; may is permissive or discretionary. 
(Ord. No. 106, § 1; Ord. No. 488; Ord. No. 472; Ord. No. 655; Ord. No. 828; Ord. No. 831)  
22.04.020 - Service and Connection Charges. 
A.  The sewer service and connection charges for each residential, commercial or other persons using the municipal sanitary sewer system of the City shall be: 
1.  Bimonthly Service Charge. 
Single Family: The bimonthly wastewater (sewer) service for single family is equal to the charge for a ?" meter of $99.82, regardless of size, beginning July 1, 2019; $104.58 beginning January 1, 2020; $109.80 beginning January 1, 2021; $115.28 beginning January 1, 2022; $121.06 beginning January 1, 2023; and $127.10 beginning January 1, 2024. 
Multi-Family, Commercial, Institutional: The sewer service for each multi-family, commercial or institutional service using the municipal sanitary system of the City shall be: 
Bimonthly Service Charge Effective: 
Meter Size 	7/1/19 	1/1/20 	1/1/21 	1/1/22 	1/1/23 	1/1/24 
?" 	$99.82 	$104.58 	$109.80 	$115.28 	$121.06 	$127.10 
¾" 	149.72 	156.86 	164.70 	172.92 	181.58 	190.66 
1" 	249.52 	261.42 	274.48 	288.20 	302.62 	317.74 
1 ½" 	499.04 	522.82 	548.96 	576.40 	605.22 	635.48 
2" 	798.48 	836.50 	878.32 	922.24 	968.34 	1,016.76 
3" 	1,596.94 	1,672.98 	1,756.62 	1,844.46 	1,936.68 	2,033.52 
Fairgrounds 	43,210 	45,268 	47,532 	49,908 	52,404 	55,024 
 
2.  Bimonthly Commodity/Volume Charge. For single family residential users the bimonthly commodity/volume charge will be based on winter water usage subject to the limitations of the sewer cap which is set annually each July 1. The sewer cap will be derived using 100 percent of the water usage for the lowest billing period (two months) during the wet winter months, October through April. If that calculation yields a number less than eight units, the cap will be set at eight units. 
Each billing period the single-family residential customer sewer commodity charge will be calculated by using 100 percent of the water used during that billing period by the single family residential commodity rate in effect. If the 100 percent calculation yields a water usage amount that exceeds the individual customer's cap, the customer will be billed for the cap amount. The cap will not apply in calculating the commodity charge for residential customers who have installed sub-meters or irrigation meters where household use without irrigation can be calculated. 
Bimonthly Commodity Rate/Volume Charge (cost per unit based on winter water use) Effective: 
	7/1/19 	1/1/20 	1/1/21 	1/1/22 	1/1/23 	1/1/24 
Single-Family Residential 	$7.06 	$7.39 	$7.76 	$8.14 	$8.55 	$8.98 
Multi-Family and Commercial: (Based on 90 percent of metered water use) 	
 General/Multi-Family 	$7.06 	$7.39 	$7.76 	$8.14 	$8.55 	$8.98 
 Hotels/Motels without Restaurants 	$6.94 	$7.28 	$7.64 	$8.02 	$8.42 	$8.84 
 Hotels/Motels with Restaurants 	$10.00 	$10.48 	$11.00 	$11.55 	$12.13 	$12.73 
 Restaurants 	$11.83 	$12.39 	$13.01 	$13.66 	$14.34 	$15.06 
 Restaurants Not Compliant with FOG Program 	$12.42 	$13.01 	$13.66 	$14.34 	$15.06 	$15.81 
 Institutional 	$7.06 	$7.39 	$7.76 	$8.14 	$8.55 	$8.98 
 Shopping Center 	$8.21 	$8.60 	$9.03 	$9.48 	$9.95 	$10.45 
 Fairgrounds:* (*100% of metered use) 	$8.06 	$8.45 	$8.87 	$9.31 	$9.78 	$10.27 
 
* The sewer commodity rate for the Fairgrounds is subject to change pending results of required annual strength testing. If strength measurements increase, the commodity rate will increase accordingly. Reductions in strength measurements will result in a commensurate decrease in the commodity rate. 
3.  Pass Through Fees and Charges for Wastewater Treatment and Transportation. All City of San Diego fees and charges for the treatment and transportation of Del Mar's wastewater shall be passed through to Del Mar sewer utility customers. 
4.  Fats, Oils, and Grease Program Non-Compliance Bimonthly Service Surcharge and Volume Charge. Restaurants not compliant with the City's Fats, Oils, and Grease Program as identified in this Chapter 22.04 and Chapter 22.08 of the Del Mar Municipal Code may be assessed an additional FOG Program Non-Compliance Surcharge in addition to the monthly service charges identified above. The FOG Program Non-Compliance Surcharge shall be assessed on a bimonthly basis as a fixed additional bimonthly service charge as follows: 
7/1/19 	1/1/20 	1/1/21 	1/1/22 	1/1/23 	1/1/24 
$82.11 	$86.22 	$90.53 	$95.05 	$99.81 	$104.80 
 
An additional volume charge will also apply to 90 percent of water usage as follows: 
7/1/19 	1/1/20 	1/1/21 	1/1/22 	1/1/23 	1/1/24 
$12.42 	$13.01 	$13.66 	$14.34 	$15.06 	$15.81 
 
5.  Sub Meters. If the property owner determines that it is in his/her best interest, a sub meter may be used to establish the wastewater units of return to sewer for the residential customer. 
a.  Readings obtained from sub meters installed for the purpose of measuring exclusively indoor water use in hundred cubic feet (HCF) may be used by the City for the purpose of calculating the sewer commodity charge if the following conditions are met: 
(1)  An application requesting that the water readings from a sub meter be considered in determining the sewer commodity charge must be completed by the customer prior to the installation of a new sub meter. The application must, as a minimum, grant the City reasonable access to the property to read the sub meter on a periodic basis. 
(2)  The use of the sub meter must be pre-approved by the Public Works Director. 
(3)  The sub meter must be connected to a water line exclusively used for indoor water use, and shall read in units of water (HCF). The applicant agrees to City inspection and verification of indoor use. 
(4)  The sub meter must be registered, inspected and certified by the County Department of Agriculture, Weights, and Measures before its installation and every four years thereafter. 
(5)  A monthly service charge will be imposed for the meter reading during which the usage is recorded. That charge shall be 50 percent of the monthly water service charge for a ?" water meter. 
b.  It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to obtain and install, at the property owner's expense, the sub meter subject to the requirements of this section. 
c.  A penalty, requiring removal of the sub meter for a period of five years, will be imposed by the City for any sub meter found to be tampered with, adjusted, or improperly installed to produce false readings. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to pay for the removal of the sub meter. 
B.  Connection and Installation Fees. The connection fee for a new connection needing to acquire capacity in the sewer system for the first time or upsizing an existing connection will be set as follows: 
Meter 
Size 	1/1/15 
?" 	$6,443.54 
¾" 	$9,665.31 
1" 	$16,108.84 
1½" 	$32,217.69 
2" 	$51,548.30 
3" 	$103,096.61 
 
Existing customers upsizing their water meter will be given a credit commensurate with the connection fee for the current meter. 
C.  Sewer Installation Fee. The owner or applicant for a connection to the City sewer system shall pay to the City an amount equal to the cost for labor and materials of the installation. 
(Ord. No. 561; Ord. No. 651; Ord. No. 655; Ord. No. 665; Ord. No. 688; Ord. No. 699; Ord. No. 714; Ord. No. 731; Ord. No. 769; Ord. No. 828; Ord. No. 903; Ord. No 948 , § 2, Exh. C, 6-3-2019)  
22.04.030 - Same—Billing and Payment. 
All sewer service charges imposed under the provisions of this Chapter shall be due and payable at the times and in the manner provided for the payment of water bills. Such sewer service charges shall be billed to the owner or occupant of the premises on the same bill on which the water is billed to such owner or occupant, and shall be subject to the same penalties for delinquency. Such combined bill for water consumed and for sewer service charge shall be paid in its entirety and may not be severed for the separate payment of either portion thereof. Where the premises consume water from a source other than the City water system, the sewer service charge shall be billed to the owner or occupant of the premises in a separate bill. The sewer service charge may be collected by suit in any court of competent jurisdiction or any other manner. 
(Ord. No. 106, § 20; Ord. No. 301, § 3)  
22.04.040 - Suspension of Sewer Service. 
When deemed necessary by the Director of Public Works for the preservation of public health or safety or for the protection of public or private property, he may suspend sewer service to any person or persons using the sewer system in a manner or way to endanger the public health or safety of public or private property. In suspending service, he may sever all pertinent connections to the public sewer. If such endangerment shall be imminent, then the Director may act immediately to suspend sewer service coincident with notice or warning to such person. 
(Ord. No. 106, § 16)  
22.04.050 - Right of Inspection. 
The officers, employees or inspectors of the Water Utilities Department shall have the right to enter upon the premises of any person at reasonable hours to inspect or determine if this Chapter is being violated.  
22.04.060 - City Manager to Enforce Chapter Provisions. 
The City Manager is hereby charged with the duty of enforcing this Chapter.  
22.04.070 - Negotiations with Applications. 
The City Manager is authorized to carry on any preliminary negotiations or investigation with any person seeking the use of the sewage facilities of the City.  
22.04.080 - Application of Revenues. 
Except as provided in Chapter 22.12, revenues derived under the provisions of this Chapter shall be used only for the acquisition, construction, reconstruction, maintenance and operation of the sanitary sewer system, and any surplus thereof shall be applied to the retirement of the bonded indebtedness now outstanding on the sanitary sewer system of the City. Such revenue shall not be used for the acquisition or construction of new local street sewers or laterals as distinguished from main trunk, interceptor and outfall sewers.  
22.04.090 - Notice to be Given when Premises are Vacated in Order for Water to be Cut Off. 
In case a house or place of business becomes vacant, the regular minimum sewer service charge shall be charged and collected from the owner thereof, whether sanitary service is used or not, until the day upon which the office of the department is notified in writing of the fact that the property is unoccupied, and is requested to shut off water and sanitary service.  
22.04.100 - Unlawful to Permit Surface Drainage to Enter System. 
No person shall allow, or permit to be allowed, whether knowingly or not, any surface or storm water runoff to enter into any portion of the City sewerage system through either sewer mains, laterals, manholes or any other location in the system.  
22.04.110 - Wastewater Utility Rates During Demand Management/Drought Conditions. 
Wastewater customers are billed for sewer service based on their water usage. During drought periods, water usage will decline and threaten the fiscal stability of the wastewater utility. Therefore, during drought periods, wastewater charges will be calculated based on the assumption that sewer usage is the same as the commensurate month from the last non-drought fiscal year. Drought sewer charges will be lifted after one full year of non-drought consumption records can be established. 
A.  Residential. Sewer discharges will be estimated based on the assumed sewage usage during the last non-drought year. 
B.  Commercial. Sewer discharges will be estimated based on 90 percent of the water usage during the last non-drought year. A user may petition to have their sewer discharge (water usage) assumption lowered if their annual water demand drops below their non-drought water demands by a level below the drought reduction levels plus an additional 20 percent. As a user can meet the previously defined criteria, their sewage discharge assumptions will be lowered to the current water demands, adding back any water savings required under the drought requirements. As an example, if the drought reductions are 20 percent, and the user drops their water consumption by 45 percent, then the resulting sewer will be calculated based on 120 percent of the current water consumption. 
C.  Fairgrounds. Sewer commodity charges during drought conditions will be calculated based on the greater of: 
(1)  The rolling average of the same bi-monthly period from the last three fiscal years, or 
(2)  The actual metered sewage. 
(Ord. No. 828; Ord. No 948 , § 2, Exh. C, 6-3-2019)  
Chapter 22.08 - SEWER CONNECTIONS AND LATERALS 
 
22.08.010 - Permit Required; Application for Permit. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to connect any pipe on private property with any pipe in the street that is connected with the public sewer, or to construct any sewer in the street that is connected with the public sewer, or to construct any sewer in the City without first obtaining a permit to do so from the Department, as hereinafter provided. 
The written application for such permit shall be filed with the Department by the owner of the property to be sewered or his agent, giving the correct number of lot and block, and the place where it is desired to connect with the sewer, and shall give the name of the property. The Department shall designate the location where the connection shall be made with such sewer. 
(Ord. No. 472)  
22.08.020 - Use of Sewer System Required. 
All human waste or wastewater shall be discharged into the sanitary sewer system, except as otherwise provided in this Chapter.  
22.08.030 - Design and Construction of Sewer Connections. 
All connections (sewer laterals) shall be designated and constructed according to City of Del Mar standards and as provided by this Chapter.  
22.08.040 - Separate Connection Required for Each House; Exception. 
Every separate residential building shall be separately and independently connected with the City sewer, except in the situation where there may be a building in the rear of the lot and without any other available sewer main. In this case, it may be connected with the sewer of the building in the front of the lot, provided the property is owned by the same parties. All condominiums shall have separate connections unless a homeowner's association is formed to manage and maintain the private sewer lateral.  
22.08.050 - General Limitations, Prohibitions, and Requirements on Fats, Oils, and Grease ("FOG") Discharges. 
A.  [Purpose.] The purpose is to facilitate the maximum beneficial public use of the City's sewer services and facilities while preventing blockages of the sewer facilities resulting from discharges of Fats, Oils and Grease ("FOG") to sewer facilities, and to specify appropriate FOG discharge requirements for Food Service Establishments. 
1.  Definitions are set forth in Section 22.04.010. The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to the discharge of all wastewater or waste containing FOG which is or may be carried to the sewer facilities of the City. 
2.  To comply with Federal, State, and local policies and to allow the City to meet applicable standards, provisions are made in this Chapter for the regulation of discharges of wastewater or waste containing FOG to sewer facilities. 
3.  This Chapter establishes standards on all wastewater and/or waste discharges from Food Service Establishments containing FOG, which may alone or collectively cause or contribute to FOG accumulation in the sewer facilities causing or potentially causing or contributing to the occurrence of sewer system overflows ("SSOs"). 
B.  FOG Discharge Limitation. No Food Service Establishment shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the sewer system FOG that may accumulate and/or cause or contribute to blockages in the sewer system, including the sewer lateral which connects the Food Service Establishment to the public sewer system. 
C.  Prohibitions. The following prohibitions shall apply to all Food Service Establishments: 
1.  Installation of food grinders in new constructions of Food Service Establishments shall be prohibited. Furthermore, all food grinders shall be removed from all existing Food Service Establishments within 180 days of the effective date of these regulations, except when expressly allowed by the FOG Control Program Administrator pursuant to the applicable provisions of the latest edition of the California Plumbing Code. 
2.  Introduction of any additives into a Food Service Establishment's wastewater system for the purpose of emulsifying FOG is prohibited, unless a specific written authorization from the FOG Control Program Administrator is obtained based upon evidence showing that such additives will not cause or contribute to interference and/or a sewer system overflow. 
3.  Discharge of waste cooking oil, directly or indirectly, into the drainage pipes and/or the sewer system is prohibited. All waste cooking oils shall be collected and stored properly in receptacles such as barrels or drums for recycling or other acceptable methods of disposal. 
4.  Discharge of wastewater from dishwashers to interceptor is prohibited. 
5.  Discharge of wastewater with temperatures in excess of 140°F to any grease control device, including interceptors is prohibited. 
6.  The use of biological additives to treat or reduce FOG or as a supplement to interceptor maintenance, without prior authorization from the FOG Control Program Administrator, is prohibited. Such authorization shall be based upon evidence showing that such biological additives will not cause or contribute to interference and/or a sewer system overflow. 
7.  Discharge of wastes from toilets, urinals, washbasins, and any other fixtures containing fecal or other bodily waste materials to piping which flows to an interceptor is prohibited. 
8.  No waste removed from an interceptor may be discharged to the sewer system. 
9.  No person shall allow the accumulation of FOG and/or solids in a gravity grease interceptor which accumulation exceeds 25 percent of the total operating hydraulic depth of the gravity grease interceptor. 
D.  FOG Pretreatment Required. Except as otherwise set forth in this Chapter, each Food Service Establishment shall install, operate and maintain an adequate interceptor necessary to maintain compliance with this Chapter. The interceptor shall be adequate to separate and remove FOG contained in wastewater discharges from the Food Service Establishment prior to discharge to the sewer system. Fixtures, equipment, and drain lines located in the food preparation and clean up areas of Food Service Establishments that are sources of FOG discharges shall be connected to interceptor. 
1.  New Construction of Food Service Establishments. All Food Service Establishments which are newly constructed shall install, operate and maintain gravity grease interceptors prior to and following commencement of wastewater discharges to the sewer system. 
2.  Existing Food Service Establishments. 
a.  For existing Food Service Establishments, the requirement to install, properly operate and maintain a gravity grease interceptor may be conditionally stayed, that is, delayed in its implementation, by the FOG Control Program Administrator for a maximum period of five years from the effective date of this Chapter (five-year Amortization Period). Terms and conditions for application of a stay for a Food Service Establishment shall be set forth in agreement between the City and the owner. The City Council finds that five years is a reasonable amortization period for existing Food Service Establishments that are operating without a gravity grease interceptor. 
b.  Existing Food Service Establishments, which have caused or contributed to a grease-related blockage in the sewer system, or which have sewer laterals connected to hot spots shall be deemed to have significant potential to adversely impact the sewer system, and shall install and commence proper operation of gravity grease interceptors within 180 days upon notification by the City. 
c.  Existing Food Service Establishments which have been determined to contribute significant FOG to the sewer system by the FOG Control Program Administrator through observation of kitchen equipment or operations, observation of grease in the sewer lateral, or testing of effluent shall be deemed to have a reasonable potential to adversely impact the sewer system, and shall install and commence proper operation of gravity grease interceptors within 18 months upon notification by the City. 
d.  Existing Food Service Establishments undergoing remodeling or a change in operations as defined in Section 22.04.010 shall be required to install a gravity grease interceptor, except as otherwise authorized by this Chapter. 
E.  Variance and Conditional Waiver of Gravity Grease Interceptor Requirement. 
1.  Variance from Gravity Grease Interceptor Requirements. A variance from the gravity grease interceptor requirements to allow alternative pretreatment technology that is, at least, equally effective in controlling the FOG discharge in lieu of a gravity grease interceptor may be granted. Additionally, a variance from the gravity grease interceptor requirement may be granted to Food Service Establishments demonstrating that it is impossible or impracticable to install, operate or maintain a gravity grease interceptor, and/or where the implementation of Best Management Practices is as effective as a gravity grease interceptor in controlling FOG discharges into the sewer system. The FOG Control Program Administrator's determination to grant a variance shall be based upon an evaluation of the following factors: 
a.  The availability of adequate space for installation and/or maintenance of a gravity grease interceptor. 
b.  The availability of an adequate slope for gravity flow between kitchen plumbing fixtures and the gravity grease interceptor and/or between the gravity grease interceptor and the private or public sewer collection lines. 
c.  Whether the Food Service Establishment can establish that the alternative pretreatment technology and/or implementation of Best Management Practices is equivalent to or better than a gravity grease interceptor in controlling its FOG discharge. In addition, the Food Service Establishment must be able to demonstrate, after installation of the proposed alternative pretreatment, its effectiveness to control FOG discharges through downstream visual monitoring of the sewer system by the City or by a City approved contractor, for at least three months, at the Food Service Establishment's own expense. A variance may be granted if the monitoring demonstrates no visible accumulation of FOG from discharges in the Food Service Establishment's lateral and in downstream sewer lines. 
d.  Other factors reasonably related to physical constraints in the construction and operation of a gravity grease interceptor or to the minimization of FOG discharges to the sewer system. 
2.  Conditional Waiver from Installation of Gravity Grease Interceptor. A conditional waiver from installation of a gravity grease interceptor may be granted for Food Service Establishments that have been determined to have a de-minimis FOG discharge to and insignificant impact on the sewer system. The FOG Control Program Administrator's determination to grant a conditional waiver shall be based upon, but not limited to, evaluation of the following conditions: 
a.  Quantity and quality of FOG discharge as measured or as indicated by the size of Food Service Establishment based on seating capacity, number of meals served, menu, water usage, amount of on-site consumption of prepared food and other conditions that may reasonably be shown to contribute to FOG discharges. 
b.  Adequacy of implementation of Best Management Practices and compliance history. 
c.  Sewer size, grade, condition based on visual inspection, FOG deposition in the sewer system by the Food Service Establishment, and history of maintenance and sewage spills in the receiving sewer system. 
d.  Changes in operations that significantly affect FOG discharge. 
e.  Any other condition determined by the FOG Control Program Administrator to be reasonably related to the generation of FOG or control of FOG discharges. 
3.  Application for Variance or Conditional Waiver of Requirement for Gravity Grease Interceptor. A Food Service Establishment may submit an application for variance or conditional waiver from the gravity grease interceptor requirement to the FOG Control Program Administrator. The Food Service Establishment shall bear the burden of demonstrating, to the FOG Control Program Administrator's reasonable satisfaction, that the variance or conditional waiver is justified. Upon determination by the FOG Control Program Administrator that the Food Service Establishment has met its burden, a FOG Wastewater Discharge variance or conditional waiver may be issued. The Finance Department will note date and type of determination on sewer service records for the property address. 
4.  Terms and Conditions. The issuance of a variance or conditional waiver may be subject to such terms and conditions that the FOG Control Program Administrator determines are reasonably appropriate to minimize or eliminate the discharge of FOG to the sewer system. A variance or conditional waiver may be revoked at any time when any of the terms and conditions for its issuance are not satisfied or if the conditions upon which the variance or conditional waiver was based change so that the justification for the variance or conditional waiver no longer exists. Except as otherwise set forth in this Chapter, a variance or conditional waiver shall be valid so long as the Food Service Establishment remains in compliance with the terms and conditions of the variance or conditional waiver. 
F.  Commercial Properties. Property owners of commercial properties shall be responsible for the installation and maintenance of the gravity grease interceptor serving multiple Food Service Establishments. 
G.  Sewer System Overflows, Public Nuisance, Abatement Orders and Cleanup Costs. 
1.  Notwithstanding the amortization periods established in Subsection 22.08.050.D.2.a., Food Service Establishments which have contributed to a sewer blockage, SSO or any sewer system interference resulting from the discharge of wastewater or waste containing FOG, shall install, operate and maintain a gravity grease interceptor, and may be required to abate such nuisance and prevent any future health hazards created by such sewer line blockage, SSO or any other sewer system interference. SSOs may threaten or cause injury to public health, safety, and welfare and are hereby declared to be a public nuisance. Furthermore, sewer lateral failures and SSOs caused by Food Service Establishments, alone or collectively, are the responsibility of the private property owner and Food Service Establishment, and their respective responsible officers and/or owners. If, either at the request of a Food Service Establishment or to abate an immediate threat of injury to the public health, safety, welfare, or property, the City acts to contain and/or clean up an SSO or the blockage of a sewer lateral or the sewer system caused by a Food Service Establishment, the City's costs for such abatement shall be entirely borne by the property owner, operator of the Food Service Establishment, and their respective responsible officers and/or owners, and each of them, and shall constitute a debt to the City and become due and payable upon the City's request for reimbursement of such costs. 
2.  Any person who discharges any waste and/or wastewater which causes or contributes to any sewer blockage, SSO, obstruction, interference, damage, or any other impairment to the City's sewer facilities or to the operation of those facilities shall be liable for all costs incurred to clean or repair the facilities together with expenses incurred by the City to resume normal operations, including all City overhead expenses related to the event. The total amount shall be payable within 45 days of invoicing by the City. 
3.  Any person who discharges waste and/or wastewater to the sewer system which causes or contributes to the City violating discharge requirements established by any Regulatory Agency shall be liable for any costs or expenses incurred by the City as a result, including but not limited to regulatory fines, penalties, and assessments made by other agencies or a court. 
(Ord. No. 831)  
22.08.051 - Facility Requirements. 
A.  Drawing Submittal Requirements. Upon request by the City: 
1.  Food Service Establishments may be required to submit two copies of facility site plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewer locations and connections. The submittal shall be in a form and content acceptable to the City for review of existing or proposed grease control device(s), the gravity grease interceptor, monitoring facilities, metering facilities, and operating procedures. The review of the plans and procedures shall in no way relieve the Food Service Establishments of the responsibility of modifying the facilities or procedures in the future, as necessary to produce an acceptable discharge, and to meet the requirements of this Chapter or any requirements of other Regulatory Agencies. 
2.  Applicants may be required to submit site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers, grease control device(s), the gravity grease interceptor or other pretreatment equipment and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation for evaluation. 
3.  Food Service Establishments may be required to submit a schematic drawing of grease control device(s), the gravity grease interceptor or other pretreatment equipment, piping and instrumentation, as well as a wastewater characterization report. 
4.  Retention calculations may be required by the City to ensure the grease control device will function correctly and efficiently. 
5.  The City may require the drawings and retention calculations be prepared by a California Registered Civil, Chemical, Mechanical, or Electrical Engineer, as appropriate. 
6.  Other permits may be required by the Planning Department or the City Building Official. 
B.  Requirements for Best Management Practices. 
1.  All Food Service Establishments shall implement best management practices in accordance with the requirements and guidelines established by the City under its FOG Control Program in an effort to minimize the discharge of FOG to the sewer system. 
2.  All Food Service Establishments shall be required, at a minimum, to comply with the following Best Management Practices: 
a.  Installation of drain screens. Drain screens shall be installed on all drainage pipes in food preparation areas. 
b.  Segregation and collection of waste cooking oil. All waste cooking oil shall be collected and stored properly in recycling receptacles such as barrels or drums. Such recycling receptacles shall be maintained properly to ensure that they do not leak. Food Service Establishments shall use licensed wastehaulers and licensed recycling facilities to dispose of waste cooking oil. 
c.  Disposal of food waste. All food waste shall be disposed of directly into the trash or garbage, and not in sinks. 
d.  Employee training. Employees of Food Service Establishments shall be trained by ownership/management, upon commencement of employment at least annually thereafter, on the following subjects: 
(i)  How to "dry wipe" pots, pans, dishware and work areas before washing to remove grease. 
(ii)  How to properly dispose of food waste and solids in enclosed plastic bags prior to disposal in trash bins or containers to prevent leaking and odors. 
(iii)  The location and use of absorption products to clean under fryer baskets and other locations where grease may be spilled or dripped. 
(iv)  How to properly dispose of grease or oils from cooking equipment into a grease receptacle such as a barrel or drum without spilling. 
Training shall be documented and employee signatures retained indicating each employee's attendance and understanding of the practices reviewed. Training records shall be available for review at any reasonable time by the FOG Control Program Administrator or an inspector. 
e.  Kitchen signage. Best management and waste minimization practices shall be posted conspicuously in the food preparation and dishwashing areas at all times. 
C.  Gravity Grease Interceptor Maintenance Requirements. 
1.  All Food Service Establishments with gravity grease interceptors shall comply with the following maintenance requirements: 
a.  Gravity grease Interceptors shall be maintained in efficient operating condition by periodic removal of the full content of the interceptor which includes wastewater, accumulated FOG, floating materials, sludge and solids. 
b.  All existing and newly installed gravity grease interceptors shall be maintained in a manner consistent with a maintenance frequency approved by the FOG Control Program Administrator pursuant to this section. 
c.  No FOG that has accumulated in a gravity grease interceptor shall be allowed to pass into any sewer lateral, sewer system, storm drain, or public right-of-way during maintenance activities. 
d.  Food Service Establishments with gravity grease interceptors may be required to submit data and information necessary to establish the maintenance frequency of gravity grease interceptors. 
e.  The maintenance frequency for all Food Service Establishments with a gravity grease interceptor shall be determined in one of the following methods: 
(i)  Twenty-five Percent Rule. Gravity grease interceptors shall be fully pumped out and cleaned at a frequency such that the combined FOG and solids accumulation does not exceed 25 percent of the total designed hydraulic depth of the gravity grease interceptor. This is to ensure that the minimum hydraulic retention time and required available hydraulic volume is maintained to effectively intercept and retain FOG discharged to the sewer system. 
(ii)  Each Food Service Establishment with a gravity grease interceptor shall fully pump out and clean its gravity grease interceptor not less than every six months, unless sooner required by the 25 percent Rule in Subsection (i) above, or a later interval determined under Subsection (iii) below. 
(iii)  Gravity grease interceptors shall be fully pumped out and cleaned every six months when the frequency described in Subsection (i) has not been established. The maintenance frequency may be adjusted by the FOG Control Program Administrator when sufficient data have been obtained to establish an average frequency based on the requirements described in Subsection (i). The FOG Control Program Administrator may change the maintenance frequency at any time to reflect changes in actual operating conditions. Based on the actual generation of FOG from the Food Service Establishment, the maintenance frequency may increase or decrease. 
E.  [Proper disposal.] Wastewater, accumulated FOG, floating materials, sludge/solids, and other materials removed from the gravity grease interceptor shall be properly disposed of off site by wastehaulers in accordance with all applicable Federal, State and/or local laws. 
F.  Record Keeping Requirements. Each Food Service Establishment shall be required to keep all manifests, records, receipts and invoices relating to all cleaning, maintenance and grease removal of/from the grease control device, and the disposal carrier and disposal site location for no less than two years. Each Food Service Establishment shall, upon request, make the manifests, records, receipts and invoices available to any City representative, or inspector. These records shall include: 
1.  A logbook of gravity grease interceptor, hydromechanical grease interceptor or grease control device cleaning and maintenance practices. 
2.  A record of Best Management Practices being implemented including employee training. 
3.  Copies of records and manifests of wastehauling of interceptor contents. 
4.  Records of sampling data and sludge height monitoring for FOG and solids accumulation in the gravity grease interceptors. 
5.  Records of any FOG and/or wastewater spills and records of the cleaning of sewer laterals. 
6.  Any other information deemed appropriate by the FOG Control Program Administrator to ensure compliance with this Chapter. 
G.  Falsifying Information or Tampering with Process. It shall be unlawful to make any false statement or representation on any record, report, plan or other document that is filed with the City pursuant to this Chapter, or to tamper with or knowingly render inoperable any grease control device, monitoring device or method or access point required under this Chapter. 
H.  Notification of Spill. 
1.  In the event a permittee is unable to comply with any permit condition due to a breakdown of equipment, accident, or human error or the permittee has reasonable opportunity to know that his/her/its discharge will exceed the discharge provisions of the applicable FOG Wastewater Discharge Permit or this Chapter, the discharger shall immediately notify the City by calling the Public Works Department during normal business hours. If the material discharged to the sewer has the potential to cause or result in sewer blockages or SSOs, the discharger shall immediately notify the Public Works Department during normal business hours or by following the prompt on message recorder directing discharger to an emergency notification call center. 
2.  Confirmation of this notification shall be made in writing to the FOG Control Program Administrator at the address specified in the permit no later than five working days from the date of the incident. The written notification shall state the date of the incident, the reasons for the discharge or spill, what steps were taken to immediately correct the problem, and what steps are being taken to prevent the problem from recurring. 
3.  Such notification shall not relieve the permittee of any expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage or loss to the City or any other damage or loss to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the permittee of any fees or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this Chapter or other applicable law. 
I.  Notification of Planned Changes. Applicants shall notify the City at least 60 days in advance prior to any facility expansion/remodeling, or process modifications that may result in new or substantially increased FOG discharges or a change in the nature of the discharge. Applicants shall notify the City in writing of the proposed expansion or remodeling and shall submit any information requested by the City for evaluation of the effect of such expansion on the Applicant's FOG discharge to the sewer system. 
J.  Fats, Oils, and Grease Program Non-Compliance Service Surcharge and Volume Charge. Restaurants not compliant with the City's Fats, Oils, and Grease Program as identified in this Chapter 22.08 and Chapter 22.04 of the Del Mar Municipal Code may be assessed an additional FOG Program Non-Compliance Surcharge as identified in Chapter 22.04. 
K.  Enforcement. When the FOG Control Program Administrator has reason to believe that grounds exist for failure to comply with this Chapter, he/she shall give written notice thereof by certified mail to the discharger setting forth a statement of the facts and grounds deemed to exist, together with the time and place where the charges shall be heard by the City Manager or his/her designee. The hearing date shall be not less than 15 calendar days nor more than 45 calendar days after the mailing of such notice. 
1.  At the suspension hearing, the permittee shall have an opportunity to respond to the allegations set forth in the notice by presenting written or oral evidence. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with procedures established by the City Manager or his/her designee. 
2.  If the City Manager designates a hearing officer, after the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall submit a written report to the City Manager or his/her designee setting forth a brief statement of facts found to be true, a determination of the issues presented, conclusions, and a recommendation. 
3.  Upon receipt of the written report of the hearing officer or conclusion of the hearing, if the City Manager or his/her designee conducts the hearing, the City Manager or his/her designee shall make his/her determination and should he/she find that grounds exist for his/her decision and order in writing within 30 calendar days after the conclusion of the hearing. The written decision and order of the City Manager or his/her designee shall be sent by certified mail to the discharger or its legal counsel/representative at the discharger's business address. 
L.  Suspension of Sewer Service. 
1.  Upon an order of suspension by the City Manager or his/her designee becoming final, the discharger shall immediately cease and desist its discharge and shall have no right to discharge any wastewater containing FOG directly or indirectly to the City's sewer system for the duration of the suspension. Water service provided to the discharger shall be locked out preventing further use of sewage system by discharger. All costs for physically terminating and reinstating sewer service shall be paid by the discharger. 
2.  Any owner or responsible management employee of the discharger shall be bound by the order of suspension. 
3.  An order of suspension issued by the City Manager or his/her designee shall be final in all respects on the 16th day after it is mailed to the discharger unless a request for appeal to the City Council is filed with the City Clerk. 
M.  Emergency Suspension Order. 
1.  The City may, by order of the City Manager or his/her designee, suspend sewer service when the City Manager or his/her designee determines that such suspension is necessary in order to stop an actual or impending discharge which presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health and welfare of persons, or to the environment, or may cause an SSO, sewer blockage, interference to the City's sewer facilities, or may cause the City to violate any State or Federal Law or Regulation. Any discharger notified of and subject to an Emergency Suspension Order shall immediately cease and desist the discharge of all waste and/or wastewater containing FOG to the sewer system. 
2.  As soon as reasonably practicable following the issuance of an Emergency Suspension Order, but in no event more than five business days following the issuance of such order, the City Manager or his/her designee shall hold a hearing to provide the Food Service Establishment or discharger the opportunity to present information in opposition to the issuance of the Emergency Suspension Order. Such a hearing shall not stay the effect of the Emergency Suspension Order. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with procedures established by the City Manager or his/her designee. The City Manager or his/her designee shall issue a written decision and order within two business days following the hearing, which decision shall be sent by certified mail to the Food Service Establishment or its legal counsel/representative at that Food Service Establishment's business address. The decision of the City Manager or his/her designee following the hearing shall be final and not appealable to the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 831; Ord. No. 903)  
22.08.060 - Work to be Performed by City; Work by Others. 
The applicant has the option to either: 
A.  Deposit with City—Refund. Deposit with the City the amount of the approved estimated cost for the sewer connection, and request the Department to proceed with the requested sewer service connection; and the Department upon completion of such extension shall refund to the applicant any money in excess of the cost of construction of the sewer service connection. Should the actual cost incurred by the City exceed the amount of the deposit, the applicant shall pay the City an additional amount as required to cover payment for the entire cost of the sewer connection prior to beginning use of the sewer system. 
B.  Work by Contractor—Inspection by City. The applicant may make or cause such sewer service connection to be made by a competent contractor; but all such work shall be done under the inspection of the City Engineer, and applicant shall pay to the City a deposit to cover all costs of inspection as determined by the City Engineer. The applicant shall also provide such security as required by the City to guarantee the completion of such work and pay such damages that may be caused to public right-of-way as a result of such construction.  
22.08.065 - Monitoring and Inspecting Facilities Requirements. 
Inspection of all sewerage construction shall be made by personnel of the City or its authorized representative as deemed necessary by the City Manager. Sewerage construction shall include, but not be limited to sewers, pump stations, treatment plants, pretreatment facilities, food establishment facilities, or other facilities which discharge grease and oils that may cause blockages. Inspections may be made to determine that such facilities are being adequately maintained and operated and meet the provisions of this Code. Sewage facilities under construction shall be inspected periodically or as deemed necessary by the City Manager to assure that construction conforms to the intent of the approved plans and specifications, City design standards, and other applicable codes. No person shall bury or backfill new sewers or lateral until inspected by personnel of the City or its authorized representative. No person shall interfere with or delay entrance by an authorized City inspector attempting to inspect any sewerage construction. 
A.  The City may require a Food Service Establishment to construct and maintain in proper operating condition at the Food Service Establishment's sole expense, flow monitoring, constituent monitoring and/or sampling facilities. The location of the monitoring or metering facilities shall be subject to approval by the FOG Control Program Administrator. 
B.  Each Food Service Establishments shall provide immediate, clear, safe and uninterrupted access to the FOG Control Program Administrator or inspectors to monitoring and metering facilities. 
C.  Food Service Establishments may also be required by the FOG Control Program Administrator to submit waste analysis plans and contingency plans to ensure proper operation and maintenance of the grease control device(s) or gravity grease interceptor(s). 
No Food Service Establishment shall increase the use of water or in any other manner attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for treatment to achieve compliance with the requirements of this Chapter and the terms of an applicable FOG Wastewater Discharge Permit. 
(Ord. No. 583; Ord. No. 831)  
22.08.070 - Responsibility for Installation, Maintenance and Replacement. 
The costs for installation, maintenance, and replacement of the sewer connections (sewer service lateral) as defined in Section 22.04.010, shall be the responsibility of the property owner.  
22.08.080 - Responsibility of Persons Doing Work for Damages to Sewers or Streets. 
Any person who shall do or cause to be done work provided for in this Chapter shall be liable for any damage to any sewer or to any public street or to any other public property.  
22.08.090 - Liability of Property Owners for Removal of Obstructions in Laterals. 
The property owners serviced by a sewer lateral shall be responsible for the maintenance of that lateral. The City shall not maintain the sewer lateral between the street main and the structure. There shall be no requirement upon the City for a property line "clean-out." 
When it is necessary for the City to relieve stop-ups in laterals, the owner of such property shall pay to the City the cost of the removal of such obstruction.  
22.08.100 - Sewer Service Outside City Limits. 
When it appears to be in the best interest of the City and the people thereof, the City Manager may prepare an agreement for property situated outside the City to be permitted to connect to the municipal sewer system. The agreement shall state the terms of connection, special conditions and limitation, costs for service and any connection fees, and all other conditions of sewer service. Before it can take effect, any such agreement must be approved by resolution of the City Council.  
Chapter 22.12 - EXTENSIONS OF SEWER MAINS 
 
22.12.010 - Application for Extension of Sewer Mains; Filing; Contents. 
Any person who desires to extend the sewer mains to his property and construct house connections shall file an application with the City in which he shall describe the area to be served and the approximate length of the proposed extension.  
22.12.020 - Design and Cost Estimate for Construction of Sewer Main Extensions. 
Upon an application, there may be scheduled a predesign conference with the City Engineer. The design and cost estimate must be prepared by a registered civil engineer and submitted with a deposit to the City for review and approval by the City Engineer. Prior to construction, additional deposits will be required for administration, engineering, and inspection costs.  
22.12.030 - Design and Construction of Sewer Main Extensions. 
All sewer main extensions shall be designated and constructed according to City of Del Mar standards and as provided by this Chapter.  
22.12.040 - Work to be Performed by City; Work by Others. 
The applicant has the option to either: 
A.  Deposit with City; Refund. Deposit with the City the amount of the estimate approved by the City Engineer plus the estimated cost for City administration, engineering, and inspection, and request the City to proceed with construction of the requested sewer main extension. The City, upon completion of such extension, shall refund to the applicant any money in excess of the total cost of construction of the sewer service connection. If the total cost of construction exceeds the deposit, the applicant shall be liable for any additional costs prior to connection to the extension of the sewer main. 
B.  Work by Contractor; Inspection by City. The applicant may make or cause such sewer main extension to be made by a competent licensed contractor; but all such work shall be done under the inspection of the City Engineer. The applicant shall also provide such security as required by the City to guarantee the completion of such work and pay such damages that may be caused to public right-of-way as a result of such construction. The applicant shall also pay all costs for City Engineering and inspection.  
22.12.050 - Design and Specifications. 
A.  The design, location, materials, and standards of construction of all extensions shall be approved by the City Engineer and shall conform to City standards. 
B.  The design of an extension shall be based upon considerations of adequate capacity to meet the present and future requirements of the area to be benefited, of distribution system operation and efficiency, of maintenance requirements and of anticipated life of such extension. 
C.  Under no circumstances shall any structure be placed over or around any sewer main or extension, or within a City utility easement, unless provision is made for ready and easy access to any and all parts or points of such main or extension, and an appropriate encroachment permit has been granted by resolution of the City Council. 
D.  Materials and standards of construction shall be those which have been adopted and are used by the department for the area and class of service to be provided.  
22.12.060 - Sewer Utility Easements. 
Sewer utility easements shall be obtained for all sewer main extensions, except for sewer mains to be located within a public street; all utility easements shall be a minimum of 15 feet in width, except where, due to exceptional physical limitations, the City Engineer approves the acceptance of a ten-foot wide easement. In no case shall said easement be less than ten feet in width. Applicant shall be required to dedicate to the City all required sewer utility easement where such easements cross property owned by the applicant. Otherwise, the City shall acquire all required easements, and the cost of easement acquisition shall be included as a part of the total cost of the sewer main extension.  
22.12.070—22.12.100 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— The former Sections 22.12.070—22.12.100, which pertained to application for reimbursement, acceptance by city, reimbursement for sewer main extensions, and payment of costs by property owners, respectively, were repealed by Ord. No. 697.  
Chapter 22.14 - SEWER CONSTRUCTION REIMBURSEMENT CONNECTION FEES 
 
22.14.010 - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this Chapter to allow a reimbursement connection fee at the time of connection, when the sewer service has been made available by a private developer, prior to the time that the City would have been able to make the sewer service available. The purpose of the reimbursement connection fee is to reimburse the person privately constructing the sewer system, which is dedicated to the public and offered to the City. 
(Ord. No. 697)  
22.14.020 - Procedure. 
A.  The City and the developer may enter into a reimbursement agreement in which the developer agrees to dedicate the sewer main to the public and offer the sewer main to the City. 
B.  Upon completion of work and acceptance by the City, the sewer main will become the property of the City. All maintenance and future replacement will then become the responsibility of the City. 
C.  Upon acceptance of the sewer main by the City in accordance with Section 4742.3 of Health and Safety Code, the City may adopt an Ordinance imposing a reimbursement connection fee for connections to that sewer main. The reimbursement connection fee shall be determined by the City Engineer and shall provide funds to reimburse the developer for costs of the main which benefit other property owners which connect to the main. The reimbursement connection fee shall include a six percent per annum simple interest charge to partially compensate developer for his financing costs. The developer shall not be reimbursed for his fair share of the project costs (that portion of the improvement costs that directly benefit his development). The City shall return the collected reimbursement connection fees to the developer, less administration fees and any other costs or fees, in accordance with the terms of this reimbursement.  
22.14.030 - Term of Agreement. 
The period over which special connection fees are collected shall be either ten or 20 years: 
A.  Projects with a total reimbursable cost of less than $50,000.00 shall have a ten-year reimbursement period. 
B.  Projects with a total reimbursement of $50,000.00 or more, and in which the City Engineer estimates that less than two-thirds of the reimbursement can be collected in ten years shall have a 20-year reimbursement period.  
22.14.040 - Reimbursement of Costs by Benefiting Property Owners Connecting. 
When a sewer main extension has been installed and a reimbursement agreement amount has been approved by the City Council, and benefiting property owner, prior to connection to the sewer system, who has not either himself or through his predecessor-in-interest contributed toward the cost of such installation, shall pay to the City, in addition to any sewer connection/capacity fees required by this Code or any other Ordinance of the City, the reimbursement connection fee for such sewer main extension, at the rate provided for by Ordinance of the City Council.  
22.14.050 - Sewer Reimbursement Agreements. 
The following sewer reimbursement Agreement has been entered by the City of Del Mar City Council.  
Chapter 22.16 - REGULATION OF DISCHARGE INTO CITY SEWER SYSTEM 
 
22.16.010 - Regulations of Discharge. 
No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or indirectly, any such influent that is inconsistent with the Metropolitan Sewerage System Sewage Disposal Agreement of 1972, Document No. 746448, on file in the Office of the City Clerk of the City of San Diego, and any amendments thereto or that would cause a deleterious to the sewerage system.  
22.16.020 - Discharge of Industrial Wastewaters Pre-treatment. 
A.  The City Council shall, by resolution, establish rules and regulations for the pretreatment of industrial wastewaters before their discharge into the public sewer. 
B.  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any industrial wastewaters directly or indirectly into the public sewer without first complying with the provisions of this Chapter and the rules and regulations established for the pretreatment of industrial wastewaters. 
C.  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to any public sewer which directly or indirectly connects to the City sewerage system any toxic or other wastes, if in the opinion of the City Manager such wastes may have an adverse or harmful effect on sewers, maintenance personnel, wastewater treatment plant personnel or equipment, treatment plant effluent quality, public or private property, or may otherwise endanger the public, the local environment, or create a public nuisance. The City Manager, in determining the acceptability of specific wastes, shall consider the nature of the waste and the adequacy and nature of the collection, treatment and disposal system available to accept the waste. 
(Ord. No. 583)  
22.16.030 - Same—Permit Required. 
A.  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any industrial wastewaters directly or indirectly to sewerage facilities without first obtaining a permit for industrial wastewater discharge. 
B.  The permit for industrial wastewater discharge may require pretreatment of industrial wastewaters before discharge, restriction of peak flow discharges, discharge of certain wastewaters only to specified sewers, relocation of point of discharge, prohibition of discharge of certain wastewater components, restriction of discharge to certain hours of the day, payment of additional charges to defray increased costs created by the wastewater discharge, and such other conditions as may be required to effectuate the purpose of this Chapter. 
C.  No permit for industrial wastewater discharge is transferable. 
D.  No person shall discharge industrial waste- waters in excess of the quantity or quality limitations set by the permit for industrial wastewater discharge. Any person desiring to discharge wastewaters or use facilities which are not in conformance with the industrial wastewater permit shall apply for an amended permit.  
22.16.040 - Same—Application for Permit. 
A.  Any person who desires to discharge industrial wastewater as described in Section 22.16.020 shall file an application with the City. The City Engineer may require additional information on the characteristics of the wastewater discharge beyond that required on the application form. 
B.  The application shall be approved if the applicant has complied with all applicable requirements of this Chapter and furnished all requested information, and if the City Engineer determines that there is adequate capacity in the City's facilities to convey, treat and dispose of the wastewaters.  
22.16.050 - Change of Industrial Wastewater Permit Restrictions. 
The City may change the restrictions or conditions of a permit for industrial wastewater discharge from time to time as circumstances may require. The City shall allow an industrial discharger a reasonable period of time to comply with any changes in the industrial wastewater permit required by the City.  
22.16.060 - Damage Caused by Prohibited Wastewater Discharge. 
Any industrial wastewater discharger who discharges or causes the discharge of prohibited waste-waters which cause damage to the sewerage facilities, detrimental effects on treatment processes, or any other damages resulting in costs to the City, shall be liable for all damages occasioned thereby.  
22.16.070 - Discharge of Liquid Wastes by Transport Trucks. 
A.  All persons owning vacuum or "cesspool" pump trucks or other liquid waste transport trucks may not discharge any septic tank, seepage pit, interceptor or cesspool contents, or other liquid wastes to City sewerage facilities of the City. 
B.  If an emergency situation exists, discharge by transport trucks to City sewerage facilities may be permitted by first obtaining emergency permission from the department.  
Chapter 22.20 - PRIVATE ON-SITE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM; SEPTIC TANKS AND CESSPOOLS 
 
22.20.010 - Installation of Septic Tanks and Cesspools; Regulation of Septic Tank and Cesspool Cleaners. 
The regulations of the County of San Diego adopted by reference in Chapter 11.04 are incorporated into this Chapter.  
22.20.020 - When Use of Private Disposal System Permitted. 
When a public sewer is not located in a public street, alley or easement within 200 feet of the lot on which any building is located, the plumbing and drainage system of such building shall be connected to an approved private subsurface sewage disposal system.  
22.20.030 - Continued Use of Private System When Public Facilities Available. 
No person shall maintain a septic tank, settling tank, cesspool or other sub-surface sewage disposal unit or system on any premises when a public sewer is located in a public street, alley or easement within 100 feet of the lot on which any building is located.  
22.20.040 - Approval of Continued Use of Existing Private Disposal Systems. 
Where a public sewer is installed within 100 feet of a lot upon which there is located an existing building served by a septic tank, settling tank, cesspool or other subsurface disposal unit or system, the City Engineer may approve the continued use of such subsurface disposal system until such time as he deems that the public health and sanitation require the connection of such building to the public sewer and the discontinuance of the use or maintenance of such subsurface disposal system.  
22.20.050 - Connections Which May Pollute Water Supply—Prohibited. 
No person shall install, or permit to be installed, an interconnection between a drinking water supply and any equipment or connection of any kind, class or description which may contain water or liquid or substance unfit for human or domestic consumption.  
22.20.060 - Same—Disconnection of Water Service Unless Condition Abated. 
The Director shall make, or cause to be made, inspections to determine if such conditions exist. If such interconnections are discovered, the director shall require the purveyor of water to discontinue water service unless the condition is abated within a reasonable period of time fixed by the director.  
22.20.070 - Same—Sale of Devices for Making Connections. 
No device shall be sold in the City which provides such an interconnection as a means of operation unless the water supply is adequately protected.  
22.20.080 - Surface Drainage From Yards or Buildings Into Septic Tanks, etc. 
No opening shall be provided in any drainage system or in any septic tank, settling tank, cesspool or other subsurface disposal unit or system for the purpose of receiving the surface drainage from any yard or building.  
22.20.090 - Limitations and Exclusions for Private On-Site Sewage Disposal Systems. 
No application for a permit to install or construct a private sewage disposal system for anything other than one- or two-family residential units will be granted.  
22.20.100 - Required Inspection. 
The County Health Department shall inspect, or cause to be inspected in a thorough manner, all septic tanks, settling tanks, cesspools and other subsurface sewage disposal units or systems hereafter installed, constructed or reconstructed in the City.  
22.20.110 - City Engineer May Impose More Stringent Regulations; Compliance Required. 
Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent the City Engineer from requiring compliance with higher or more stringent requirements or specifications than those contained in this division. For reasons of health and safety, the County Health Department may ask for compliance to more stringent requirements or specifications necessary to maintain a sanitary condition.  
TITLE 23 - BUILDING CONSTRUCTION  
Chapter 23.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
23.04.010 - Purpose. 
The erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, movement, improvement, removal, conversion, demolition, equipping, using, occupying or maintaining of any building or structure within the City shall comply with the provisions of this Title. 
(Ord. No. 412)  
23.04.015 - Code Conformance. 
Before a building or grading permit is issued for a project within the City, the applicant must first obtain a Code Conformance Statement from the City's Planning Department. The Code Conformance Statement shall be issued in writing so long as the project conforms to the provisions of the Municipal Code.  
23.04.020 - Violations and Penalty. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, remove, improve, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of this Title. 
B.  Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this Title shall be deemed guilty of an infraction. Each such person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this Title shall be deemed guilty of an infraction. Each such person, firm or corporation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this Title is committed, continued or permitted.  
23.04.030 - Public Nuisance. 
A.  Any building or structure erected, constructed, enlarged, altered, repaired, moved, improved, removed, converted, demolished, equipped, used, occupied or maintained contrary to the provisions of this Title shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. 
B.  Any failure, refusal or neglect to obtain a permit, as required by this Title, shall be prima facie evidence of the fact that a public nuisance has been committed.  
Chapter 23.08 - DESIGN REVIEW 
 
23.08.010 - Purpose. 
A.  It is the purpose of this Chapter to achieve and protect a residential, seaside community which is both beautiful and pleasant in character, by fostering and encouraging good design which encompasses the use of harmonious materials and colors, compatible proportional relationships and appropriate use of landscaping, and to protect the citizens of the City of Del Mar by providing a design review process as hereinafter described. As a means to implement the Del Mar Community Plan intended to preserve and improve the City of Del Mar as a beautiful, pleasant, residential community in which to live, work, shop, and pursue leisure time activities, and in order to protect the property values, natural environment, primary scenic views and the aesthetic quality of the community, this Chapter is to be applied in furtherance of the health, safety, and general welfare of the City. 
B.  The Design Review Board shall fully consider the beneficial design impacts of a proposed project before analyzing the project for impacts that may violate the regulations of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 465; Ord. No. 849)  
23.08.020 - Prohibitions. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, relocate, alter, remodel or otherwise modify the exterior of any structure, without first having obtained a Design Review Permit, when such activity is required by this Chapter to have a Design Review Permit. 
B.  No building permit or other development permits shall be issued relating to a structure for which a Design Review Permit is required until the Design Review Permit is obtained.  
23.08.030 - General Scope of Requirement. 
A Design Review Permit shall be required for the construction, relocation, alteration, remodeling or other modification of the exterior of all structures, whether public or private, except as follows: 
A.  Except as provided in Subsection B. or C. below, no Design Review Permit is required for the repair, restoration or reconstruction of a structure where such work maintains the outer dimensions and surface relationships of the existing structure. 
B.  For projects located within the CC, NC, BC, VC, PC, or RC zones, or within the BSC, Open Space, and Historical Preservation Overlay zones, no Design Review Permit shall be required for the repair, restoration or reconstruction of a structure where such work maintains the outer dimensions and surface relationships of the existing structure, unless such work will involve a modification of the exterior design features of the existing structure or involve a change in the exterior materials or colors in existence on such structure. "Modifications of the exterior design features" as used herein, includes, but is not limited to, the addition, deletion or modification of windows, doors, overhangs and chimneys. 
C.  For projects involving the installation of doors, windows or other transparent surfaces on portions of the outer surface of an existing structure where such doors, windows or other transparent surfaces do not currently exist, a Design Review Permit shall be obtained. 
1.  The requirement for receipt of a Design Review Permit shall not apply for the replacement of doors, windows or other transparent surfaces that currently exist, provided the surface area of the replacement door window or other transparent surface does not exceed the size of the door window or other transparent surface to be replaced by a factor of more than ten percent and/or the replacement door window or other transparent surface is located on the same building plane and within three feet of the location of the door, window or other transparent surface to be replaced. 
(Ord. No. 565; Ord. No. 784)  
23.08.031 - Reserved. 
Note— Ord. No. 789 expired August 10, 2008.  
23.08.035 - Administrative Design Review. 
A.  An applicant for a project involving the construction, alteration, or remodeling of the exterior of a structure which requires a Design Review Permit may apply for an Administrative Design Review Permit in accordance with this Section, so long as: 
1.  The proposed project involves only a pool, spa or fence; 
2.  The proposed project involves the modification of an existing structure and the outer vertical dimensions of such structure will not be extended or retracted by more than three feet in any lateral direction or involve an increase in height; 
3.  The proposed project involves the installation of a skylight which measures not more than four feet in width or length and for which all proposed mechanized operating equipment is located on the interior of the structure on which the skylight is to be installed; 
4.  The proposed project involves solely the installation of solar water-heating or solar air-heating equipment, with such equipment installed either on and extending no more than 30 inches above grade; or on an existing roof so as to be generally flush to, but in no event more than five inches above, the level of the roof to which it is mounted; or 
5.  The proposed project involves the construction or installation of an accessory structure which measures not more than 48 square feet in area and not more than six feet in height and which meets all required setbacks pursuant to the provisions of Title 30, the Zoning Code. 
6.  The proposed project involves a request for reasonable accommodation in the application of zoning regulations in order to secure equal access to housing or commercial or industrial facilities for persons with disabilities. The request shall be consistent with Section 30.86.220 (Reasonable Accommodation) of the DMMC. 
B.  Notice of the filing of an application for an Administrative Design Review Permit shall be mailed to persons owning property within 300 feet of the project site and posted on the property. The mailed notice of application shall advise persons that plans are available for public review at City Hall and that the application will be administratively approved unless a written objection is received by the Planning Department on or before a date specified in the notice which shall be ten working days after the date of mailing. 
C.  If no timely written objection is filed, the application shall be administratively approved by the Planning Director if it is deemed to be consistent with the provisions of the Del Mar Municipal Code. 
D.  If a timely written objection is filed, the application shall no longer be administratively processed and shall instead be processed in accordance with the other sections of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 565; Ord. No. 716; Ord. No. 740; Ord. No. 917 , § 3, 9-19-2016)  
23.08.040 - Definitions. 
A.  For purposes of this Chapter, a conclusion that a proposed design element is "unreasonable," must be supported by findings of fact regarding: 
1.  The extent to which the contested design element adversely impacts upon the purposes for which this Chapter is adopted. 
2.  Whether the project requires the inclusion of the contested design element in order for the project to be useable by the applicant. 
3.  Whether the project requires the inclusion of the contested design element in order to produce a project that is similar in quality to development in the neighborhood. 
4.  The availability of one or more alternatives to the contested design element that will produce a project that is useable by the applicant and similar in quality to development in the neighborhood. 
B.  For purposes of this Chapter, primary scenic view means a view of the ocean, the community, lagoons, canyons or other scenic vistas from the primary living area of a residence. 
C.  For purposes of this Chapter, primary living area shall mean that portion of a residence determined by the Design Review Board, or City Council on appeal, to be the main gathering and entertainment room used by residents and guests at the residence. 
1.  Each residence shall be limited to the designation of only one primary living area. 
2.  Unless otherwise determined by the DRB, or City Council on appeal, the primary living area of a residence is that portion of the residence that is most often used by the occupants and their guests for gatherings and entertainment, consisting of the residence's living room, dining room or great room. 
3.  Under rare and extraordinary circumstances, the DRB, or City Council on appeal, may determine that another area of a residence is the primary living area when it has been demonstrated that due to extenuating circumstances, the occupants of the residence must use another portion of the residence, rather than its living room, dining room or great room, as the residence's main gathering and entertainment area. 
4.  In no case shall a bathroom, storage room, stairwell or hallway be designated as a primary living area. 
D.  For purposes of this Chapter, "bulk" and "mass" shall mean the appearance of volume given by the outer, visible envelope of a structure as viewed from surrounding public or private properties, this appearance generally attributable to the size of the structure and/or its architectural features. 
(Ord. No. 647, § 1; Ord. No. 784)  
23.08.050 - Reserved.  
23.08.060 - Procedure. 
A.  The owner, or the owner's authorized agent, of the real property on which the construction activity is proposed, shall make application for a Design Review Permit to the Department of Planning and Community Development on a form approved by the City. To be received, that application must be accompanied by a filing fee in an amount set, from time to time, by resolution of the City Council together with whatever additional plans and information the Planning Department deems necessary to accomplish the purposes of this Chapter. 
B.  When the application has been received and deemed complete, the Department of Planning and Community development shall prepare a staff report and place the matter on the agenda of the next available meeting of the Design Review Board in accordance with the Board's adopted Policy Manual. Notice of the consideration of the matter shall be made as follows: 
1.  Posting of a notice at City Hall and on the project site at least ten calendar days prior to the matter being first considered. 
2.  Publishing a notice in the "Del Mar Surfcomber" or a newspaper of general circulation at least one week prior to the matter being first considered. 
3.  The mailing of a notice to all owners of property within a 300-foot radius of the exterior boundaries of the subject property at least ten calendar days preceding the hearing prior to the matter being first considered. 
C.  At the discretion of the Director, the matter shall either be set as a public hearing or be placed on the Consent Calendar of the agenda. If the matter is placed on the Consent Calendar and not removed there from, then by the adoption of the Consent Calendar, the matter shall be acted upon as recommended in the staff report. If the matter is removed from the Consent Calendar, it shall be continued to a date certain for the purpose of conducting a public hearing. 
D.  A matter shall be removed from the Consent Calendar at the request of any member of the Design Review Board, public or staff, either by submission of a written request delivered to the City Clerk at least seven days prior to the Design Review Board's initial consideration of the matter or by oral request made at the first consideration of the matter. At any time, the requesting party may withdraw the request to conduct a public hearing. 
E.  The Design review Board may, by majority vote, approve, disapprove in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, conditionally approve or continue the application.  
23.08.065 - Citizens' Participation Program—Purpose. 
A.  The purpose of the Citizens' Participation Program is to ensure that applicants for projects requiring the receipt of a Design Review Permit conduct efforts to notify potentially affected parties of proposed developments early in the design phase of a project. The Citizens' Participation Program is also intended to give the applicants and their agents the opportunity to understand and respond to concerns raised about the project's potential impacts on the community. 
B.  The Citizens' Participation Program is not intended to produce complete consensus on all applications but to facilitate dialogue among applicants and neighbors early in the development review process. Completion of the Citizen's Participation Program shall not be construed as any prejudgment, commitment, or guarantee that an application for a Design Review Permit will be approved with or without any particular conditions. Approval of a Design Review Permit is at the sole discretion of the Design Review Board or City Council on appeal. 
(Ord. No. 849; Ord. No. 872; Ord. No. 920 , § 1, 11-21-2016)  
23.08.066 - Projects Requiring Implementation of a Citizens' Participation Program. 
A.  The requirement to implement a Citizens' Participation Program, as regulated in this Chapter, shall apply to those applications for Design Review Permits that involve one or more of the following: 
1.  Any new detached structure that would contain more than 500 square feet of bulk floor, as bulk floor area is measured pursuant to the DMMC; 
2.  Any addition of a second-story element to a one-story structure; or 
3.  Any project that, in the determination of the Planning Director, working in consultation with the Chairperson of the Design Review Board, holds the potential to cause adverse impacts on the surrounding neighborhood and therefore, warrants the implementation of a Citizens' Participation Program. 
B.  In order for an application for a Design Review Permit to be deemed complete and eligible for inclusion on a noticed agenda of the Design Review Board, the applicant shall submit evidence to the Director of Planning and Community Development that a Citizens' Participation Program has been implemented, where required and as regulated by this Chapter. 
C.  A Citizens' Participation Program shall be considered valid for a period of one year following City acceptance of the report required by this Chapter, unless an extension is granted by the Planning and Community Development Director based upon a corresponding schedule of CEQA environmental review, Specific Plan, or other similar process. 
D.  For the purposes of this section, a person or their agents/representatives required to implement a Citizen's Participation Program shall be referred to as "Property Owner." 
(Ord. No. 872; Ord. No. 920 , § 2, 11-21-2016)  
23.08.067 - Procedure for Initiating a Citizens' Participation Program. 
A.  A Property Owner shall file an application for commencement of a Citizens' Participation Program with the Department of Planning and Community Development on a form approved by the City. To be received, that application must be accompanied by a filing fee in an amount set, from time to time, by resolution of the City Council together with whatever additional plans and information the Planning Department deems necessary to accomplish the purposes of this Chapter. 
B.  A City staff planner shall be assigned to each CPP application. The staff planner shall be responsible for City oversight of the program and adherence to all required CPP criteria provided by this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 920 , § 3, 11-21-2016) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 920 , § 3, adopted November 21, 2016, amended Section 23.08.067 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, Section 23.08.067 pertained to required components of a citizen's participation program, and derived from Ord. No. 872. For current provisions pertaining to similar subject matter, the user's attention is directed to Section 23.08.068.  
23.08.068 - Required Components of a Citizens' Participation Program. 
A.  Meetings. 
1.  All Property Owners required by this Chapter to implement a Citizens' Participation Program shall hold two meetings with neighbors and interested parties prior to submittal of any Design Review Permit applications for the project. The meetings shall consist of the following: 
a.  Introductory Meeting. Prior to any preparation of architectural design plans, the Property Owner shall conduct an informal meeting with neighbors and all interested parties to discuss the development desires and conceptual design ideas of the owner. The purpose of this meeting is to receive initial feedback and identify areas of potential concern from attendees of the meeting. Meeting attendees are encouraged to convey any information during this meeting that may help the Property Owner develop a plan that would avoid adverse impacts to the surrounding neighborhood and community. Every effort shall be taken to hold the meeting at the site of the proposed development. 
b.  Project Proposal Meeting. After conducting the Introductory Meeting as discussed in Subsection a. above, the Property Owner shall conduct a second meeting with neighbors and all parties interested in the development project. For this meeting, the Property Owner shall provide the following to help facilitate understanding of the project and development review processing at the meeting: 
1.  Conceptual architectural plans consisting of a site plan, floor plans, and all exterior building elevations. 
2.  A photographic exhibit that depicts structures located on the next three consecutive properties located to each side (left and right) of the subject property to be improved. 
3.  3-D computer modeling images of the new building(s), or existing building(s) with proposed additions, as viewed from each home located on property directly adjacent to the potential project site. At a minimum, the model shall depict the exterior massing/envelope of the buildings and shall be viewable from all above-ground angles. Architectural details, window/door placements, exterior finishes, etc. are not required for the model. 
4.  Story poles, erected in accordance with the Design Review Board's Story Pole Guidelines, shall be erected on the potential development site no less than 14 calendar days prior to the Project Proposal Meeting. 
2.  The Introductory Meeting required in this Section shall be scheduled within the following time/date parameters: 
a.  Weekdays after 6:00 p.m.; and 
b.  Non-Holiday weekends after 10:00 a.m.; and 
c.  Not during the City Council, Design Review or Planning Commission meeting times. 
3.  The "Project Proposal Meeting" required in this Section shall be attended by one member of the City of Del Mar Planning and Community Development Department. Scheduling of the meeting shall be coordinated with City to assure staff availability for meeting attendance during City business hours. The role of the City staff member at the meeting shall be to educate and inform meeting attendees of the City's development review processes and provide procedural guidance. 
4.  Property Owners shall provide the opportunity to meet individually with neighbors and interested parties who are unable to attend either of the required meetings at their scheduled times. 
B.  Provision of Notice for CPP Meetings. 
1.  Notice for all Citizens' Participation Program meetings shall be provided by the City to the owners and current residents of all properties located within 300 feet of the potential project site. 
2.  Notices for each of the required meetings shall: state the purpose of the meeting, as described by this Chapter; briefly describe the Property Owner's intentions (project description); encourage recipients to participate; and shall contain the date, time and location of the meeting. All notices must also include the Property Owner's name, mailing address, email address and a telephone number. 
3.  Notices for the Project Proposal Meeting shall include the most recent preliminary project plans, as required in Subsection 23.08.067 A.1.a(i) of this Code. 
4.  Notices required by this Code shall be mailed and postmarked no less than 28 calendar days prior to the proposed [CPP] meeting date. 
5.  All required meeting notices shall be posted on the potential development site and on the City's website at least 28 calendar days prior to a required CPP meeting. Parties interested in receiving notice of all CPP meeting posted on the City's website may sign-up to receive "E-Blast" communications from the City regarding scheduled CPP meetings. 
6.  The requirements for notice of a Citizens' Participation Program are separate and distinct from the noticing requirements for provision of notice of a Design Review Board hearing, as required in this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 920 , § 4, 11-21-2016) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 920 , § 4, adopted November 21, 2016, amended Section 23.08.068 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, Section 23.08.068 pertained to submittal of report documenting implementation of a citizens' participation program, and derived from Ord. No. 872. For current provisions pertaining to similar subject matter, the user's attention is directed to Section 23.08.069.  
23.08.069 - Submittal of Reports Documenting Implementation of a Citizens' Participation Program. 
A.  At least 28 calendar days prior to the submittal of a Design Review Permit application for the project, the Property Owner shall provide the City with a written response to any concerns raised during the CPP Meeting process explaining how the draft project plans would be modified as a result the concerns that neighbors raised at the Citizens' Participation meeting, or if not, the rationale thereof. This information, and any additional comments by the interested neighbors, shall be reviewed by the City for accuracy and shall be sent to all CPP meeting attendees no less than 14 calendar days prior to Design Review Permit application submittal. 
B.  Following implementation of the Citizens' Participation Program, the applicant or applicant's agent shall submit a written report to the Director of Planning and Community Development documenting the steps taken to implement, and the results of, the Citizens' Participation Program. The report required herein shall include all of the following information: 
1.  The Map and distribution (address) list for the meeting notices; 
2.  The dates and locations of all meetings to which interested parties were invited to discuss the development proposal; 
3.  The content, dates mailed, and number of mailings, including letters, meeting notices, newsletters and other writings distributed by the applicant or his/her representatives as part of the Citizens' Participation Program; 
4.  A list of the parties who attended meetings or otherwise participated in the Citizens' Participation Program; 
5.  A list of the comments raised at each of the Citizen Participation Program meetings, along with any correspondence received as part of the Citizens' Participation Program; and 
6.  An explanation as to how the project was modified as a result of those comments from the Citizens' Participation meeting(s), or if not, the rationale thereof. 
7.  A copy of the written response sent to all meeting attendees. 
(Ord. No. 920 , § 5, 11-21-2016)  
23.08.070 - Design Regulations. 
An application shall be approved unless the Design Review Board makes findings of fact based upon the information presented during the hearing that support one or more of the regulatory conclusions contained in this Chapter.  
23.08.072 - Regulatory Conclusions—Generally. 
A.  The design is inconsistent with the Community Plan, General Plan, or Zoning Ordinance, including the Design Review standards contained within the Zoning Chapter of the underlying zone. 
B.  The design will create a private or public nuisance. 
C.  The design will adversely affect the health or safety of the neighborhood. 
D.  The design will create an unreasonable invasion of the privacy of neighboring properties. 
E.  The design will cause the surrounding neighborhood to depreciate materially in appearance or value. 
F.  The design will discourage occupancy, investment or orderly development in the neighborhood. 
G.  The proposed development fails to comply with a lawful requirement to accommodate individuals with physical disabilities, either by provision of handicap parking stalls, ramps, or the like. 
H.  The proposed development fails to site separate structures so as to avoid crowding. 
I.  The proposed development does not functionally use open space between separate structures. 
J.  The proposed development locates structures so as to unreasonably, adversely impact upon outdoor areas on adjacent properties. 
(Ord. No. 637)  
23.08.074 - Regulatory Conclusions—Traffic, Parking and Pedestrian Circulation. 
A.  The vehicular or pedestrian circulation, including walkways, interior drives and parking, access points to the public streets, widths of interior drives, general circulation, separation of vehicular traffic, or arrangement of parking areas, is not safe; is not as convenient as reasonably practicable; detracts from the design of the proposed structure; or adversely impacts neighboring property. 
B.  The design's traffic ingress, egress or internal traffic circulation will have an adverse effect on traffic conditions on abutting streets. 
C.  The design will create traffic hazards due to congestion, distraction of motorists or unsatisfactory access and egress. 
D.  The design will interfere with public access, rights-of-way or a public easement. 
E.  The design does not provide ingress/egress or maneuver area for emergency vehicles. 
F.  The circulation systems will cause conflicts among vehicular, bicycle, or pedestrian traffic. 
G.  The proposed development provides inadequate site distances for motorists and pedestrians entering or exiting the property. 
H.  The proposed development interferes with off-site circulation safety or efficiency.  
23.08.076 - Same—Topography and Landscaping. 
A.  The natural state topography or landscaping is not being preserved insofar as practical, by minimizing tree and soil removal. 
B.  The proposed grading or vegetation changes will unreasonably, adversely impact upon neighboring, developed areas. 
C.  The proposed development does not minimize the disruption of existing natural features such as trees and other vegetation, natural ground forms, and view. 
D.  The proposed development fails to blend the proposed grading with the contours of adjacent properties. 
E.  The proposed development fails to ensure that all on-site drainage patterns will occur on or through the areas designed to serve this function. 
F.  The proposed development unreasonably disrupts the existing natural topography or vegetation. 
G.  The proposed development fails to provide the sizing of landscape materials so that a mature appearance will be attained within a reasonable period of time following installation. 
H.  The proposed development fails to provide landscaping to minimize and disrupt the expansive appearance of parking lots or other large paved areas. 
I.  The proposed development fails to utilize landscaping to effectively compliment building elevations and soften the appearance of structures. 
J.  The proposed development uses landscaping which is not well suited to Del Mar's climate without the use of extensive irrigation. 
K.  The proposed development fails to minimize hardscape surfaces and limit excessive paving. 
(Ord. No. 637)  
23.08.077 - Same—Relationship to Neighborhood. 
A.  The design unreasonably blocks significant public coastal views. 
B.  The design detracts from the natural beauty of the coastal area. 
C.  The design is out of scale with other structures in the neighborhood. 
D.  The design is not harmonious with or is functionally incompatible with the surrounding neighbor-hood in one or more of the following respects: 
1.  Color scheme. 
2.  Structural siting on the lot. 
3.  Existing improvements or natural elements in the area. 
4.  Architectural features and ornaments. 
5.  Type and quality of material. 
6.  Existing and proposed open spaces areas. 
E.  The component elements of the design are not in proportion to one another. 
F.  The design would adversely affect the lighting or noise quality of the local neighborhood. 
G.  The proposed development unreasonably fails to screen from the view from neighboring properties and public places, unattractive features such as storage areas, trash enclosures, transformers, service yards, loading docks and ramps, utility buildings, or other design elements of the project which adversely impact upon the visual quality of the neighborhood; by failing to use setbacks, landscaping, fencing, siting or structures. 
H.  The proposed development unreasonably encroaches upon primary scenic views of neighboring property. 
I.  The proposed development fails to minimize noise created by the proposed project (traffic, air conditioning, use, etc.) that may negatively impact the proposed project. 
J.  The proposed development fails to minimize noise from the surrounding area that may negatively impact the proposed project. 
K.  The exterior lighting is not functional, subtle or architecturally integrated with the building's style, materials, or colors. 
L.  The proposed development fails to avoid similar or identical building facades on the same or adjacent parcels. 
(Ord. No. 637)  
23.08.078 - Same—Building Design. 
A.  The proposed development fails to coordinate the components of exterior building design on all elevations with regard to color, materials, architectural form and detailing to achieve design harmony and continuity. 
B.  The proposed development fails to limit the number of materials on the exterior face of the building resulting in inharmonious design and lack of continuity. 
C.  The proposed development fails to minimize roof penetrations by grouping all plumbing vents and ducting and mechanical equipment together. 
D.  The proposed development fails to design and/or screen all rooftop mechanical and electrical equipment as an integral part of the building design. 
E.  The proposed development fails to limit the amount of design components which unnecessarily add bulk and mass to the building but which are not calculated as floor area ratio (FAR) pursuant to DMMC Title 30, the Zone Code. 
(Ord. No. 647, § 2)  
23.08.079 - Same—Signs. 
A.  The proposed signage fails to relate to its surroundings in terms of size, shape, color, texture, and lighting so that it is not complimentary to the overall design of the building and is not visually compatible with other approved conforming signs in the neighborhood. 
B.  The proposed signage fails to convey its message legibly and clearly. 
C.  The proposed signage is not weather resistant and vandal-resistant. 
D.  The proposed freestanding sign fails to provide external lighting which is screened from direct view and/or which does not impact upon adjacent properties, motorists or pedestrians. 
E.  The proposed freestanding sign fails to utilize plant materials effectively to integrate the sign with the ground plane and screen out low level flood lighting. 
F.  The profile of the proposed freestanding sign is unreasonably high. 
G.  The proposed signage used struts, braces, or guy wires to support said signage.  
23.08.080 - Satellite Antennas. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain an apparatus capable of receiving communications from a transmitter or a transmitter relay located in a planetary orbit without first having obtained the approval of the Design Review Board. 
B.  The proposed antenna shall be approved so long as the location, size, design and operating characteristics of the satellite antenna are compatible with and do not adversely affect, in a material manner, adjacent uses, residences, structures or natural resources, with consideration given to, among other things, the following: 
1.  The effect upon the character of the neighborhood; 
2.  The effect upon views from public and private vantage points; 
3.  The effect upon environmental quality or natural resources; and 
4.  Any other relevant impact of the proposed use on the surrounding area. 
C.  Satellite antennas shall be located, designed and screened so as to cause the least visual impact on views from surrounding properties and from public areas. 
D.  Satellite antennas may be erected on the ground in setbacks if no danger to public health, safety or welfare exists. 
E.  No more than one satellite antenna shall be permitted on a lot. 
F.  Notwithstanding the above, the regulations of this Section shall not be administered so as to: 
1.  Prevent reception of satellite delivered signals from major communications satellites that, when viewed in a conventional television set, are at least equal in picture quality to those received from local commercial television stations, or 
2.  Impose costs on the potential user of the antenna that are excessive in light of the purchase and installation costs of the equipment. 
G.  If an applicant claims that an imposed regulation violates one or both of the provisions of Section F, the applicant shall deposit with the City a sum determined by the Director of Planning and Community development to obtain an expert evaluation and opinion. Any unused portion of the deposit shall be refunded to the applicant upon a final determination on the application.  
23.08.090 - Guidelines. 
By resolution, passed from time to time, the Design Review Board may announce design guidelines, which, though not binding, are intended to provide guidance to applicants.  
23.08.100 - Imposition of Conditions. 
A.  The Design Review Board, or City Council on appeal, shall have the authority to impose such conditions and safeguards as it deems necessary to protect and enhance the health, safety, and welfare of the surrounding area, and to insure that the proposed project for which design review approval is sought, fully meets the criteria as set forth in this Chapter. 
B.  No Design Review Permit shall require a condition which is not reasonably related to the project for which the Design Review Permit is requested.  
23.08.110 - Expiration. 
Three years from the date of final approval of a Design Review Permit, the Permit will expire, unless a building permit has been issued and substantial construction has been accomplished in reliance upon the Design Review Permit. 
(Ord. No. 641; Ord. No. 757)  
23.08.120—23.08.140 - Reserved.  
23.08.150 - Posting of Performance Bonds. 
Whenever a Design Review Permit is granted upon any condition or limitation, the person seeking the Design Review Permit may be required to furnish security in the form of money or surety bond in an amount sufficient to insure compliance with the conditions and limitations upon which such Design Review Permit is granted. Every such bond shall be in a form satisfactory to the Department of Planning and Community Development, shall be payable to the City, and shall be conditioned upon compliance with the conditions and limitations upon which the Design Review Permit is granted.  
23.08.160 - Reapplications. 
At least one year shall have elapsed since the effective date of disapproval of the application or revocation of a Design Review Permit before filing a new application seeking substantially the same Design Review Permit for any of the same property.  
23.08.170 - Covenant. 
At the discretion of the Director of Planning and Community Development, to accomplish the purposes of this Chapter, the Design Review Permit may be issued in the form of a covenant to be signed by the permittee and recorded with the County Recorder.  
Chapter 23.09 - ADMINISTRATIVE SIGN REVIEW 
 
23.09.010 - Purpose. 
Carefully designed and constructed signs are an important component of the character of Del Mar. The use of a variety of sign types and quality materials contribute to the eclectic character of the community. The purpose of this Chapter is to provide a relatively simple and expedient review process for sign proposals while also ensuring that new signage will be in keeping with the small town, pedestrian-oriented character of the City's commercial areas. This Chapter is also intended to protect Del Mar's scenic amenities against the adverse impact of visual clutter. 
(Ord. No. 707; Ord. No. 799)  
23.09.020 - Permit Required. 
Unless exempted by another provision in law, it is unlawful for any person to erect a sign within the City without first obtaining either a Design Review Permit or Administrative Sign Review Permit, in addition to any Building Permit or Electrical Permit that may also be required.  
23.09.030 - Application Requirements. 
A person proposing to erect a sign may elect to process an application for an Administrative Sign Review Permit in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. An application for an Administrative Sign Review Permit shall be made upon a form provided by the City and shall be accompanied by the following information and plans: 
A.  Two copies of project plans to include: 
1.  A location map showing the project site; 
2.  A site plan indicating the position of each proposed sign and its relation to adjacent on-site buildings or structures; 
3.  An elevation(s) drawn to scale or with dimensions noted, showing the location and proposed size of the sign and its support structures, the proposed design and color specifications, and the dimensions of any letters or logos; 
4.  A description of all construction materials for the proposed sign and sign support system; 
5.  A sample board or specification information in sufficient detail to identify and verify the materials and colors to be used in the sign; 
6.  Pictures of the surface to which the sign will be attached or, for freestanding signs, the area in which the sign will be installed; 
7.  A description of any proposed sign lighting system(s) including supporting technical data to allow an evaluation of proposed lighting levels; and 
8.  A list of the sizes and dimensions of all of the business's existing signs. 
B.  An application fee, as established by resolution of the City Council; and 
C.  Such other information as the Director of Planning and Community Development may require to determine the application's compliance with this Chapter and with the zoning provisions of Title 30 of the DMMC.  
23.09.040 - Eligibility Requirements for Administrative Sign Review Permit. 
In order for a proposed sign to qualify for eligibility of review under the Administrative Sign Review Permit process, the proposed sign must meet the applicable zoning provisions of DMMC Chapter 30.84 (Signage) and must be consistent with all of the criteria set forth below: 
A.  The sign and sign supports will be composed of one or more of the following materials only: 
- Painted, treated or weathered metal (e.g. bronze, copper, stainless steel, wrought iron) 
- Natural finished, stained or painted wood 
- Ornamental Glass 
- Stone or inlayed stone 
- Ceramics 
- Masonry 
- Durable, weather-resistant fabric 
- Custom-generated vinyl appliqués 
- Durable, weather-resistant plastic, such as acrylic or Poly Vinyl Composite, provided signs using such material meet all of the following requirements: 
1.  The plastic material will be a minimum of one-half-inch thick; 
2.  The sign is a custom generated (vs. a massed-produced) sign; 
3.  The plastic material will be treated with paint or other covering to mask the material; 
4.  The edges of the plastic material will be buffed or beveled to provide a finished appearance; 
5.  The plastic material will treated to be glare resistant; and 
6.  The sign will not be internally lit ("can signs" are prohibited). 
B.  The sign will be permanently attached to the ground or adjacent structure and shall be constructed of durable, weather-resistant materials; 
C.  The sign will be legible with individual letters or lettering no greater than ten inches in height or width; 
D.  The individual logos of the sign will be no greater than 15 inches in height or width; 
E.  The sign will be of a design which is compatible with the architectural style, colors and materials of the structure upon which, or in front of which, the sign is to be located; 
F.  If located within planter boxes or other landscaped areas, the sign will be designed with colors and materials which are compatible with the plant species within the adjacent landscape area; 
G.  If illuminated, the sign illumination will: 
1.  Be of an intensity or brightness which will not interfere with the reasonable enjoyment of residential properties in proximity to the sign; 
2.  Not involve the use of harsh or vibrant tones and shall not involve the use of high-intensity discharge lighting sources such as mercury vapor, metal halide or high- or low-pressure sodium; 
3.  Be designed so as not to contrast with ambient lighting of adjacent rights-of-way; 
4.  Be equipped and controlled so as to be inactive or of a lower intensity when the business for which the sign is proposed is not open to the public; and 
H.  The sign will be designed so that all elements which create noise are fully enclosed and shall not be audible to a person of normal sensitivities standing at ground level at a distance of six feet or more from the sign. 
(Ord. No. 745)  
23.09.050 - Issuing Authority Review Process. 
The Director of Planning and Community Development or his/her designee, may approve, conditionally approve, or deny an application which qualifies for an Administrative Sign Review Permit. In reviewing an application, the Director or designee shall apply the criteria of this Chapter and of DMMC Chapter 23.08—Design Review.  
23.09.060 - Sign Review Criteria as Standard of Review. 
A.  An application for an Administrative Sign Review Permit shall be approved unless it is found by the Director of Planning and Community Development (or Design Review Board on referral) that the proposed sign will be inconsistent with one or more of the criteria set forth in this Chapter or in DMMC Chapter 23.08—Design Review.  
23.09.070 - Application Notice and Objection Process. 
A.  Notice of the filing of an application for an Administrative Sign Review Permit shall be posted at the project site on a notice card provided by staff of the City of Del Mar Department of Planning and Community Development. The notice of application shall advise interested persons that plans are available for public review at Del Mar City Hall. The notice shall stipulate that the application may be administratively approved unless a written objection is received by the Department of Planning and Community Development on or before a date specified in the notice which shall be ten working days after the date of the posting of the notice. 
B.  If no timely written objection is filed, the application may be administratively approved by the Director of Planning and Community Development if it is deemed to be consistent with the provisions of this Chapter and of the Del Mar Municipal Code. 
C.  If a timely written objection is filed, the application shall no longer be administratively processed and shall instead be processed in accordance with the requirements for a Design Review Permit as specified in DMMC Chapter 23.08—Design Review.  
23.09.080 - Administrative Sign Review Applications Referred to the Design Review Board. 
Applications for signs which are determined by staff to be otherwise eligible for review under the Administrative Sign Review Permit process as specified in this Chapter but which in the opinion of the Director of Planning and Community Development do not meet the applicable design review standards contained in this Chapter or in DMMC Chapter 23.08 shall be set on an agenda of the Design Review Board for review at a noticed public hearing. The Design Review Board (or City Council on appeal) shall thereupon render a decision to approve, conditionally approve, or deny the application, using as the standard of review, the provisions of DMMC Chapter 23.08—Design Review. In cases where an application for an Administrative Sign Review Permit is forwarded to the Design Review Board pursuant to this Section, the applicant shall not be required to pay an additional fee for the processing of the application through the Design Review Board process.  
Chapter 23.12 - CALIFORNIA CODES FOR CONSTRUCTION  
DIVISION 1. - BUILDING CODE 
 
23.12.010 - Adoption of the 2016 California Building Code, Part 2, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations. 
There is adopted and incorporated by reference herein as the City building code for the purpose of prescribing regulations in the City of Del Mar for the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, conversion, demolition, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area, and maintenance of buildings and structures, the 2016 California Building Code, Part 2, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations, a portion of the California Building Standards Code, as defined in the California State Health and Safety Code, Section 18902 et seq. based on the International Building Code, 2015 Edition, including those Appendix Chapters not shown as deleted by this Chapter. Except as otherwise provided by this Chapter or any other section of the City of Del Mar Municipal Code, all erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, conversion, demolition, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area and maintenance of buildings and structures within the City of Del Mar shall be in conformance with the 2016 California Building Code and the adopted Appendix Chapters, published by the California Building Standards Commission. 
(Ord. No. 922 , § 3, 11-21-2016) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 922 , § 3, adopted November 21, 2016, repealed the former Sections 23.12.010, 23.12.012, 23.12.014, 23.12.016, 23.12.018, 23.12.020, 23.12.030, 23.12.032, 23.12.040, 23.12.042, 23.12.050, 23.12.060, 23.12.062, 23.12.063, and 23.12.070 in their entirety, and enacted new Sections 23.12.010, 23.12.011, 23.12.012, 23.12.014, 23.12.018, 23.12.020, 23.12.030, 23.12.040, 23.12.050, 23.12.060—23.12.065, and 23.12.070 to read as herein set out. The former provisions pertained to various codes for construction, and derived from Ord. No. 412; Ord. No. 632; Ord. No. 678; Ord. No. 763; Ord. No. 775; Ord. No. 800; Ord. No. 808; Ord. No. 853, and Ord. No. 890.  
23.12.011 - Section 101.1 amended. 
Section 101.1 Title shall be amended as follows, "These regulations shall be known as the Building Code of the City of Del Mar, hereinafter referred to as "this code."" 
(Ord. No. 922 , § 3, 11-21-2016) 
Note— See editor's note at Section 23.12.010.  
23.12.012 - Section 105.2 amended. 
Section 105.2 Building is amended [as follows]: 
1.  One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds, play houses and similar uses, provided the floor area is not greater than 48 square feet. 
6.  Sidewalks and driveways not more than 30 inches in the rear yard, and 18 inches in the side yard, above adjacent grade, and not over any basement or story below and are not part of an accessible route. This exception applies only to structures accessory to a single family dwelling (Group R, Division 3 Occupancy). 
Unless otherwise exempted by this code, separate plumbing, electrical and mechanical permits will be required for the above exempted items. 
(Ord. No. 922 , § 3, 11-21-2016) 
Note— See editor's note at Section 23.12.010.  
23.12.014 - Section 1505 Amended. 
Section 1505 of the 2016 California Building Code, is amended to read as follows: 
Section 1505 Roofing Requirements. The roof covering or roofing assembly on any structure regulated by this code shall be as specified in Table 1505.1 and as classified in Section 1505. All roof-coverings, including re-roofing shall be of a roof classification not less than a Class A Roof-Covering. 
No wood shake or shingle products are permitted to be installed on the roof of any Occupancy Group. 
Class A Roof-Covering shall not be required for roof repair where the proposed improvements are at or below 10% of the total roof area. This exemption shall be allowed for only one repair of 10% or less. Subsequent roof repairs shall be required to meet the standards set forth in Section 1503 of the California Building Code. 
For re-roofing if existing residential buildings, the Class A Roofing Assembly may be limited the part of the assembly specified from the sheathing upward, provided the existing sheathing is solid with a minimum thickness of 3/8". Where spaced sheathing currently exists, it shall be replaced or covered with sheathing of a thickness required for a class A Assembly. 
Roofing shall be secured or fastened to the supporting roof construction and shall provide weather protection for the building at the roof. 
TABLE 1505.1 
MINIMUM ROOF COVERING CLASSIFICATION 
FOR TYPE OF CONSTRUCTION 
IA 	IB 	IIA 	IIB 	IIIA 	IIIB 	IV 	VA 	VB 
A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 
 
(Ord. No. 922 , § 3, 11-21-2016) 
Note— See editor's note at Section 23.12.010.  
23.12.018 - Appendices Adopted. 
Appendices C and I of the 2016 California Building Code are adopted. 
(Ord. No. 922 , § 3, 11-21-2016) 
Note— See editor's note at Section 23.12.010.  
DIVISION 2. - ELECTRICAL CODE 
 
12.12.020 - Adoption of the 2016 California Electrical Code, Part 3, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations. 
There is adopted and incorporated by reference herein as the City electrical code for the purpose of prescribing regulations in the City of Del Mar for the installation, alteration or repair of electrical systems and permit requirements and inspection thereof, the 2016 California Electrical Code, Part 3, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations, a portion of the California Building Standards Code based on the National Electrical Code, 2014 Edition. Except as otherwise provided by this Chapter other parts of the City of Del Mar Municipal Code, all installation, alteration, or repair of electrical systems within the City of Del Mar shall be in conformance with the 2016 California Electrical Code published by the California Building Standards Commission. 
(Ord. No. 922 , § 3, 11-21-2016) 
Note— See editor's note at Section 23.12.010.  
DIVISION 3. - PLUMBING CODE 
 
23.12.030 - Adoption of the 2016 California Plumbing Code, Part 5, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations. 
There is adopted and incorporated by reference herein as the City Plumbing Code for the purpose of prescribing regulations in the City of Del Mar for the construction, alteration, moving, demolition, repair and use of all plumbing, gas or drainage piping and systems or water heating or treating equipment in or on any building or structure or outdoors on any premises or property, the 2016 California Plumbing Code, Part 5, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations, a portion of the California Building Standards Code, as defined in the California Health and Safety Code, Section 18902 et seq. . Except as otherwise provided by this Chapter and other parts of the City of Del Mar Municipal Code, all construction, alteration, moving, demolition, repair and use of all plumbing, gas or drainage piping and systems or water heating or treating equipment within the City of Del Mar shall be in conformance with 2016 California Plumbing Code, published by the California Building Standards Commission. 
(Ord. No. 922 , § 3, 11-21-2016) 
Note— See editor's note at Section 23.12.010.  
DIVISION 4. - MECHANICAL CODE 
 
23.12.040 - Adoption of the 2016 California Mechanical Code, Part 4, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations. 
There is adopted and incorporated by reference herein as the City Mechanical Code for the purpose of prescribing regulations in the City of Del Mar for the erection, installation, alteration, repair, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of any heating, ventilating, cooling, refrigeration systems, incinerators or other miscellaneous heat-producing appliances, the 2016 California Mechanical Code, Part 4, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations, a portion of the California Building Standards Code, as defined in the California Health and Safety Code, Section 18902 et seq. . Except as otherwise provided by this Chapter and other parts of the City of Del Mar Municipal Code, all erection, installation, alteration, repair, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of any heating, ventilating, cooling, refrigeration systems, incinerators or other miscellaneous heat-producing appliances shall be in conformance with California State Building Standards Code and any rules and regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, published by the California Buildings Standards Commission. 
(Ord. No. 922 , § 3, 11-21-2016) 
Note— See editor's note at Section 23.12.010.  
DIVISION 5. - ENERGY CODE 
 
23.12.050 - Adoption of the 2016 California Energy Code, Part 6, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations. 
There is adopted and incorporated by reference herein as the City energy code for the purpose of prescribing regulations in the City of Del Mar for the conservation of energy the 2016 California Energy Code, Part 6, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations, a portion of the California Building Standards Code, as defined in the California Health and Safety Code, Section 18902 et seq. Except as otherwise provided by this Chapter and other parts of the City of Del Mar Municipal Code, all construction of buildings where energy will be utilized shall be in conformance with California Building Standards Code and any rules and regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, including the 2016 California Energy Code, published by the California Energy Commission. 
(Ord. No. 922 , § 3, 11-21-2016) 
Note— See editor's note at Section 23.12.010.  
DIVISION 6. - RESIDENTIAL CODE 
 
23.12.060 - Adoption of the 2016 California Residential Code, Part 2.5, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations. 
There is adopted and incorporated by reference herein as the City residential code for the purpose of prescribing regulations in the City of Del Mar for the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition of one- and two-family dwellings, and townhouses, the California Residential Code, Part 2.5, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations, a portion of the California Building Standards Code, as defined in the California Health and Safety Code, Section 18902 et seq. and the 2016 California Residential Code. Except as otherwise provided by this Chapter and other parts of the City of Del Mar Municipal Code, all construction of one- and two-family dwellings and townhouses shall be in conformance with the California Building Standards Code and rules and regulations promulgated pursuant there to, including the 2016 California Residential Code, published by the California Building Standards Commission. 
(Ord. No. 922 , § 3, 11-21-2016) 
Note— See editor's note at Section 23.12.010.  
23.12.061 - Section R101.1 amended. 
Section R101.1 Title shall be amended as follows, "These provisions shall be known as the Residential Code for One- and Two-family Dwellings of the City of Del Mar, and shall be cited as such and will be referred to herein as "this code."" 
(Ord. No. 922 , § 3, 11-21-2016) 
Note— See editor's note at Section 23.12.010.  
23.12.062 - Section R105.2 amended. 
Section R105.2, Building is amended [as follows:] 
1.  One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds, play houses and similar uses, provided the floor area is not greater than 48 square feet. 
(Ord. No. 922 , § 3, 11-21-2016) 
Note— See editor's note at Section 23.12.010.  
23.12.063 - Section R902.1.3 amended. 
Section R902.1.3 is amended to read as follows: 
R902.1.3 Roof Covering in all other areas. The entire roof covering of every existing structure where more that 10 percent of the total roof area is replaced within one-year period, the entire roof covering of every new structure, and any roof covering applied in the alteration, repair or replacement of the roof of every existing structure, shall be a fire-retardant roof covering the is at least Class A. 
(Ord. No. 922 , § 3, 11-21-2016) 
Note— See editor's note at Section 23.12.010.  
23.12.064 - Section R313.1 Exception amended. 
Section R313.1 Exception is amended to read as follows: 
R313.1 Exception: An automatic residential fire sprinkler system may be required by the fire code official when additions or alterations are made to existing townhouses that do not have an automatic residential fire sprinkler installed. 
(Ord. No. 922 , § 3, 11-21-2016) 
Note— See editor's note at Section 23.12.010.  
23.12.065 - Section R313.2 Exception amended. 
Section R313.2 Exception is amended to read as follows: 
R313.2 Exception: An automatic residential fire sprinkler system may be required by the fire official for additions or alterations to existing buildings that are not already provided with an automatic residential fire sprinkler system. 
(Ord. No. 922 , § 3, 11-21-2016) 
Note— See editor's note at Section 23.12.010.  
DIVISION 7. - GREEN BUILDING CODE 
 
23.12.070 - Adoption of the 2016 California Building Standards Code, Part 11, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations. 
There is adopted and incorporated by reference herein as the City green building code for the purpose of prescribing regulations in the City of Del Mar for improving public health, safety and general welfare by enhancing the design and construction of buildings through the use of building concepts having a reduced negative impact or positive environmental impact and encouraging sustainable construction practices, the 2016 California Green Building Standards Code, Part 11, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations, a portion of the California Building Standards Code, as defined in the California Health and Safety Code, Section 18902 et seq. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and other parts of the Del Mar Municipal Code, all construction shall be in conformance with the California Building Standards Code and rules and regulations promulgated pursuant there to, including the 2016 California Green Building Standards Code, published by the California Building Standards Commission and Appendix A5 (Tier 1 non-residential voluntary measures), incorporated herein by reference, is adopted as mandatory provisions for all new non-residential construction and any non-residential construction over a $150,000.00 valuation as determined by the City of Del Mar Building Department. 
(Ord. No. 922 , § 3, 11-21-2016; Ord. No. 937 , § 1, 6-18-2018) 
Note— See editor's note at Section 23.12.010.  
23.12.080 - Adoption of the 1997 Uniform Administrative Code. 
There is adopted and incorporated by reference herein as the City administrative code for the purpose of providing administration and enforcement of the technical codes adopted by the City of Del Mar. The provisions of this code shall serve as the administrative, organizational and enforcement rules and regulations for the technical codes which regulate site preparation and construction, alteration, moving, demolition, repair, use and occupancy of buildings, structures and building service equipment with the City of Del Mar. Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter and other parts of the Del Mar Municipal Code, administration of the technical codes shall be in conformance with the Uniform Administrative Code, 1997 Edition and rules and regulations promulgated there to. 
(Ord. No. 853; Ord. No. 890)  
23.12.082 - Amendment to Chapter 2, Organization and Enforcement. 
Chapter 2, Organization and Enforcement, of the 1997 Uniform Administrative Code is amended as follows: 
A.  Section 204.1 of the Uniform Administrative Code, 1997 Edition, is amended to read as follows: 
204.1 General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the Building Official relative to the application and interpretation of this code, or any other code mandated to be enforced and administered by the Building Official, there shall be and is hereby created a board of appeals consisting of the members of the Del Mar City Council. 
(Ord. No. 853; Ord. No. 890)  
23.12.084 - Amendment to Chapter 3, Permits and Inspection. 
Chapter 3, Permits and Inspection, of the Uniform Administrative Code, 1997 Edition, is amended to read as follows: 
A.  Section 301.1 of the Uniform Administrative Code, 1997 Edition, is amended to read as follows: 
301.1 Permits Required. Except as specified in Section 301.2, no building or structure regulated by this code shall be erected, constructed, enlarged, altered, repaired, moved improved, removed, converted or demolished unless a separate permit for each building or structure has first been obtained from the building official. Permits shall also be obtained for fences, regardless of height and retaining walls, regardless of height. A permit shall be obtained for re-paving and/or re-striping of all commercial parking lots associated with all A, B, E, F, H, I, M, R-1, and S Occupancies. Striping shall be required to meet applicable disabled access parking standards at the time that the re-paving and/or re-striping is performed. 
B.  Section 301.2.1 of the Uniform Administrative Code, 1997 Edition, is amended to read as follows: 
301.2.1 Work Exempt from Permit. A building permit shall not be required for the following: 
1.  One-story detached accessory buildings used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses, and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed 48 square feet. This exception applies only to structures accessory to a single family dwelling (Group R, Division 3 Occupancy). 
2.  Oil derricks. 
3.  Movable cases, counters and partitions not over 5 feet 9 inches high (compliance with all applicable California Disabled Access Regulations is required). 
4.  Water tanks supported directly upon grade if the capacity does not exceed 5,000 gallons and ratio of height to diameter or width does not exceed 2:1. 
5.  Platforms, walks and driveways not more than 30 inches in the rear yard, and 18 inches in the side yard, above grade and not over any basement or story below. This exception applies only to structures accessory to a single family dwelling (Group R, Division 3 Occupancy). 
6.  Painting, papering and similar finish work. 
7.  Temporary motion picture, television and theater stage sets and scenery. 
8.  Window awnings supported by an exterior wall of Group R, Division 3, and Group U Occupancies when projecting not more than 54 inches. 
9.  Prefabricated swimming pools accessory to a Group R, Division 3 Occupancy if the capacity does not exceed 5,000 gallons. 
Unless otherwise exempted by this code, separate plumbing, electrical and mechanical permits will be required for the above exempted items. 
C.  Section 303.1 of the Uniform Administrative Code, 1997 Edition, is amended by adding the following after the first paragraph of the existing language: 
Permits shall not be issued for construction on a site until the Planning and Community Development Director, or her/his designee, determines that all other development permits or approvals required by this code, or any other City ordinance, have been approved and/or issued, and that all applicable site preparation, grading or public improvement work has been satisfactorily completed to allow building permits to be issued, and so notifies the Building Official in writing. 
Permits shall not be issued if the City Engineer determines that flooding or geologic conditions at the site may endanger the public safety or welfare. 
D.  Section 304.1 of the Uniform Administrative Code, 1997 Edition, is amended to read as follows: 
304.1 General. Fees shall be assessed in accordance with an ordinance adopted by the Del Mar City Council. 
E.  Section 304.2 of the Uniform Administrative Code, 1997 Edition, is amended to read as follows: 
304.2 Permit Fees. The fee for each permit shall be as set forth in an ordinance adopted by the Del Mar City Council. The determination of value or valuation under any of the provisions of this code shall be made by the Building Official using the valuation tables adopted by the Del Mar City Council as the basis for such valuation. The value to be used in computing the building permit and building plan review fees shall be the total value of all construction work for which the permit is issued, as well as all finish work, painting, roofing, electrical, plumbing, heating, air conditioning, elevators, fire-extinguishing system and any other permanent equipment. 
F.  Section 304.3 of the Uniform Administrative Code, 1997 Edition, is added to read as follows: 
304.3 Plan Review Fees. When submittal documents are required by Section 302.2, a plan review fee shall be paid at the time of submitting the submittal documents for plan review. Said plan review fee shall be as set forth in an ordinance adopted by the Del Mar City Council. 
The plan review fees specified in this Section are separate fees from the permit fees specified in Section 304.2 and are in addition to the permit fees. 
When submittal documents are incomplete or changed so as to require additional plan review or when the project involves deferred submittal items as defined in Section 302.4.2 an additional plan review fee shall be charged at the rate shown in an ordinance adopted by the Del Mar City Council. 
G.  Section 110.1 of the Uniform Administrative Code, 1997 Edition, is amended by adding the following language: 
In lieu of a separate certificate of occupancy the Building Official may indicate approval on the Inspection Record Card, and the approved and signed Inspection Record Card shall serve as a Certificate of Occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 853; Ord. No. 890)  
Chapter 23.16 - MOVING BUILDINGS 
 
23.16.010 - Purpose. 
Any person, firm or corporation who moves, or causes to be moved, any house or other building over or along any street or alley in this City shall first obtain a permit for such move, together with any other licenses or permits required by this Code. 
(Ord. No. 431)  
23.16.020 - Issuing Authority. 
A.  The Director of Planning and Community Development is authorized to issue a permit to move a building within the City and to impose such conditions as are necessary to protect the public health and safety in: 
1.  Removing a building from a foundation within the City; 
2.  Moving a building through the City; and 
3.  Placing a building on a foundation within the City. 
B.  Exercising the authority to move a building in accordance with the permit shall be expressly conditioned upon the applicant first having obtained all other permits and licenses required for the building move. If the building is to be located within the City, the applicant shall first comply with the Design Review and zoning requirements of this Code.  
23.16.030 - Prohibition. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to move, or cause to be moved, any building within the City without first having complied with provisions of this Chapter.  
23.16.040 - Fees. 
From time to time, the City Council, by resolution, may impose a fee for the processing of an application and a fee for the issuance and supervision of a permit issued in accordance with this Chapter.  
23.16.050 - Regulations. 
A.  As a condition to the issuance of the permit, the applicant shall post a surety bond or cash deposit in an amount determined by the Director of Public Works to be sufficient to perform the conditions of the permit, repair any and all damage which may foreseeably occur, and remove and restore all en route obstructions. 
B.  As a condition to the issuance of the permit, the applicant shall agree to indemnify and hold harmless the City of Del Mar from any and all claims arising out of the building move. The applicant's obligation shall be secured by a policy of insurance whose amount and terms are deemed satisfactory by the Director of Planning and Community Development to protect the public. 
C.  Where obstructions in the way of the move are identified, the permittee shall give written notice to the owner of such obstruction at least five days prior to the move. The owner of the obstruction will have requisite linemen and helpers at the place of such obstruction to remove the obstruction so as to allow the passage of the building, and thereafter repair and replace the same. Provided, however, that the permit-tee shall post with the owner of the obstruction an amount of money sufficient to cover the actual, necessary expenses incident to the removal, repair and restoration of the obstruction. The owner of an obstruction failing to timely remove the obstruction in accordance with the provisions of this Subsection shall be liable to the permittee for any delay or damage caused by such failure. 
D.  A permit shall not be issued if the building to be moved will not comply with the applicable building regulations for the proposed site.  
Chapter 23.20 - SOLAR ENERGY 
 
23.20.010 - Title. 
This Chapter shall be known as the "Solar Energy Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 306)  
23.20.020 - Purpose and Intent. 
This Chapter is intended to implement adopted Federal, State and local policies by decreasing the City's dependence upon non-renewable energy systems for sources through the encouragement of solar energy systems for the heating of buildings and water. It is intended that the energy requirements from conventional sources for space heating shall be reduced by 60 percent or more for each structure falling within purview of this Chapter. If swimming pools are to be heated, all heat will be provided by solar systems. Emphasis shall be given to the design of a total passive or hybrid solar energy system, as opposed to a less efficient mechanical system. Care shall be taken by the designer to aesthetically integrate the solar equipment into the architecture of the structure or landscaping. 
(Ord. No. 682)  
23.20.030 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases are herein defined for use in the administration of this Chapter: 
Active Solar System means a system using a mechanical device, such as pumps or fans and energy in addition to solar energy, to transport a conducive medium (air or water) between a solar collector and the interior of a building for heating or cooling. 
Backup System means a conventional energy system used to supplement the output of the solar system, and/or to provide energy if the solar system is inoperable for any reason. 
Collection Area means the heat-absorbing surface area of solar collectors. 
Conventional Energy Source means includes all fossil fuel forms of energy and electrical energy generated off-site. 
Direct Radiation means solar radiation that comes straight from the sun, casting shadows on a clear day. 
Floor Area Ratio means the numerical value obtained by dividing the total floor area of a structure or structures by the total lot area of its lot or premises (see DMMC, Chapter 30, Article III). 
Hybrid Solar System means a system which utilizes combined passive and active solar systems. 
Passive Solar System means a system that uses direct heat transfer from thermal mass instead of mechanical power to distribute collected heat. Passive systems rely on building design and materials to collect and store heat and to create natural ventilation for cooling. 
Retrofit means the addition of materials and/or devices to an existing building. 
Solar Access means access which protects solar energy collection areas from being blocked or shadowed from direct sun exposure between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. 
Solar Energy System means any solar collector or other solar energy device; or any structured design or a building whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for space heating or cooling or for water heating.  
23.20.040 - Space Heating and Cooling of New Structures. 
A.  Space Heating. All new structures proposed or required to be heated shall be provided with an active, passive, or hybrid solar space heating system. The solar space heating system shall be considered acceptable if it is designed to minimize the use of conventional energy sources consistent with the stated intent of this Chapter. The City Council may, from time to time, adopt by resolution, solar space heating guidelines intended to assist in the implementation of this Section. Required solar space heating systems shall at minimum meet or exceed said guidelines adopted by the City Council, or shall consist of an alternative design, which, in the opinion of the City, is sufficient to meet or exceed the stated intent of this Chapter. 
B.  Space Cooling. The installation of conventional air refrigeration systems shall be discouraged in all new structures. Permits for conventional air refrigeration systems when proposed, shall be at the discretion of the Design Review Board, or City Council on appeal. This Section shall not apply to rooms where air refrigeration systems are necessary, such as medical treatment rooms or rooms designed for the storage, maintenance, or processing of temperature sensitive materials or equipment.  
23.20.050 - Reserved.  
23.20.060 - Swimming Pool Heating. 
All swimming pools proposed to be heated, or plumbed, or otherwise connected to a spa or jacuzzi, shall be equipped with a solar pool heating system. Conventional swimming pool heating systems shall be prohibited, except those spas or jacuzzis whose water surface area is less than 75 square feet may be heated by conventional means. Swimming pools which are plumbed or otherwise connected to a spa or jacuzzi utilizing conventional heaters shall include a solar swimming pool heating system which contains an unglazed solar collector area of not less than one-half of the surface area of the swimming pool, or shall consist of an alternative design, which, in the opinion of the City, is sufficient to meet or exceed the stated intent of this Article.  
23.20.070 - Remodels of Existing Structures. 
A.  Reserved. 
B.  Remodels. Any remodel of a structure on which the structural alterations encompass 50 percent or more of the floor area of the structure as it existed prior to said alteration, shall cause the entire structure to conform to Sections 23.20.040 and 23.20.050 of this Chapter. 
C.  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 682)  
23.20.080 - Modifications of Height, Setback, and Floor Area Restrictions to Accommodate Solar Energy Systems. 
A.  Height. In solar retrofit installations, solar energy collectors, storage tanks and equipment, roof ponds, and/or other solar equipment appurtenant to a solar energy system may exceed by three feet the maximum height limits established by zoning, subject to approval by the Design Review Board following a Board finding that there is no suitable alternative. 
B.  Front, Rear, and Sideyard Setbacks. In solar retrofit installations, solar greenhouses, and/or other solar equipment appurtenant to a solar energy system may project into a required front, rear, and sideyard setback area, subject to approval by the Design Review Board following a Board finding that there is no suitable alternative. 
C.  Floor Area. Structures or space within structures used solely for the capture, distribution, or storage of solar energy, shall not constitute "floor area" as defined in Section 30-3.2 of the Del Mar Municipal Code, and therefore, shall not affect the computation of the permitted floor area to lot area ratio.  
23.20.090 - Reduction of License Fees for Solar Contractors and Designers. 
The business license fee for licensed work within Del Mar is limited to the design and/or installation of solar energy collection and distribution systems, shall pay a reduced business license fee pursuant to Section 12-22 of the Del Mar Municipal Code.  
23.20.100 - Rights to Solar Access. 
In the event adjacent landscaping deprives a site of reasonable solar access, and/or shades an existing solar collection device, the owner of a site so affected may petition the City Council for abatement of the foliage as a public nuisance. Upon receipt of such a petition, the City Clerk shall set the matter for a public hearing and provide due notice to affected parties. Following said hearings, and upon a finding by the City Council that the subject foliage be trimmed or removed sufficient to provide adequate solar access to the adjacent property. Failure to abate the nuisance by trimming or removing the foliage as so ordered shall constitute a misdemeanor, and subject the owner to penalties as provided for in Chapter [Title] 1 of the Del Mar Municipal Code.  
23.20.110 - Plan Processing. 
Solar energy systems required shall be delineated on preliminary plans and submitted to the City Planning Department prior to Design Review Board review. The plans shall contain a statement briefly describing the solar system and affirming that the system is designed to meet the requirements of this Chapter; said statement shall be signed by a licensed architect, registered engineer, or qualified solar consultant or solar installation contractor who is classified under Chapter 8, Title 16, of the California Administrative Code to design and install the type of solar system proposed. 
A.  Staff Review and Approval. Any application scheduled to appear on the Design Review Board Consent Calendar shall be reviewed by the Planning Department to determine whether or not there is compliance with this Chapter. Upon a finding by staff that there is compliance, no further review shall be required except as may be mandated by other sections of this Chapter and of the Del Mar Municipal Code. A determination by the Planning Department may be appealed to the Design Review Board within ten days by any interested party. The Planning Department shall report its determination in writing to the applicant and Design Review Board no later than the Design Review Board Consent Calendar hearing date. 
B.  Design Review Board Review. Any application required by other provisions of the Del Mar Municipal Code to be heard by the Design Review Board on its regular agenda shall be concurrently reviewed by said Board for compliance with the provisions of this Chapter. Upon approval of the Design Review Board, no further review shall be required except as may be mandated by other sections of the Del Mar Municipal Code. A determination by the Design Review Board may be appealed to the City Council within ten days by any interested party. Fees for appeals as provided for in this Section shall be set by resolution of the City Council.  
23.20.120 - Use of Solar Systems and Monitoring Equipment. 
Each solar system installed shall include for the owner a set of operating instructions which describe how the system functions, what is expected from the system in terms of minimum service levels, and how to operate the system for maximum efficiencies. Each solar hot water storage tank shall be equipped with a thermometer to permit the owner to self-monitor the effectiveness of the system.  
23.20.130 - Conflict with Other Municipal Policies and Ordinances. 
Nothing in this Chapter does, or is intended to abrogate the owner's responsibility to meet all other municipal policies and ordinances applicable to the development of real property within the City of Del Mar, including, but not limited to, the preservation of private and public views, the quality of architectural design, the preservation of historic landmark structures, or the like.  
23.20.140 - Exemptions. 
An exemption or partial exemption from the requirements of this Chapter may be granted by the Design Review Board upon a finding by the Board that required conformity with the requirements of this Chapter would constitute an unreasonable economic or physical hardship to retrofit an existing structure or swimming pool, and/or that solar access to the proposed building site is excessively limited due to terrain, adjacent structures, or adjacent landscaping which cannot, or, in the opinion of the Board, should not be abated. Pursuant to Section 25985 of the Public Resources Code, the provisions of the California Solar Shade Control Act shall be exempted for said adjacent landscaping which cannot or, in the opinion of the Board, should not be abated. Within the meaning of this Section, "excessively limited solar access" means that direct radiation to a reasonably sized and located solar collection area would likely be blocked or shadowed between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. on December 21 of any year, for ten percent or more of its collection area. The burden of proof necessary to demonstrate such facts to the Board rests with the applicant; however, the Board may, at its discretion, employ a solar consultant to assist in the determination. The selection of the solar consult-ant shall be at the discretion of the Department of Planning and Community Development. All costs incurred by said consultant review shall be borne by the project applicant, and shall be paid by the project applicant in advance of the City executing the solar consultant contract. The decision of the Board regarding the request for exemption may be appealed to the City Council within ten calendar days of the Board's decision. Said appeal shall not require a noticed public opportunity to present the appeal to the City Council. Following said appeal, the City Council shall render a decision based on the information presented and the written findings of the Design Review Board and/or the solar consultant. The decision of the City Council shall be final.  
Chapter 23.21 - SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR SYSTEMS 
 
23.21.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide an expedited, streamlined solar permitting process that complies with the Solar Rights Act and AB 2188 (Chapter 521, Statutes 2014, California Government Code § 65850.5) in order to achieve timely and cost-effective installations of small residential rooftop solar energy systems. This Chapter encourages the use of solar systems by removing unreasonable barriers, minimizing costs to property owners and the City and facilitating property owners to install solar energy systems. This Chapter allows the City to achieve those goals while protecting the public health and safety. 
(Ord. No. 909)  
23.21.020 - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply to this Chapter: 
A.  Electronic submittal means the utilization of one or more of the following: 
1.  E-mail. 
2.  The internet. 
3.  Facsimile. 
B.  Reserved. 
C.  Small residential rooftop solar energy system means all of the following: 
1.  A solar energy system that is no larger than ten kilowatts alternating current nameplate rating or 30 kilowatts thermal. 
2.  A solar energy system that conforms to all applicable State fire, structural, electrical, and other building codes as adopted or amended by the City and Paragraph (iii) of Subdivision (c) of Section 714 of the Civil Code, as such section or subdivision may be amended, renumbered, or redesignated from time to time. 
3.  A solar energy system that is installed on a single or duplex family dwelling. 
4.  A solar panel or module array that does not exceed the maximum legal building height as defined by the City of Del Mar. 
D.  Solar energy system has the same meaning set forth in Paragraphs (1) and (2) of Subdivision (a) of Section 801.5 of the Civil Code, as such section or subdivision may be amended, renumbered, or redesignated from time to time. 
E.  Eligibility Checklist means the submittal checklist required by the City of Del Mar to be submitted with the small residential rooftop solar energy system demonstrating compliance. 
F.  Specific, adverse impact means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete. 
G.  Reasonable restrictions on a solar energy system are those restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or significantly decrease its efficiency or specified performance, or that allow for an alternative system of comparable cost, efficiency, and energy conservation benefits. 
H.  Restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or decrease its efficiency or specified performance means: 
1.  For Water Heater Systems or Solar Swimming Pool Heating Systems: an amount exceeding ten percent of the cost of the system, but in no case more than $1,000.00, or decreasing the efficiency of the solar energy system by an amount exceeding ten percent, as originally specified and proposed. 
2.  For Photovoltaic Systems: an amount not to exceed $1,000.00 over the system cost as originally specified and proposed, or a decrease in system efficiency of an amount exceeding ten percent as originally specified and proposed.  
23.21.030 - Applicability. 
A.  This Chapter applies to the permitting of all small residential rooftop solar energy systems in the City. 
B.  Small residential rooftop solar energy systems legally established or permitted prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Chapter are not subject to the requirements of this Chapter unless physical modifications or alterations are undertaken that materially change the size, type, or components of a small rooftop energy system in such a way as to require new permitting. Routine operation and maintenance or like-kind replacements shall not require a permit.  
23.21.040 - Solar Energy System Requirements. 
A.  All solar energy systems shall meet applicable health and safety standards and requirements imposed by the State and the City. 
B.  Solar energy systems for heating water in single-family residences and for heating water in commercial or swimming pool applications shall be certified by an accredited listing agency as defined by the California Plumbing and Mechanical Code. 
C.  Solar energy systems for producing electricity shall meet all applicable safety and performance standards established by the California Electrical Code, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where applicable, rules of the Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and reliability.  
23.21.050 - Applications and Documents. 
A.  All documents required for the submission of an expedited solar energy system application shall be made available on the City website. 
B.  Electronic submittal of the required permit application and documents by email, fax, or the Internet shall be made available to all small residential rooftop solar energy system permit applicants. 
C.  The Planning and Building Departments shall adopt an eligibility checklist of all requirements with which small residential rooftop solar energy systems shall comply to be eligible for expedited review. 
D.  Prior to submitting an application, the applicant shall: 
1.  Verify to the applicant's reasonable satisfaction through the use of standard engineering evaluation techniques that the support structure for the small residential rooftop solar energy system is stable and adequate to transfer all wind, seismic, and dead and live loads associated with the system to the building foundation; and 
2.  At the applicant's cost, verify to the applicant's reasonable satisfaction using standard electrical inspection techniques that the existing electrical system including existing line, load, ground and bonding wiring as well as main panel and subpanel sizes are adequately sized, based on the existing electrical system's current use, to carry all new photovoltaic electrical loads. 
E.  The permit application and associated documentation may be submitted to the Building Division in person, by mail, or by electronic submittal together with required permit processing and inspection fees. In the case of electronic submittal, the electronic signature of the applicant on all forms, applications, and other documents may be used in lieu of a wet signature. 
F.  The small residential rooftop solar system permit process and eligibility checklist shall substantially conform to recommendations for expedited permitting contained in the most current version of the California Solar Permitting Guidebook adopted by the Governor's Office of Planning and Research.  
23.21.060 - Permit Review and Inspection Requirements. 
A.  The Planning and Building Departments shall implement an administrative, nondiscretionary review process to expedite approval of small residential rooftop solar energy systems. 
B.  Review of the application shall be limited to the Chief Building Official's review of whether the application meets local, State, and Federal health and safety requirements. 
C.  If an application is deemed incomplete, a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information or documentation required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance shall be sent to the applicant for resubmission. 
D.  Upon confirmation by the building official of the application and supporting documentation being complete and meeting the requirements of the eligibility checklist, the building official shall administratively approve the application and issue all required permits or authorizations. Such approval does not authorize an applicant to connect the small residential rooftop energy system to the local utility provider's electricity grid. The applicant is responsible for obtaining such approval or permission from the local utility provider. 
E.  The Chief Building Official may require an applicant to apply for a Conditional Use Permit if the official finds, based on substantial evidence, that the solar energy system could have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health and safety. Such decisions may be appealed to the City Planning Commission. If a Conditional Use Permit is required, the City may deny such application if it makes written findings based upon substantive evidence in the record that the proposed installation would have a specific, adverse impact upon public health or safety and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid, as defined, the adverse impact. Such findings shall include the basis for the rejection of the potential feasible alternative for preventing the adverse impact. Any condition imposed on an application shall be designed to mitigate the specific, adverse impact upon health and safety at the lowest possible cost. 
F.  Reserved. 
G.  "A feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact" includes, but is not limited to, any cost-effective method, condition, or mitigation imposed by the City on another similarly situated application in a prior successful application for a permit. The City shall use its best efforts to ensure that the selected method, condition, or mitigation meets the conditions of Subparagraphs (A) and (B) of Paragraph (1) of Subdivision (d) of Section 714 of the Civil Code defining restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or decrease its efficiency or specified performance. 
H.  Only one inspection shall be required and performed by the Building Division, and may include a consolidated inspection with the Fire Marshall, for small residential rooftop solar energy systems eligible for expedited review. 
I.  The inspection shall be done in a timely manner and should include consolidated inspections. 
J.  If a small residential rooftop solar energy system fails inspection, a subsequent inspection is authorized; however the subsequent inspection need not conform to the requirements of this Section.  
Chapter 23.22 - ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATIONS 
 
23.22.010 - Purpose and Intent. 
The purpose of this Chapter is to promote and encourage the use of electric vehicles in accordance with the City's Climate Action Plan by providing an expedited, streamlined permitting process for electric vehicle charging stations for residential and non-residential uses consistent with California Government Code Section 65850.7. The intent is to remove unreasonable regulatory barriers and minimize permit processing costs in order to achieve timely and cost-effective installations. This Chapter allows the City to achieve those goals, prevents adverse impacts in the installation and use of electric vehicle charging stations, and maintains the Building Official's authority to protect the public health and safety and to identify and address higher priority life-safety situations, where applicable. 
(Ord. No. 930 , § 2, 9-18-2017)  
23.22.020 - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply to this Chapter: 
A.  Checklist means the submittal checklist required by the City of Del Mar to be submitted with the permit application for an electric vehicle charging station to demonstrate compliance. 
B.  Electric Vehicle Charging Station or Charging Station means any level of electric vehicle supply equipment station that is designed and built in compliance with Article 625 of the California Electrical Code, as it reads on the effective date of this Chapter, and delivers electricity from a source outside an electric vehicle into a plug-in electric vehicle. 
C.  Electronic Submittal means the utilization of electronic mail (email); the Internet; facsimile (fax); or any combination of thereof. 
D.  Specific, Adverse Impact means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete. 
(Ord. No. 930 , § 3, 9-18-2017)  
23.22.030 - Applicability. 
A.  This Chapter applies to the permitting of all electric vehicle charging stations in the City. 
B.  Electric vehicle charging stations legally established or permitted prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Chapter are not subject to the requirements of Chapter 23.22 unless physical modifications or alterations are undertaken that materially change the size, type, or components of the electric vehicle charging station in such a way as to require new permitting. Routine operation and maintenance or like-kind replacements shall not require a permit. 
(Ord. No. 930 , § 4, 9-18-2017)  
23.22.040 - Permit Application and Submittal Requirements. 
A.  All electric vehicle charging stations shall meet applicable health and safety standards and requirements imposed by the State and the City. 
B.  Prior to submitting an application for processing, the applicant shall verify that the installation of an electric vehicle charging station will not have specific, adverse impact to public health and safety and building occupants. Verification by the applicant includes but is not limited to: electrical system capacity and loads; electrical system wiring, bonding and overcurrent protection; building infrastructure affected by charging station equipment and associated conduits; areas of charging station equipment and vehicle parking. 
C.  All documents required for the submission of an electric vehicle charging station application are available on the City website, including a Checklist of submittal requirements for expedited review. Unless otherwise specified, the Checklist shall be the most current version of the "Plug-In Electric Vehicle Infrastructure Permitting Checklist" of the "Zero-Emission Vehicles in California: Community Readiness Guidebook". 
D.  Electronic submittal of the required permit application and documents by email, fax, or the Internet shall be made available to all electric vehicle charging station permit applicants. 
E.  The permit application and associated documentation may be submitted to the Building Division in person, by mail, or by electronic submittal together with required permit processing and inspection fees. In the case of electronic submittal, the electronic signature of the applicant on all forms, applications, and other documents may be used in lieu of a wet signature. 
(Ord. No. 930 , § 5, 9-18-2017)  
23.22.050 - Permit Review and Issuance. 
A.  The Planning and Building Departments shall implement an administrative, nondiscretionary review process to expedite approval of electric vehicle charging stations. 
B.  A permit application that satisfies the information requirements in the City's adopted Checklist shall be deemed complete and be promptly processed. 
C.  If an application is deemed incomplete, a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information or documentation required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance shall be sent to the applicant for resubmission. 
D.  Upon confirmation by the Building Official that the permit application and supporting documents meets the adopted Checklist, and is consistent with all applicable laws and health and safety standards, the Building Official shall, consistent with Government Code Section 65850.7, approve the application and issue all necessary permits. Such approval does not authorize an applicant to energize or utilize the electric vehicle charging station until approval is granted by the City. 
E.  The Building Official may require an applicant to apply for a Conditional Use Permit if the Building Official finds, based on substantial evidence, that the electric vehicle charging station could have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health and safety. 
1.  Such decisions may be appealed to the Planning Commission. 
2.  If a Conditional Use Permit is required, the City may deny such application if it makes written findings based upon substantive evidence in the record that the proposed installation would have a specific, adverse impact upon public health or safety and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid, as defined, the adverse impact. 
3.  Such findings shall include the basis for the rejection of the potential feasible alternative for preventing the adverse impact. 
4.  Any condition imposed on an application shall be designed to mitigate the specific, adverse impact upon health and safety at the lowest possible cost. 
5.  No condition shall be imposed on the Conditional Use Permit that would require prior approval by an "association" as that term is defined by Civil Code Section 4080. 
(Ord. No. 930 , § 6, 9-18-2017)  
23.22.060 - Electric Vehicle Charging Station Installation Requirements. 
A.  Electric vehicle charging station equipment shall meet the requirements of the California Electrical Code, the Society of Automotive Engineers, the National Electrical Manufacturers Association, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories, and rules of the Public Utilities Commission or a Municipal Electric Utility Company regarding safety and reliability. 
B.  Installation of electric vehicle charging stations and associated wiring, bonding, disconnecting means and overcurrent protective devices shall meet the requirements of Article 625 and all applicable provisions of the California Electrical Code. 
C.  Installation of electric vehicle charging stations shall be incorporated into the load calculations of all new or existing electrical services and shall meet the requirements of the California Electrical Code. Electric vehicle charging equipment shall be considered a continuous load. 
D.  Anchorage of either floor-mounted or wall-mounted electric vehicle charging stations shall meet the requirements of the California Building or Residential Code as applicable per occupancy, and the provisions of the manufacturer's installation instructions. Mounting of charging stations shall not adversely affect building elements. 
(Ord. No. 930 , § 7, 9-18-2017)  
Chapter 23.24 - SCHOOL FACILITIES 
 
23.24.010 - Title. 
This Chapter shall be known as the "School Facilities Dedication and Fee Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 292, § 1)  
23.24.020 - Authority—Conflict. 
This Chapter is adopted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 4.7 (commencing with Section 65970) of Division 1 of Title 7 of the California Government Code. In the case of any conflict between the provisions of this Chapter, and those of Chapter 4.7, the latter shall prevail.  
23.24.030 - Purpose and Intent. 
This Chapter is intended to implement the school facilities dedication and fees legislation in the City, and to provide authority whereby the City, affected school districts, and applicants for land development approvals may undertake such reasonable steps as the City Council determines to be necessary to alleviate overcrowding of school facilities.  
23.24.040 - Regulations. 
The City Council may, from time to time, by resolution, issue regulations to establish procedures, interpretations, and policy directions for the administration of this Chapter.  
23.24.050 - Findings. 
The City Council finds and declares as follows: 
A.  Adequate school facilities should be available for children residing in new residential developments. 
B.  Public and private residential development may require the expansion of existing public schools or the construction of new school facilities. 
C.  In many areas of the City, the funds for the construction of new classroom facilities are not available when new development occurs, resulting in the overcrowding of existing schools. 
D.  New housing developments frequently cause conditions of overcrowding in existing school facilities which cannot be alleviated under existing law within a reasonable period of time. 
E.  That, for these reasons, new and improved methods of financing for interim school facilities necessitated by new development are needed in the City.  
23.24.060 - General Plan. 
The General Plan of the City provides for the location of public schools. Those interim school facilities to be constructed from fees paid or those lands to be dedicated for school facilities as required by this Chapter shall be consistent with the General Plan of the City.  
23.24.070 - Definitions. 
Whenever the following words are used in this Chapter, unless otherwise defined, they shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this Section: 
A.  Conditions of Overcrowding means the total enrollment of a school, including enrollment from proposed development, exceeds the capacity of such school as determined by the governing body of the district. 
B.  Decision-Making Body means the City Council, Planning Commission, City Engineer, Design Review Board, or Planning Director. 
C.  Dwelling Unit means a building or a portion thereof, designated for residential occupation by one person or a group of two or more persons living together as a domestic unit. 
D.  Reasonable Methods for Mitigating Conditions of Overcrowding shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
1.  Agreements between a subdivider and the affected school district whereby temporary use buildings will be leased to the school district. 
2.  The use of temporary use buildings owned by the school district. 
3.  The use of temporary portable classrooms, student bussing, classroom double sessions, year-round use of school facilities, school boundary realignments, and elimination of low priority school facility uses. 
4.  The use of available annual tax rate bond revenues or State loan revenues, to the extent authorized by law. 
5.  The use of funds which could be available from the sale of surplus school district real property and funds available from any other source. 
E.  Residential Development means a project containing residential dwellings of one or more units or a subdivision of land for the purpose of constructing one or more residential dwelling units. "Residential development" includes, but is not limited to: 
1.  A Tentative or Final Subdivision Map or Parcel Map, or a time extension or amendment to such a map, except that a Tentative or Final Map or an extension or amendment thereof solely for the purpose of converting existing structures to the condominium form of ownership and where no new dwelling unit is proposed shall not be included. 
2.  A Conditional Use Permit for a new dwelling unit or units. 
3.  A Variance for a new dwelling unit or units. 
4.  A privately proposed Specific Plan or amendment thereto which would allow an increase in authorized residential density. 
5.  A privately proposed amendment to the City General Plan which would allow an increase in authorized residential density. 
6.  An ordinance rezoning property to a residential use or to a more intense residential use. 
7.  A Land Conservation Permit for a new dwelling unit or units. 
8.  A Certificate of Compliance which would allow a new dwelling unit or units. 
9.  A Design Review Permit for a new dwelling unit or units. 
10.  A Bluff, Slope and Canyon Review Permit for a new dwelling unit or units. 
11.  A View Review Permits for a new dwelling unit or units. 
12.  Any other discretionary permit for a new dwelling unit or units.  
23.24.080 - Notice to School Districts. 
The City shall notify all potentially affected school districts of an application for any residential developments proposed for location within their boundaries.  
23.24.090 - School District Findings. 
If the governing body of the school district which operates an elementary or high school in the City makes a finding supported by clear and convincing evidence that: 
A.  Conditions of overcrowding exist in one or more attendance areas within the district which will impair the normal functioning of education programs including the reason for such conditions existing; and 
B.  That all reasonable methods of mitigating conditions of overcrowding have been evaluated and no feasible method for reducing such conditions exist, the governing body of the school district shall notify the City Council. The notice of findings sent to the City shall specify the mitigation measures considered by the school district. After the receipt of any notice of findings complying with this Section, the City Council shall determine whether it concurs in such school district findings. The City Council may schedule and hold a public hearing on the matter of its proposed concurrence prior to making its determination. If the City Council concurs in such findings, the provisions of Section 23.24.110 shall be applicable to actions taken on residential development by a decision-making body.  
23.24.100 - Requirements of Notice of Findings. 
Any notice of findings sent by a school district to the City Council shall specify: 
A.  The findings listed in Section 23.24.090. 
B.  The mitigation measures and methods, including those listed in Subsection 23.24.070.D. considered by the school district and any determination made concerning them by the district. 
C.  The precise geographic boundaries of the overcrowded attendance area or areas. 
D.  Such other information as may be required by the City Council.  
23.24.110 - Restriction on Approval of Residential Developments—City Council Findings. 
Within the attendance area where it has been determined pursuant to Section 23.24.090 that conditions of overcrowding exist, no decision-making body shall approve an application for a residential development within such area, unless such decision-making body makes one of the following findings: 
A.  That action will be taken pursuant to this Chapter to provide dedications of land and/or fees to mitigate conditions of overcrowding; or 
B.  That there are specific overriding fiscal, economic, social or environmental factors which in the judgement of the decision-making body would benefit the City, thereby justifying the approval of a residential development otherwise subject to the provisions of this Chapter. An agreement between the applicant for a residential development and the school district to mitigate conditions of overcrowding within that attendance area may be considered by a decision-making body as such an overriding factor.  
23.24.120 - Requirements of Fees and/or Dedications. 
For the purpose of establishing an interim method of providing classroom facilities where overcrowding conditions exist as determined pursuant to Section 23.24.090, the City shall require the dedication of land, the payment of fees in lieu thereof, or a combination of both, for all residential development resulting from an approved discretionary action taken by the City. Prior to imposition of the requirement for fees and/or dedications of land, a resolution shall be considered and approved by the City Council setting forth the following findings as may be applicable to all residential development occurring within the City: 
A.  The City General Plan provides for the location of public schools. 
B.  The land or fees, or both, transferred to a school district shall be used only for the purpose of providing interim elementary, junior high or high school classroom and related facilities. 
C.  The location and amount of land to be dedicated or the amount of fees to be paid, or both, shall bear a reasonable relationship and will be limited to the needs of the community for interim elementary, junior high or high school facilities and shall be reasonably related and limited to the need for schools caused by the development. 
D.  The facilities to be constructed, purchased, leased, or rented from such fees or the land to be dedicated or both is consistent with the City General Plan.  
23.24.130 - Payment of Fees in Smaller Subdivisions. 
Only the payment of fees shall be required in subdivisions containing 50 lots or less.  
23.24.140 - Standards for Land Dedication and Fees. 
The standards for the amount of dedicated land or fees to be required shall be determined by the City Council and set by resolution. The governing board of each school district where a determination has been pursuant to Section 23.24.090 that conditions of overcrowding exists, shall recommend standards for their attendance areas to the City Council. Such standards and the facts supporting them shall be transmitted to the City Council. If the City Council concurs in such recommended standards, they shall, until revised, be used by decision-making bodies in situations where dedications of land and/or fees are required as a condition to the approval of a residential development. Nothing herein shall prevent the City Council from using standards other than those recommended by the school district in the event the City Council is unable to concur in those transmitted by the district.  
23.24.150 - Filing Application for Residential Development. 
At the time of filing, an application for approval of a residential development in excess of 50 units located within an attendance area where the findings required by Section 23.24.090 have been made, the applicant shall, as part of such filing, indicate whether it prefers to dedicate land for school facilities, to pay a fee in lieu thereof, or do a combination of these. If the applicant prefers to dedicate land, it shall suggest the specific land.  
23.24.160 - Notification to School District. 
Upon receipt of an application for a residential development within an attendance area where the findings required by Section 23.24.090 have been made, the Planning Director shall notify the affected school districts thereof. The notification shall be made no later than ten days prior to consideration of the application by a decision-making body. This notice requirement may be waived in writing by an affected school district. In the event the noticing requirement is not waived by the affected school district, reasonable fees may be set by the City Council to cover administrative costs incurred in providing such notice.  
23.24.170 - Decision Factors. 
A.  Upon receipt of the notification required by Section 23.24.160, the governing board of the affected school district shall recommend whether a dedication of land within the development, payment of a fee in lieu thereof, or a combination of both, should be required. Waiver of notification requirements by the affected district, as provided for in Section 23.24.160, shall be construed as requiring a fee in lieu of land dedication. Upon determination of land dedication or in-lieu fee, the school district shall then transmit the determination to the Planning Director for submission to the appropriate decision-making body for concurrence. If the decision-making body concurs in such recommendation, it may, at the time of its consideration of a residential development application, impose such requirements as conditions of granting a permit for residential development. In their respective actions regarding this determination, the school district and the decision-making body shall consider the following requirements: 
1.  Whether lands offered for dedication will be consistent with the City General Plan. 
2.  Whether the lands offered for dedication meet the criteria established at Education Code §§ 39000, et seq. 
3.  The topography, soils, soil stability, drainage, access, location, and general utility of land in the development available for dedication. 
4.  Whether the location and amount of lands proposed to be dedicated or the amount of fees to be paid, or both, will bear a reasonable relationship and will be limited to the needs of the community for interim elementary, junior high school, or senior high school facilities, and will be reasonably related and limited to the need for schools caused by the development. 
5.  If only a subdivision is proposed, whether it will contain 50 parcels or less. 
Nothing herein shall prevent a decision-making body from imposing requirements other than those recommended by the school district in the event that a decision-making body is unable to concur in the district's recommendation hereunder. 
B.  If the school district has entered into an agreement with the applicant for the residential development to mitigate conditions of overcrowding within the attendance area covered by the application, the governing board shall, upon receipt of the notification required by Section 23.24.160, so advise the Planning Director and transmit a copy thereof for submission to the appropriate decision-making body for consideration as an overriding factor under Subsection 23.24.110.B.  
23.24.180 - School District Schedule. 
Following the action by a decision-making body on an application for a permit for residential development to require the dedication of land or the payment of fees, or both, the Planning Director shall notify each school district affected thereby. The governing body of the school district shall then submit a schedule specifying how it will use the land or fees, or both, to solve the conditions of overcrowding. The schedule shall include the school sites to be used, the classroom facilities to be made available, and the times when such facilities will be available. In the event the governing body of the school district cannot meet the schedule, it shall submit modifications to the City Council and the reasons for the modifications.  
23.24.190 - Fee Payment. 
If the payment of a fee is required for residential development approved by a decision-making body, such payment or the pro-rata amount thereof, shall be made at the time a building permit within the residential development is approved and issued.  
23.24.200 - Fees Held in Trust. 
Fees paid under this Chapter shall be paid in the manner provided and according to the procedures established by the City Council by resolution pursuant to Section 23.24.040.  
23.24.210 - Use of Land and Fees. 
All land or fees, or both, collected pursuant to this Chapter and transferred to a school district, shall be held in trust and shall be used only by the district for the purpose of providing interim elementary, junior high or high school classroom and related facilities in the attendance area from which the land or fees were collected.  
23.24.220 - Refunds. 
If a residential development approval is vacated or voided, and if the affected school district has not made use of the land and/or fees collected therefor, and if the applicant so requests, the governing board of the school district shall order the land and/or fees returned to the applicant.  
23.24.230 - Agreement for Fee Distribution. 
If two separate school districts operate schools in an attendance area where the City Council has concurred that overcrowding conditions exist for both school districts, the City Council will enter into an agreement with the governing body of each school district for the purpose of determining the distribution of revenues from the fees levied pursuant to this Chapter. In the event the school districts do not agree, the City shall retain all fees until an agreement is secured.  
23.24.240 - Fee Fund Records and Reports. 
Any school district receiving funds pursuant to this Chapter shall maintain a separate account for any fees paid and shall file a report with the City Council on the balance in the account at the end of the previous fiscal year and the facilities leased, purchased, or constructed during the previous fiscal year. In addition, the report shall specify which attendance areas will continue to be overcrowded when the fall term begins and where conditions of overcrowding will no longer exist. Such report shall be filed by August 1 of each year and shall be filed more frequently at the request of the City Council.  
23.24.250 - Termination of Dedication and Fee Requirements. 
When it is determined by the City Council that conditions of overcrowding no longer exist in an attendance area, decision-making bodies shall cease levying any fee or requiring the dedication of any land for that area pursuant to this Chapter. Action under this Section shall not affect the validity of conditions already imposed for levy of fees and dedications of land and such conditions shall remain binding.  
23.24.260 - Exemptions for Projects in Process. 
This Chapter shall not apply to any project for which all discretionary applications for residential development have been filed and the appropriate application fee(s) paid prior to the effective date of this Chapter.  
23.24.270 - Operative Date. 
This Chapter shall become operative 30 days after its effective date.  
Chapter 23.28 - ENCROACHMENT PERMITS 
 
23.28.010 - Purpose. 
The City of Del Mar holds interests in various properties, including rights-of-way and easements granted to the City for utility, roadway and trail purposes. The City Council is the custodian of that public property. The standards and procedures contained in this Chapter have been adopted to protect public property, to protect public health and safety and to provide for the general welfare of the community, including the preservation of Del Mar's aesthetic qualities. Individuals, businesses and agencies frequently request permission to work in or use public property, either as a long-term encroachment or a short-term encroachment. This Chapter regulates the manner in which encroachments onto City property are to be reviewed and the conditions that may be attached to such authorizations. All encroachments onto public areas are expressly revocable at any time at the sole discretion of the City Council or its agents. 
(Ord. No. 444; Ord. No. 482; Ord. No. 746; Ord. No. 761)  
23.28.020 - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this Chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this Chapter its most reasonable application. 
A.  City Right-of-Way or Easement shall mean any real property interest granted to the City for roadways, pathways, open space or conservation, or for the installation or maintenance of utilities. 
B.  Director shall mean the Director of Planning and Community Development or his/her designee. 
C.  Encroachment shall mean development or use of any portion of a City Right-of-Way or Easement in a manner other than its intended use. Encroachment shall include, but not be limited to, any of the following: 
1.  Erecting or maintaining any structure, flag, banner, post, sign, pole, fence, guard-rail, wall, loading platform, mailbox, pipe, conduit, irrigation, or wire on, over, or under a City Right-of-Way or Easement; 
2.  Planting of any tree, shrub, grass or other growing thing within a City Right-of-Way or Easement; 
3.  Placing or leaving on a City Right-of-Way or Easement any rubbish, brush, earth, or other material of any nature whatsoever; 
4.  Constructing, placing, or installing any pathway, sidewalk, driveway, curb, gutter, paving, or other surface or subsurface drainage structure or facility, any pipe, conduit, wire or cable on, over, under, or within a City Right-of-Way or Easement; 
5.  Performing tree trimming or tree removal in any City Right-of-Way or Easement; 
6.  Constructing, placing, planting, or maintaining any structure, embankment, excavation, or development adjacent to a City Right-of-Way or Easement which causes or will cause an Encroachment; 
7.  Positioning of any equipment or machinery or moving any over-sized load on or over any City Right-of-Way or Easement; 
8.  Grading, trenching or change of elevation of the surface of a City Right-of-Way or Easement; 
9.  Placement of any barrier, sign, detour, post or bollard so as to change the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic in a City Right-of-Way or Easement. 
D.  Encroachment Permit shall mean a permit issued by the City for either a Minor or Major Encroachment. 
E.  Long-term Improvement shall mean any improvement designed to or having a permanent appearance and intended for use for a period of 365 days or more. 
F.  Major Encroachment shall mean placement of any improvement that projects, in whole or in part, onto a City Right-of-Way or Easement in a manner to extend above the level of the sidewalk, roadway or adjacent grade. Examples of Major Encroachments include, but are not limited to: structures or portions thereof, balconies, cornices and other architectural projections, awnings, below grade vaults, earth-retaining structures extending 12 inches or more in height above the adjacent grade, planter boxes, ramps, fences or walls, curbs extending 12 inches or more in height above the adjacent grade. "Major Encroachment" shall also mean any activity that will cause a marked change in the manner in which a City Right-of Way or Easement will be used or will function. 
G.  Minor Encroachment shall mean any Encroachment onto a City Right-of-Way or Easement resting on grade or a paved surface but which is not structurally attached to any building. Examples of Minor Encroachments that constitute Long-term Improvements include, but are not limited to: driveway aprons, pathways and walkways, and vegetation. Minor Encroachment shall also mean any short-term Encroachment that will interfere, even on a temporary basis, with the public's use of a City Right-of-Way or Easement. Examples of short-term, Minor Encroachments include, but are not limited to: the placement of trash dumpsters, haul routes for relocation of earth, the positioning of heavy equipment, storage of materials and tree trimming or removal. Any Encroachment which is not deemed a Minor Encroachment pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed a Major Encroachment. 
H.  Permittee shall mean any person(s) firm, company, corporation, association, public agency, public utility, or organization which has been issued an Encroachment Permit by the City. 
I.  Short-term Impact shall mean an activity not resulting in a permanent change in the condition or appearance of a City Right-of-Way or Easement and which is intended for use for a period of less than 365 days. 
(Ord. No. 919 , § 1, 10-17-2016)  
23.28.030 - When an Encroachment Permit is Required. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, maintain or place any Encroachment without complying with the terms of this Chapter. 
B.  Except as provided in this Chapter, no Major or Minor Encroachment shall be allowed except in compliance with the terms of this Chapter. 
C.  The Director shall determine the classification of a Major Encroachment vs. a Minor Encroachment and a Long-term Improvement versus a Short-term Impact and the corresponding permit requirements. 
D.  A separate Encroachment Permit shall be obtained for each Encroachment, except that where an applicant is proposing multiple Encroachments to be installed or carried out simultaneously, the multiple Encroachments may be combined for processing under one application. Similarly, an applicant for both a Major Encroachment Permit and a Minor Encroachment Permit may request that the applications be combined for processing as a Major Encroachment Permit. 
(Ord. No. 919 , § 2, 10-17-2016)  
23.28.040 - Prohibited Encroachments. 
A.  Proposed Encroachments shall generally be designed to comply with the zoning requirements applicable to the adjacent private property. 
B.  The following Encroachments are specifically prohibited: 
1.  Construction or placement of any fill, wall, pipe, column, pole, fence, tree, shrub or other thing which would obstruct and/or reduce the capacity of any watercourse to carry storm water; 
2.  Installation or maintenance of signs or sign supports inconsistent with the Sign Encroachment Permit process contained in DMMC Chapter 30.84; 
3.  Any Encroachment that would convey an impression or appearance that the encroached upon area is owned by or reserved solely for the private use of the adjacent property with no associated public benefit to the community; 
4.  Any Encroachment that would create a trip hazard or other impediment that would interfere with safe pedestrian passage; and 
5.  Any Encroachment that would create an unsafe line of sight for pedestrians or motorists. 
(Ord. No. 919 , § 3, 10-17-2016)  
23.28.050 - Exemptions. 
A.  No Encroachment Permit shall be required for the following activities/development: 
1.  Mailboxes installed in accordance with the rules and regulations at the United States Post Office Department, and provided that no mailbox deemed exempt under this Section shall be placed so as to endanger the life or safety of the traveling public and provided that the mailbox, at no point, exceeds a height of 50 inches or a width/depth of 20 inches; 
2.  Newspaper racks installed and maintained in accordance with the DMMC; 
3.  Vegetation, which, at the time of installation or at maturity, will not exceed a height of 30 inches and which will not change nor interfere with existing traffic flows, traffic sight lines, or parking patterns (Note that the installation of irrigation lines is not exempt from the requirement for receipt of an Encroachment Permit); 
4.  Placement of trash barrels and bins for collection, provided the placement complies with the regulations for time and location of placement as specified in the DMMC; or 
5.  Cleaning and maintenance normally associated with the ongoing care of adjacent private property. 
B.  The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to: 
1.  City employees engaging in City-related activities; or 
2.  Public utilities operating under a valid franchise agreement, provided all requirements imposed through the franchise agreement, applicable State law or regulation have been complied with and provided the Public Utility has notified and gained prior authorization from the City's Public Works Director.  
23.28.060 - How to Apply for an Encroachment Permit. 
A.  An application for an Encroachment Permit shall include the following materials: 
1.  An application fee, as set forth by resolution of the City Council; 
2.  An application, on a form provided by the City, along with such information and drawings as required by the Director to accomplish the purposes of this Chapter; and 
3.  When deemed necessary by the Director, a set of Public Improvement Plans for the improvements proposed within a City Right-of-Way or Easement. Where required, such Public Improvement Plans shall be prepared and stamped by a registered civil engineer, shall include design calculations and shall be of a form and content acceptable to the Director. 
B.  The required application shall be filed with the Department of Planning and Community Development. The application shall be routed to each City Department, as deemed appropriate by the Director, for comment and suggested conditions. After receipt of comments and suggested conditions, the Director shall make a recommendation to the City Manager. 
C.  Encroachments that are determined to require a Major Encroachment Permit shall be placed on the first available agenda of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 919 , § 4, 10-17-2016) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 919 , § 4, adopted October 17, 2016, changed the title of Section 23.28.060 from "Issuing authority and application procedure for a major encroachment permit" to "How to apply for an encroachment permit."  
23.28.070 - Decision Process for Encroachment Permits and Findings for Approval. 
A.  A decision on an application for a Minor Encroachment Permit shall be made by the City Manager in accordance with DMMC Section 23.28.070C. The decision may be appealed to the City Council in accordance with DMMC Section 23.28.110. 
B.  A decision on an application for a Major Encroachment Permit shall be made by a majority vote of the City Council in accordance with DMMC Section 23.28.070C. 
C.  An Encroachment Permit, Minor or Major, may be approved or conditionally approved only if the decision maker makes all of the following findings: 
1.  The proposed Encroachment will not endanger the public health, safety, or welfare, or the surrounding property; 
2.  The proposed Encroachment will not unreasonably interfere with the intended use of a City Right-of-Way or Easement; 
3.  The proposed Encroachment will not have an adverse impact on the welfare of the community or on the community's appearance or aesthetics; 
4.  The proposed Encroachment will not cause an unnecessary change in the character of the community; or 
5.  The proposed Encroachment will not be a detriment to the interests of the general public; and 
6.  The proposed Encroachment will not convert significant areas of public property to private use. 
D.  The decision maker may impose conditions of approval on the Encroachment Permit as deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare and to preserve the intended use of the City Right-of-Way or Easement, and to ensure compliance with the findings supporting such approval. 
(Ord. No. 919 , § 5, 10-17-2016) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 919 , § 5, adopted October 17, 2016, changed the title of Section 23.28.070 from "Issuing authority and application procedure for a minor encroachment permit" to "Decision process for encroachment permits and findings for approval."  
23.28.080 - Provision of Notice. 
A.  Notice for a Major Encroachment Permit application shall contain the date, place, and time set for the scheduled City Council review of the application for a Major Encroachment Permit. The required notice shall include all of the following: 
1.  The number assigned to the application; 
2.  A description of the proposed Encroachment and its location; and 
3.  A brief description of the purpose of the City Council review and of the review process. 
B.  Notice of an application for a Major Encroachment Permit shall be provided as follows: 
1.  Published once in a newspaper of general circulation within the City; 
2.  Mailed to all owners of real property within 300 feet of the location of the proposed Encroachment which is the subject of the review, with ownership as identified on County Tax Assessors' rolls; and 
3.  Posting at City Hall by staff; and at the site of the proposed Encroachment, using a notification card provided by the City. 
C.  Notice for a Minor Encroachment Permit application for an Encroachment which will constitute a Long-term Improvement, as defined in this Chapter, shall include all of the following: 
1.  The number assigned to the application; 
2.  A description of the proposed Encroachment and its location; and 
3.  A brief description of the purpose of the review process and of the process of appeal of the Manager's decision. 
D.  Notice of an application for a Minor Encroachment Permit which will constitute a Long-term Improvement, as defined in this Chapter, shall be provided as follows: 
1.  Mailed to owners of real property within 100 feet of the location of the proposed Encroachment which is the subject of the review, with ownership as identified on County Tax Assessors' rolls; and 
2.  Posting at City Hall by staff; and at the site of the proposed Encroachment, using a notification card provided by the City. 
E.  Notice of an Application for a Minor Encroachment Permit for a Short-term Impact, as defined in this Chapter, shall be posted at City Hall by staff on the date of the permit application. 
(Ord. No. 919 , § 6, 10-17-2016)  
Secs. 23.28.090, 23.28.100. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 919 , § 7, adopted October 17, 2016, repealed the former Sections 23.28.090 and 23.28.100 in their entirety, which pertained to required fee and application materials, and standards of review for applications, respectively, and derived from original codification.  
23.28.110 - Appeals. 
A decision made by the City Manager on an application for an Encroachment Permit may be appealed in accordance with the provisions of the DMMC, except that the appeal period for a Minor Encroachment Permit for a Long-term Improvement shall be ten working days from the date of the Manager's action and the appeal period for a Minor Encroachment Permit for a Short-term Impact shall be five working days from the date of the Encroachment Permit application. 
(Ord. No. 919 , § 8, 10-17-2016)  
23.28.120 - Inspections of completed work and inspection fee. 
A.  The Director and his/her designees are authorized to make inspections in connection with permits issued under this Chapter. 
B.  Within 72 hours of completion of the development or activity for which an Encroachment Permit has been issued, the Permittee shall notify the Director of such completion. 
C.  To cover the costs of the inspections authorized herein, the Permittee of an approved Encroachment Permit shall deposit with the City, a partially refundable inspection fee as set forth by resolution of the City Council. Upon satisfactory completion of the activity for which the Encroachment Permit was issued, as determined by the Director, 50 percent of the inspection fee shall be returned to the Permittee. The remaining 50 percent shall be retained by the City and used to cover the administrative costs of inspections.  
23.28.130 - Terms, conditions and required measures to protect public property and provide for public health and safety. 
A.  As deemed necessary by the Director, the Permittee shall be required to place warning devices and barriers to protect the safe movement of vehicular and pedestrian traffic in the City Right-of-Way or Easement, in accordance with the provisions of the California Vehicle Code. The applicant may also be required to submit a Traffic Control Plan prepared by a certified Traffic Engineer. 
B.  By accepting an issued Encroachment Permit, the Permittee explicitly agrees to hold the City, its officers, and employees harmless from any liability, claims, suits or actions for any and all damages alleged to have been suffered by any person or property by reason of the Permittee's installation, operation, maintenance or removal of the Encroachment. 
C.  If deemed necessary by City's Finance Director to protect the public interest, the Permittee shall file a certificate of insurance naming the City of Del Mar as an additionally insured entity and showing evidence of coverage of bodily injury or property damage liability. The form and content of the certificate of insurance shall be to the satisfaction of the City's Finance Director. 
D.  All work authorized by an Encroachment Permit shall be performed by a licensed contractor. This requirement may be waived by the Director when the work to be performed is limited to minor improvements or maintenance for residential property adjacent to the City Right-of-Way or Easement and when the work will be performed by the resident or owner of the adjacent residential property. 
E.  The Permittee shall obey and enforce all safety orders, rules, regulations, and recommendations of the Department of Industrial Relations of the State of California, CAL-OSHA, applicable to the work and shall comply with all applicable laws, ordinances, codes, and regulations. Any omission on the part of the Director to specify protective measures or devices in the Encroachment Permit shall not excuse the Permittee from complying with all applicable requirements of law. 
F.  No trench shall be opened in any street for the purpose of laying pipes, conduits or ducts except when the prior written consent of the Director of Public Works has been obtained. 
G.  All excavations shall comply with the policies, standards and requirements established from time to time by the Director of Public Works for compaction, backfill and pavement restoration. The policies, standards and requirements may include different requirements for different types of excavations, taking into consideration relevant factors such as: 
1.  The location, type and extent of excavation performed; 
2.  The condition of the surface being excavated; and 
3.  The period of time elapsed since the construction or most recent resurfacing of the surface being excavated. 
H.  If any part of the work performed under an Encroachment Permit is not completed within the period indicated in either the submitted application materials or the conditions of approval of the Encroachment Permit, the Director of Public Works may notify in writing the person performing the work to complete the work within 48 hours thereafter, legal holidays excepted. If the work is not completed within this time period, the Director of Public Works shall have full power to perform the work, including such measures as will restore the disturbed area to a safe and passable condition until the work can be completed. The cost thereof, including any inspection and administrative overhead costs incurred by City, shall be assessed against the Permittee. 
I.  It shall be unlawful for any person to apply paint or other permanent marking substance to any paved surface or curbs, except for official traffic markings made or authorized by the City or its agents, markings of underground facilities in connection with construction or maintenance work, and numbers painted on curbs to identify an address. 
J.  When deemed appropriate by the Director, the applicant shall record a covenant against the deed for the property benefited by the approved Encroachment Permit setting forth the terms and conditions of the Permit, including the requirement for removal of the Encroachment upon demand by the City. The covenant shall run with the land and shall be binding on future owners and assigns. The form and content of the covenant shall be to the satisfaction of the Director. 
K.  By accepting an issued Encroachment Permit, the Permittee explicitly agrees that, upon notice from the City, the Encroachments authorized in the Permit shall be removed. All costs for removal of Encroachments shall be borne by the applicant or, where applicable, by the successor in interest.  
23.28.140 - Requirement for security deposits. 
A.  As determined by the Director, the Permittee may be required to deposit with the City: cash, a certified or cashier's check, or an approved surety bond as sufficient to assure performance with any permit conditions regarding the manner of installation of the authorized Encroachment. 
B.  Any bond or cash deposit required pursuant to this Chapter shall be payable to the City. Upon satisfactory completion of all work authorized in the Permit, and fulfillment of all conditions of the Permit, the bond or cash deposit shall be released, save for any funds necessary to offset City costs in administering the bond or cash deposit or for any work performed by the City to satisfactorily complete the work authorized under the Permit. 
C.  Cash deposits or bonds shall not be required of any public utility or public agency which is authorized by law or franchise agreement to establish or maintain any works or facilities in, under or over any City Right-of-Way or Easement.  
23.28.150 - Encroachments not having a permit. 
Encroachments that were constructed, installed or maintained without the receipt of an Encroachment Permit and which do not conform to the regulations of this Chapter shall be deemed illegal and non-conforming and may be subject to abatement as a nuisance. The City may remove the Encroachment at the responsible party's expense.  
23.28.160 - Commencement of work—Permit Expiration/Extensions of Time. 
A.  The period in which to begin work or commence an activity authorized under an approved Encroachment Permit shall be one year from the date of approval of the Encroachment Permit. If, in that one-year period, the Permittee has not commenced and completed substantial work on the authorized Encroachment, the Encroachment Permit shall expire. 
B.  A Permittee may request a single Extension of Time of an approved Encroachment Permit by submitting a written request to the City Manager setting forth the reason that substantial work on the Permit cannot be commenced by the scheduled expiration date. The City Manager shall grant the extension unless he/she determines that there has been a change in circumstances since the time of the original grant of the Permit which would create an inconsistency between the proposed Encroachment and the provisions of this Chapter. No extension shall be granted for a period greater than one year.  
23.28.170 - Emergency Encroachments. 
In the event that an Encroachment is required for the immediate protection of life or property and there is insufficient time to obtain an Encroachment Permit in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, the person making the Encroachment shall, within two working days, apply for the required Permit.  
23.28.180 - Revocation of an Encroachment Permit—Notice to remove Encroachment. 
A.  Encroachment Permit applications are requests to work in or use public property on a temporary basis. At its sole discretion, the City may revoke any Encroachment Permit and demand the applicant or successor in interest to remove the Encroachment. 
1.  An Encroachment Permit may be revoked if the Permittee fails to comply with any of the provisions of this Chapter or any of the conditions set forth in the Encroachment Permit. 
2.  An Encroachment Permit may be revoked upon a determination by the City that a change of use or appearance of the City Right-of-Way or Easement on which the authorized Encroachment was located warrants removal of the Encroachment. 
B.  The notice of revocation shall be given in writing to the Permittee or successor in interest. 
C.  Upon the revocation of any Encroachment Permit, the City shall notify the Permittee or successor in interest of his/her responsibility to immediately remove the Encroachment and to repair any damage resulting therefrom to the satisfaction of the Director. 
D.  The cost for removal of Encroachments shall be borne solely by the Permittee or successor in interest.  
23.28.190 - Preservation of monuments. 
Any monument of granite, concrete, iron, or other lasting material set for the purpose of locating or preserving the lines and/or elevation of any public street or Right-of-Way, property subdivision, or a precise survey point or reference point shall not be removed or disturbed without first obtaining permission from the Director to do so. Replacement of any removed or disturbed monument will be at the expense of the Permittee.  
23.28.200 - Maps of facilities. 
Each Permittee installing, constructing, or maintaining underground facilities, such as pipes, wires, conduits, or similar structures under an Encroachment Permit granted pursuant to this Chapter may be required to maintain accurate and complete maps of location, depth, size, and character of such facilities, upon request, to furnish copies of said maps to the Director at no cost to the City.  
23.28.210 - Compliance with authorized Permit and Conditions. 
A.  By submittal of an application for and acceptance of an Encroachment Permit, the Permittee agrees to comply with and be bound by all sections, provisions, and references contained in this Chapter. It shall be unlawful for the Permittee to implement the authorized Encroachment in a manner that is not in accordance with the approved Encroachment Permit, including any conditions attached thereto. 
B.  All obligations, responsibilities, and other requirements of the Permittee shall be binding on successors in interest of the original Permittee and subsequent owners of property benefited by the granting of the Encroachment Permit, unless otherwise specified in the Encroachment Permit.  
23.28.220 - Violation—Penalties. 
Any person violating any provisions of or failing to comply with any of the requirements of this Chapter shall be subject to the enforcement provisions set forth in DMMC Chapters 1.08 and 30.98.  
Chapter 23.30 - SIDEWALK CAFÉS IN THE DOWNTOWN AREA 
 
23.30.010 - Purpose. 
The Del Mar Community Plan calls for the City's downtown area to serve the cultural, social, recreational and material needs of the community. In order to help achieve this goal, this Chapter of the Municipal Code is established to accommodate and regulate the safe operation of Sidewalk Cafés that encroach onto City rights-of-way. The City finds that Sidewalk Cafés encourage a pedestrian-oriented environment and helps to create a visually attractive atmosphere and streetscape. This Chapter identifies the design, operation and permitting requirements for the commercial use of a public right-of-way that a Sidewalk Café entails. The user fee, which is set by separate resolution of the City Council, is designed to secure fair and reasonable compensation to the City and its residents for permitting private use of the public rights-of-way. This Chapter also recognizes that public rights-of-way should continue to be available for use by the general public, including areas improved and shared for use for the patrons and employees of Sidewalk Cafés. 
(Ord. No. 810)  
23.30.020 - Definitions. 
The following words and terms are defined for the purpose of applying the provisions of this Chapter: 
A.  Downtown Area shall mean the commercial district of the Village Center District as defined and shown in the Del Mar Community Plan. 
B.  Director shall mean the Director of Planning and Community Development. 
C.  Main Restaurant shall mean that restaurant operation located on adjoining private property to which a Sidewalk Café is an attendant part. 
D.  Permittee shall mean the person or persons to whom a valid Sidewalk Café Permit is issued. 
E.  Sidewalk Café shall mean the activity and improvements associated with the sale and/or service of food or beverages for immediate on-site consumption in a portion of a public right-of-way where such activity is conducted by the operators of a lawfully established restaurant located on adjoining private property. Sidewalk Café shall also mean that portion of an outdoor dining area of a restaurant that extends over a private property line into a public right-of-way.  
23.30.030 - Sidewalk Café Permit Required/Allowed Location. 
A.  No person shall operate a Sidewalk Café without first obtaining a Sidewalk Café Permit in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. 
B.  With authorization, as required in this Chapter, a Sidewalk Café may be located in the Downtown Area.  
23.30.040 - Required Application Materials. 
An application for a Sidewalk Café Permit shall include all of the following materials: 
A.  An application, submitted on a form provided by the City, along with such information and drawings as required by the Director to accomplish the purposes of this Chapter. 
B.  A permit application processing fee, as set forth by resolution of the City Council. 
C.  A description of the proposed operation of the Sidewalk Café, including but not limited to the hours of operation, number of tables and the services to be rendered. 
D.  Plans for the improvements to be installed in the right-of-way and a plan for maintenance of such improvements. 
E.  The written consent of the owner of the real property located immediately adjacent to and street-ward of the right-of-way area subject to the application. 
F.  A copy of the licenses and authorizations required for operation of the Main Restaurant, including a City of Del Mar Business License.  
23.30.050 - Issuing Authority and Application Procedure for a Sidewalk Café Permit. 
A.  The City Council shall serve as the issuing authority for an application for a Sidewalk Café Permit. Upon receipt, the application shall be routed to each City Department, as deemed appropriate by the Director, for comment and suggested conditions. After receipt of comments and suggested conditions, the Director shall cause the application to be placed on the first available agenda of the City Council. 
B.  A staff report shall be prepared for the City Council, to include a recommendation from staff. 
C.  The City Council shall take action to approve, conditionally approve, or deny the application based on the standards of review contained in this Chapter. The City Council may also continue the application, as deemed necessary, in order to gain additional information to be used as the basis for making a determination on the application. 
D.  Provided all proposed improvements to be located in the public rights-of-way are included in the Sidewalk Café Permit application, a separate Encroachment Permit shall not be required for installation of the improvements or for conducting the activity authorized in the Sidewalk Café Permit.  
23.30.060 - Provision of Notice. 
A.  Notice of a Sidewalk Café Permit application shall contain the date, place, and time set for the scheduled City Council review of the application. The required notice shall also include all of the following: 
1.  The number assigned to the application; 
2.  A description of the proposed Sidewalk Café and its location; and 
3.  A brief description of the purpose of the City Council review and of the review process. 
B.  Notice of an application for a Sidewalk Café Permit shall be provided as follows: 
1.  Published once in a newspaper of general circulation within the City; 
2.  Mailed to all owners of real property within 300 feet of the location of the proposed Sidewalk Café, with ownership as identified on County Tax Assessors' rolls; and 
3.  Posting at City Hall by staff and posting at the site of the proposed Sidewalk Café by the applicant using a notification card provided by the City.  
23.30.070 - Sidewalk Café Design and Operation Parameters. 
A Sidewalk Café shall comply with all of the following requirements: 
A.  The Sidewalk Café shall be located street-ward and adjacent to the Main Restaurant through which it is authorized to provide the sale/service of on-site consumption of food or beverages; 
B.  No Sidewalk Café shall be sited so as to block the direct perpendicular visibility of display windows or signage of a separate, adjacent business unless written authorization is provided from the owner of such adjacent business. 
C.  The authorized perimeter of the Sidewalk Café area shall be demarcated by planter boxes, railings or other measures deemed acceptable to the Director to visually define and secure the Sidewalk Café area. The demarcation measures shall be designed to ensure opportunities for use of the Sidewalk Café area by the general public as intended in this Chapter. 
D.  A Sidewalk Café area may be furnished with chairs, tables, and umbrellas which shall either be secured to the sidewalk pavement or removed when the Café is not open. The method of securing furniture to the sidewalk shall be subject to the prior approval of the City's Public Works Director. The furniture to be used shall be specified and described in the application for the Sidewalk Café Permit. 
E.  No portion of any Sidewalk Café furniture or amenity shall be affixed to any streetlights, trees or other improvements in the public rights-of-way unless prior written authorization is received from the City's Public Works Director. 
F.  The Sidewalk Café shall be located so as to provide an unobstructed sidewalk width of a minimum of five feet along the perimeter of the Sidewalk Café area. The required sidewalk width may be increased, if found necessary by the City, to ensure compliance with State and Federal accessibility regulations. 
G.  The Sidewalk Café shall be located so as to provide a minimum, unobstructed walkway with a ten-foot radius at corner intersections of public rights-of-way; 
H.  A Sidewalk Café shall be designed with a minimum five-foot-wide clearance from City planters, bus shelters and/or trash containers. 
I.  No signage shall be allowed in a Sidewalk Café except as proposed and approved in the Sidewalk Café Permit application. 
J.  The Sidewalk Café operator shall maintain the site and adjacent area in a clean and safe condition at all times, and shall properly dispose of all trash and water generated by operation of the Sidewalk Café. The operators shall maintain all furnishings, planters and signs in safe and good condition. 
K.  Sidewalk Café operator shall comply with all applicable laws and local ordinances regarding the sale and service of food and beverages to the public. 
L.  No service, sale or consumption of alcohol shall be permitted within the Sidewalk Café area between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. daily. 
M.  No food preparation, fire or fire apparatus shall be permitted in the Sidewalk Café area. 
N.  No live entertainment, amplification or sound system speakers shall be permitted in the Sidewalk Café area. 
O.  It shall be the duty of the Sidewalk Café operator to maintain the Sidewalk Café area in a quiet and good order. The Permittee shall not cause or create any noise or other nuisance in the outdoor area where the quiet and good order of the premises or the neighborhood are disturbed. 
P.  The placement or maintenance of a Sidewalk Café shall not obstruct or interfere with the installation or maintenance of underground utilities. 
Q.  All aspects of the Sidewalk Café shall be designed and maintained to comply with applicable State and Federal laws regarding the provision of access for disabled persons. 
R.  The Sidewalk Café shall comply with provisions of Sidewalk Café guidelines as may be adopted or amended by resolution of the City Council.  
23.30.080 - Design of Sidewalk Café Furniture. 
A.  Tables and chairs shall be made of a safe, sturdy, durable material such as wrought iron, wood, steel or cast aluminum. All tables and chairs shall be commercial grade, manufactured for outdoor commercial use. 
B.  All furniture shall be properly maintained and cleaned regularly. 
C.  All tablecloths shall be stored indoors nightly and shall be cleaned on a regular basis. No vinyl tablecloths shall be permitted. 
D.  Individual canvas or other non-vinyl umbrellas are permitted. Umbrellas shall be designed for outdoor commercial use and maintained in a clean manner. 
E.  Each umbrella may include display of the name of the Sidewalk Café business so long as the name does not exceed six inches in height. The total umbrella signage shall not cover more than ten percent of the area of each umbrella and shall contain no advertising other than the name of the associated Main Restaurant.  
23.30.090 - Exemption for Requirement for Design Review of Sidewalk Café Improvements and Amenities. 
Provided an application for a Sidewalk Café Permit contains detailed information to allow the Issuing Authority for the Permit to make a determination that the proposed Sidewalk Café demarcation measures and Sidewalk Café furniture and amenities will be in compliance with the parameters set forth in this Chapter, no Design Review Permit shall be required for installation of such improvements or amenities.  
23.30.100 - Standards of Review for Applications. 
A.  An application for Sidewalk Café shall be approved by the issuing authority identified in this Chapter unless the issuing authority makes one or more of the following findings of fact: 
1.  That the issuance of the Sidewalk Café Permit will endanger public health, safety or welfare of the surrounding property; 
2.  That the issuance of the Sidewalk Café Permit will unreasonably interfere with the intended use of a City right-of-way or Easement; 
3.  That the issuance of the Sidewalk Café Permit will have an adverse impact on the welfare of the community or on the community's appearance or aesthetics; 
4.  That the issuance of the Sidewalk Café Permit will cause an unnecessary change in the character of the community; or 
5.  That the issuance of the Sidewalk Café Permit will be to the detriment of the interests of the general public. 
B.  An approved Sidewalk Café Permit shall be subject to such conditions as the issuing authority deems necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare and to preserve the intended use of the City right-of-way or Easement. Such conditions may include a requirement for recordation of a covenant against the deed for the adjacent property on which the Main Restaurant is located acknowledging that the property owner agrees to remove the Sidewalk Café improvements installed within the right-of-way upon notice of request for removal from the City.  
23.30.110 - Term of Permit. 
A.  A Sidewalk Café Permit shall be valid for a period of three years from the date of approval.  
23.30.120 - Renewal of Sidewalk Café Permits. 
A.  Notwithstanding the other provisions of this Chapter, the Permittee may request a renewal of the term of a Sideway Café Permit. The request shall be submitted on a form provided by the City and shall be accompanied by a processing fee, as established by resolution of the City Council. 
B.  Upon submittal, the Director shall review the request the Sidewalk Café Permit Renewal to determine if the circumstances and findings under which the original Sidewalk Café Permit application were issued are still applicable and can support findings for approval of a renewal of the Permit. 
C.  A Sidewalk Café Renewal shall be valid for a period of three years from the date of approval. 
D.  Within three months of the end of the period of a valid Sidewalk Café Permit Renewal, the Permittee may request another Sidewalk Café Permit Renewal.  
23.30.130 - Sidewalk Café User Fee. 
A.  As a condition of approval of a Sidewalk Café Permit, the applicant shall pay to the City a Sidewalk Café user fee for commercial use to the City's public right-of-way. 
B.  The amount of the Sidewalk Café user fee shall be set by resolution of the City Council. 
C.  The Sidewalk Café user fees collected by the City shall be deposited in an account to be used specifically and solely for installation and/or maintenance of streetscape improvements in the City's Downtown Area rights-of-way.  
23.30.140 - Public Use of Sidewalk Café. 
A.  All seating areas in a Sidewalk Café shall be available for the reasonable use and enjoyment of the public, including persons who are not patrons or employees of the Main Restaurant. 
B.  The Permittee shall be responsible for installing and maintaining signage to notify members of the public, patrons and employees of the Main Restaurant of the public's right to use and enjoy the seating in the Sidewalk Café. The required signage shall be subject to review by the Director, prior to installation, to ensure that the signage will adequately and conspicuously carry out the intent of this Section. 
C.  A Sidewalk Café operated in a manner consistent with the provisions and intent of this Chapter for general public use of the public right-of-way shall not be required to provide off-street parking spaces.  
23.30.150 - Insurance and Indemnification Requirements. 
A.  Prior to the issuance of a Sidewalk Café Permit, the Permittee shall provide the City with a certificate of insurance showing that the applicant is covered by general liability insurance in the amount of not less than, $1,000,000.00 per occurrence and $2,000,000.00 in the aggregate, for personal injury (including death) and property damage. The certificate shall include an endorsement naming the City of Del Mar, its Council, boards, commissions, officers, employees, volunteers and agents as additional insured. The general liability insurance shall cover the property on which the Main Restaurant is located and the area for which the Sidewalk Café Permit is authorized.  
23.30.160 - Requirement for Security Deposits. 
A.  As determined by the Director, the Permittee may be required to deposit with the City: cash, a certified or cashier's check, or an approved surety bond, as sufficient to assure performance with any permit conditions regarding the manner of installation of the authorized Sidewalk Café and to ensure removal of improvements from the right-of-way when deemed necessary by the City. 
B.  Any bond or cash deposit required pursuant to this Chapter shall be payable to the City. Upon satisfactory completion of all work authorized in the Permit, and fulfillment of all conditions of the Permit, the bond or cash deposit shall be released, save for any funds necessary to offset City costs in administering the bond or cash deposit, or for any work performed by the City to satisfactorily restore the public right-of-way to its condition prior to the installation of the improvements authorized under the Sidewalk Café Permit.  
23.30.170 - Revocation of Permit. 
A Sidewalk Café Permit may be revoked upon a written finding by the Planning Director that the Sidewalk Café is being operated in violation of one or more of the conditions of the Sidewalk Café Permit or that the Sidewalk Café is being operated in violation of one or more of the provisions of this Chapter. A Sidewalk Café Permit may also be revoked upon a written finding by the Planning Director that the Sidewalk Café is being operated in a manner that constitutes a nuisance, or unduly impedes or restricts the movement of pedestrians. The decision of the Planning Director shall be appealable to the City Council in accordance with the provisions of the Del Mar Municipal Code.  
Chapter 23.32 - EXCAVATION AND GRADING PERMIT 
 
23.32.010 - Adoption of County Code. 
Chapters 1 through 6 of Division 7 of Title 8 of the San Diego County Code commencing at Section 87.101 together with such secondary references as are included in those portions, effective as of the date set forth in Section 23.32.020 below are hereby adopted by reference by the City of Del Mar for the purpose of prescribing rules and regulations for the protection of the public health and safety through the regulation of excavation and grading. Subject to the following amendments, the provisions of those portions shall be controlling within the limits of the City of Del Mar. 
A.  "County Official" shall mean "City Engineer of the City of Del Mar" relating to major grading projects. 
B.  "Zoning Ordinance" shall mean the "Zoning Ordinance of the City of Del Mar". 
C.  Sections 87.106 and 87.115 are not adopted by this reference. 
D.  "Planning Environmental Review Board" and "PERB" shall mean the "Planning Director of the City of Del Mar". 
E.  The "Department of Sanitation and Flood Control" shall mean the "City of Del Mar". 
F.  "County Counsel" shall mean "City Attorney". 
G.  Section 87.208 is amended to provide that only a cash deposit is acceptable as security. 
H.  Section 87.210.1 is amended to provide that "County" shall mean "The City of Del Mar, its employees or agents". 
I.  "Clerk of the Board of Supervisors" shall mean the "City Clerk of Del Mar". 
J.  Section 87.306 is amended to provide that "County Official or Employee" shall mean "County Official, County Employee, City Official, City Employee or City Agent". 
K.  Sections 87.206 and 87.207 relating to plan checking fees and inspection fees are amended to provide that the amount of fees shall be set for City activities by resolution of the City Council which may refer to fees adopted by the County of San Diego. 
(Ord. No. 459; Ord. No. 485)  
23.32.020 - Effective Date of Incorporated County Ordinance. 
The effective date of this Chapter is September 15, 1993. 
(Ord. No. 632)  
23.32.030 - Application Processing. 
A.  An application for an excavation or grading permit shall be submitted to the Director of Planning and Community Development together with a deposit equal to the estimated plan check fee. 
B.  Plan check fees may be set, from time to time, by resolution of the City Council. 
C.  The Director of Planning and Community Development shall review the application and: 
1.  Determine whether a Land Conservation Permit is also required, and so advise the applicant; 
2.  Submit the application to the City Engineer, who shall conduct a plan check and route the application to the County of San Diego, if appropriate; and 
3.  Shall conduct an environmental assessment of the proposed project to determine whether an Environmental Impact Report is required.  
23.32.040 - Issuance and Inspection Fees. 
A.  The amount of the issuance and inspection fees may be set, from time to time, by resolution of the City Council. 
B.  Except as otherwise provided herein, issuance and inspection fees shall be collected and retained by the City of Del Mar. 
C.  When performing services authorized herein, the County of San Diego may collect and retain the issuance and inspection fees.  
23.32.050 - Issuance of Permits. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, the City of Del Mar shall issue all excavation and grading permits, and perform related inspections, when the application conforms with the provisions of this Code. 
B.  The County of San Diego may issue minor grading permits and perform related inspections in accordance with the regulatory provisions of Section 87.210 when, concurrent to the excavation or grading permit, there is a building permit application for a single-family dwelling or duplex together with any accessory buildings.  
23.32.060 - Violations. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to excavate or grade in violation of any of the regulatory provisions of this Chapter. 
B.  A violation of any of the regulatory provisions of this Chapter constitutes a public nuisance.  
Chapter 23.33 - LAND CONSERVATION PERMIT 
 
23.33.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Chapter is to insure that development results in minimum disturbances of existing or natural terrain and vegetation and does not create soil erosion, silting of lower slopes, slide damage, flooding problems, severe cutting or scarring. 
(Ord. No. 434)  
23.33.020 - Requirement. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to make any alteration in the existing or natural grade elevation, in excess of 18 inches, without having first obtained a Land Conservation Permit. 
B.  There is exempt from the provisions of this Chapter, any excavation replaced by a structure or pool, and any temporary alteration of grade elevation which proposes the restoration within 18 inches of the original grade elevation within 30 days and any excavation to fill less than 25 cubic yards.  
23.33.030 - Procedure. 
A.  The applicant shall submit an application on a form prepared by the Planning Department and submit such other required supportive material as may be required by the Planning Department to accomplish the purposes of this Chapter. 
B.  The applicant shall pay an application fee in an amount set, from time to time, by resolution of the City Council. 
C.  The Planning Department shall submit the application to the Design Review Board as a noticed public hearing. 
D.  The Design Review Board may approve, conditionally approve, or deny the application.  
23.33.035 - Administrative Land Conservation Review. 
A.  An applicant for a project involving grading to alter the existing or natural grade elevation on a property in an amount in excess of 18 inches which requires a Land Conservation Permit may apply for an Administrative Land Conservation Permit so long as: 
1.  The proposed project involves a maximum of 50 cubic yards of combined cut and/or fill grading; and 
2.  The proposed project involves a maximum alteration of the existing or natural grade elevation of the property by no more than 36 inches. 
B.  Notice of the filing of an application for an Administrative Land Conservation Permit shall be mailed to persons owning property within 300 feet of the project site and posted on the property. The mailed notice of application shall advise persons that plans are available for public review at City Hall and that the application will be administratively approved unless a written objection is received by the Planning Department on or before a date specified in the notice which shall be ten working days after the date of mailing. 
C.  If no timely written objection is filed, the application shall be administratively approved by the Planning Director if it is deemed to be consistent with the provisions of the Del Mar Municipal Code. 
D.  If a timely written objection is filed, the application shall no longer be administratively processed and shall instead be processed in accordance with the other sections of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 716)  
23.33.040 - Denial of Application. 
The application shall be approved unless the Design Review Board makes one or more of the following findings based upon the evidence submitted at the public hearing: 
A.  The proposed excavation or grading project is not in conformance with the Del Mar Municipal Code requirements. 
B.  The proposed excavation or grading project will force the topography to be subservient to the development of the site. 
C.  The proposed excavation or grading project will endanger steep slopes through undue increases in weight or retained water thereby creating conditions which encourage slippage. 
D.  The excavation or grading project will alter the natural formations unnecessarily. 
E.  The excavation or grading project does not provide for the restoration of the natural state of the site, to the degree feasible. 
F.  The excavation or grading project does not minimize the loss of major vegetation, to the degree feasible. 
G.  The excavation or grading project will create major interruptions of the natural drainage patterns.  
23.33.045 - Expiration. 
Three years from the date of final approval of a Land Conservation Permit, the Permit will expire, unless a grading permit, where necessary, has been issued and substantial construction has been accomplished in reliance upon the Land Conservation Permit. 
(Ord. No. 641; Ord. No. 757)  
23.33.050 - Violation. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to excavate or grade without first having satisfied the requirements of this Chapter. 
B.  A violation of any of the regulatory provisions of this Chapter or any of the conditions imposed by an issued permit constitutes a public nuisance.  
Chapter 23.50 - TREES 
 
23.50.010 - Purpose. 
A.  The City of Del Mar Community Plan has as one of its major goals the preservation of the unique village-like atmosphere of the City of Del Mar and specifically references the preservation of natural vegetation, including tree species. 
B.  In the interest of the public health, safety and welfare, as well as general aesthetics of the community and the importance of the ecology of the area, the City of Del Mar finds it necessary to encourage conservation of trees and the application of management techniques to create a healthy, diverse urban forest, including but not limited to pruning, thinning, trimming, shaping, and selective planting and removal of trees and vegetation within the City of Del Mar on private as well as public property. 
C.  The species Torrey Pine, the species Monterey Cypress, and all species of trees located within the Central Commercial zone and the environmentally sensitive Open Space Overlay zone are of particular significance to the City, and should therefore be protected to conserve the environmental qualities of the City. 
(Ord. No. 683; Ord. No. 749)  
23.50.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this Section: 
A.  Accessory Structure means a portion of the main building or a detached subordinate building located on the same lot or premises which is devoted exclusively to an accessory use, and which is used exclusively by the occupants of the main building. 
B.  Certified Arborist shall mean "Certified Arborist" as that term is defined by the International Society of Arboriculture. 
C.  Permit shall mean Tree Removal Permit. 
D.  Primary Structure shall mean a building used for living quarters. 
E.  Protected Tree shall mean: 
1.  A tree of the species Cupressus macrocarpa (Monterey Cypress); 
2.  A tree of the species Pinus torreyana (Torrey Pine); 
3.  A tree of any species and located on property within the Central Commercial, Open Space Overlay Zones of the City, within a public right-of-way, or on public or City-owned property; or 
4.  Any tree planted as a result of required mitigation for the removal of another Protected Tree(s). 
F.  Tree shall mean any perennial plant growing on public or private property, having a self-supporting woody main stem or trunk. 
(Ord. No. 749)  
23.50.030 - Prohibitions, Penalties. 
A.  It shall be unlawful, subject to enforcement pursuant to Chapter 1.08 as a misdemeanor or infraction, for any person to plant, trim, or remove any vegetation within the public right-of-way without first having obtained an Encroachment Permit under the provisions of this Code. 
B.  It shall be unlawful, subject to enforcement pursuant to Chapter 1.08 as a misdemeanor or infraction, for any person to cut down, remove, destroy, or move a Protected Tree without first having obtained a Tree Removal Permit in accordance with this Chapter unless exempt as set forth in this Chapter. 
C.  It shall be unlawful, subject to enforcement pursuant to Chapter 1.08 as a misdemeanor or infraction, for any person to damage or deface any vegetation within the public right-of-way or on public property, or a protective structure placed around such vegetation. 
D.  Any person, including but not limited to the property owner and the person performing the work, who violates any provision of this Chapter or any condition imposed upon any permit issued hereunder shall remedy any damage caused by the violation. Such remediation may include, but is not limited to, the following: 
1.  Replacement of removed or damaged trees in accordance with Section 23.50.090 of this Chapter; and 
2.  Payment to the City's Tree Mitigation Fund of an amount representing the value of any removed or damaged tree, as determined using the most current International Society of Arboriculture's Guide for Plant Appraisal. 
(Ord. No. 729; Ord. No. 749)  
23.50.040 - Removal of a Protected Tree Which Is Exempt From Permit Requirement; Notice of Intent. 
A.  A person desiring to cut down, remove, destroy, or move a Protected Tree that is exempt from a permit requirement pursuant to this Chapter shall file a Notice of Intent, using a form supplied by the City, with the Planning and Community Development Director two working days prior to the scheduled removal. 
B.  The Director or his/her representative shall, within two working days of the filing of Notice of Intent, conduct a site visit to verify that the tree(s) proposed for removal qualifies for a permit exemption. 
(Ord. No. 749)  
23.50.050 - Exemptions. 
A.  No permit is required by this Chapter for pruning or trimming of any tree on private property. 
B.  No permit is required by this Chapter to cut down, remove, destroy, or move a Protected Tree under any of the following circumstances. This exemption does not apply to trees within the public right-of-way. 
1.  When measured two feet above ground level, (a) the Protected Tree has a single trunk circumference of 20 inches or less and is not a replacement tree pursuant to Section 23.50.090, or (b) the Protected Tree has multi-trunks having a total circumference of 30 inches or less and is not a replacement tree pursuant to Section 23.50.090. 
2.  When measured two feet above ground level, the trunk of the Protected Tree is located no more than 12 feet from the exterior wall of any Primary Structure or Accessory Structure. 
3.  When both trees are measured two feet above ground level, the Protected Tree is located no more than 12 feet from another Protected Tree. Only one of the Protected Trees may be removed. 
C.  No permit is required by this Chapter for the emergency removal of a Protected Tree for reasons of public health, safety and welfare. The Planning and Community Development Department shall be promptly notified of emergency removal. 
(Ord. No. 749)  
23.50.060 - Director Powers and Duties. 
The Director of Planning and Community Development shall be responsible for administering and enforcing this Chapter. The Director shall have the following powers and duties: 
A.  Grant or deny Tree Removal Permit applications pursuant to this Chapter. 
B.  Determine mitigation requirements for approved Tree Removal Permits. 
C.  Determine whether a Protected Tree proposed for removal qualifies for a permit exemption pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 749)  
23.50.070 - Design Review Board Powers and Duties. 
The Design Review Board shall be responsible for administering and enforcing this Chapter when a request for a Tree Removal Permit is a direct result of a concurrent development permit application reviewed by the Design Review Board. The Design Review Board shall have the following powers and duties: 
A.  Grant or deny Tree Removal Permit applications pursuant to this Chapter. 
B.  Determine mitigation requirements for approved Tree Removal Permits. 
(Ord. No. 749)  
23.50.080 - Processing of Permits; Standards for Permits. 
A.  Application. A person who desires to cut down, remove, destroy, or move a Protected Tree shall make application for a Tree Removal Permit to the Planning and Community Development Department on a form provided by the City. A processing fee, established by resolution of the City Council, shall be required. The application shall contain the number, species, and size of the trees involved, a statement on the reason for the requested action, a site plan depicting the location of tree(s) proposed for removal and other trees located in the vicinity, and any other pertinent information determined necessary by the Planning and Community Development Director or Design Review Board. This additional information may include a report from a qualified, professional arborist selected and employed by the City. The applicant shall be required to reimburse the City for the cost of such a report. 
B.  Noticing. A notice of the filing of an application for a Tree Removal Permit shall be mailed by the City to persons owning property adjacent to the project site. The mailed notice of application shall advise persons of the date of action and that the application is available for public review at City Hall. 
C.  Action. The Director or the Design Review Board shall approve or conditionally approve a Tree Removal Permit if the Protected Tree is: 
1.  Dead, diseased or injured beyond reclamation, as certified by a tree condition report from an arborist; 
2.  Crowded by other healthier protected trees; thinning (removal) would promote healthier growth in the trees to remain, as certified by a tree condition report from an arborist; 
3.  Interfering with existing utilities and/or primary structures, as certified by a report from the public utility operator or a structural engineer; 
4.  Causing substantial damage to a Primary or Accessory Structure or associated utilities, as certified by a structural engineer when applicable; 
5.  Interfering with existing improvements, and/or is a danger to the public health, safety, or welfare in the Central Commercial, Open Space Overlay Zone, or on public property or right-of-way; 
6.  Deemed a safety hazard in a tree condition report from a Certified Arborist. The report shall include a completed ISA-Hazard Evaluation Form or other methodology acceptable to the City of Del Mar, as well as the observations and opinions of the Arborist. The City reserves the right to retain a Certified Arborist, at the expense of the Applicant, when needed to review a hazardous tree determination; 
7.  Deemed by the Trees, Scenic Views and Sunlight Board to be unreasonably blocking a scenic view and/or sunlight of a neighboring residence and the Board has determined that removal of the tree is the only feasible method available for restoration of the affected scenic view and/or sunlight; 
8.  Located within 30 feet of a Primary or Accessory Structure, when measured two feet above ground level, and the canopy of the tree cannot be reduced so as to: 
(i)  Avoid overhanging the roof of a Primary or Accessory Structure; 
(ii)  Be at least ten feet from the canopy of any other tree; and 
(iii)  Be at least ten feet from the chimney of any residence. 
The feasibility of reducing the tree(s) canopy shall be determined by the City's Arborist and Fire Chief; 
9.  Voluntarily replaced in accordance with Subsection 23.50.090.A.1. The replacement tree(s) shall be indicated in a covenant on the property on which the tree(s) are located. The replacement tree(s) shall not be eligible for removal in accordance with this Code until it has attained a circumference of at least 20 inches when measured two feet above ground level; or 
10.  Obstructing proposed improvements that cannot be reasonably designed to avoid the need for tree removal, as certified by a report from the project planner and determined by the Director of Planning and Community Development or the Design Review Board based on the following factors: 
(i)  Early consultation with the City; 
(ii)  Consideration of practical design alternatives; 
(iii)  Saving the Protected Tree eliminates all reasonable use of the property; or 
(iv)  Saving the Protected Tree requires the removal of more desirable trees. 
Notwithstanding the existence of Subsections 1. through 10. above, the Director or the Design Review Board may deny a Tree Removal Permit if any of the following conditions exist: 
1.  The tree removal will, even after the imposition of permit conditions, endanger the public health, safety, peace, or welfare; 
2.  The tree removal will have an adverse impact on the aesthetics of the area surrounding the proposed activity; 
3.  Reasonable alternatives to a concurrent development proposal exist which would eliminate the need to remove a Protected Tree; or 
4.  The applicant has not agreed to perform the conditions of approval imposed by Section 23.050.090. 
(Ord. No. 729; Ord. No. 749)  
23.50.090 - Conditions on Permit. 
A.  The Planning and Community Development Director or Design Review Board may impose conditions on the permit to achieve the purposes of this Chapter. These conditions include without limitation one or more of the following: 
1.  Requirement that the permittee replace the removed tree on the property. The number and species of replacement trees required shall be determined by the Planning and Community Development Director in accordance with the Tree Mitigation Replacement Scale below and the species being removed. 
Circumference of Single-Trunk Tree To be Replaced* 	Replacement Ratio 
# of Replacement Trees/ 
# of Removed Trees 
20"—60" 	1/1 
60"—100" 	2/1 
100" or Greater 	3/1 
 
Circumference of Multi-Trunk Tree To be Replaced* 	Replacement Ratio 
# of Replacement Trees/ 
# of Removed Trees 
30"—70" 	1/1 
70"—110" 	2/1 
110" or Greater 	3/1 
 
* Measured two feet above ground level 
2.  Payment into the City's Tree Mitigation Fund, if on-site replacement is not suitable due to site constraints such as, but not limited, to the location of existing structures and vegetation. Payment in-lieu of each required replacement tree shall be equal to the estimated cost required to buy, transport, and plant a 15-gallon, 24"- or 36"-boxed tree of a species and size to be determined by the City. Any such payment is to be used to fund the purchase of additional tree(s), for planting off-site or as approved by the City Council by resolution. 
3.  Requirements that will preserve surrounding trees and protect those trees from damage from the tree removal. 
B.  The following criteria shall be considered by the Planning and Community Development Director or Design Review Board, in consultation with the City's Arborist if necessary, when determining whether or not mitigation should be required and which method should be applied. 
1.  Good forestry practices, i.e., the number of healthy trees that a given parcel of land will support; 
2.  The topography of the land and the positive effect that tree replacement could have on soil retention and erosion; 
3.  The number, species, size, and location of existing trees in the area; 
4.  Whether the replacement tree(s) would create or continue the unreasonable obstruction, as determined in accordance with DMMC Chapter 23.51, of the scenic view and/or sunlight of a neighboring residence; 
5.  If a tree is to be removed from the public right-of-way, whether the replacement tree(s) would interfere with public utilities, streets, or sidewalks. 
(Ord. No. 729; Ord. No. 749)  
23.50.100 - Appeal. 
The decision of the Planning and Community Development Director and the Design Review Board may be appealed to the City Council pursuant to this Code. The provisions of Section 1094.6 of the California Code of Civil Procedure are applicable to judicial review of the City of Del Mar's decisions pursuant to this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 729)  
23.50.110 - Expiration. 
Permits will be effective ten working days after approval, unless appealed, and shall be valid for a period of 180 days, subject to a 180-day renewal period at the permittee's request.  
Chapter 23.51 - TREES, SCENIC VIEWS AND SUNLIGHT 
 
23.51.010 - Purpose. 
A.  The City recognizes that Trees, Scenic Views and plentiful Sunlight contribute to the special character of Del Mar and to the overall quality of life enjoyed by residents, property owners, and visitors in Del Mar. 
B.  Trees, Vegetation, and other landscaping produce a wide variety of significant psychological and tangible benefits for residents, property owners, and visitors in Del Mar. Trees contribute to the economic value and comfortable enjoyment of the community, neighborhoods and individual properties. Trees provide aesthetic value as part of an urban forest, visual and auditory privacy, climate control, wind screening, soil stability, and wildlife habitat. 
C.  Scenic views, whether of the Pacific Ocean, nearby lagoons, canyons, the community and its landscapes and urban forest character, or other scenic vistas, produce a variety of significant and tangible benefits for residents, property owners and visitors. Scenic views provide inspiring vistas, encourage distinct and creative architecture, and contribute to the economic value and comfortable enjoyment of real property within the City of Del Mar. 
D.  Plentiful Sunlight provides an opportunity to utilize solar energy and contributes to the economic value and comfortable enjoyment of real property within the City of Del Mar. 
E.  The purpose of this Chapter is to acknowledge the benefits derived from Trees, Scenic Views and plentiful Sunlight and to balance the goal of maintaining each of them when possible. This Chapter also provides a process by which persons may seek to restore Scenic Views and/or Sunlight that has been unreasonably obstructed by the growth and/or installation of Trees and Vegetation. 
(Ord. No. 747; Ord. No. 780)  
23.51.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this Section: 
A.  Applicant shall mean any property owner (or legal occupant with written permission of the property owner) who alleges that Trees or Vegetation located on the property of another person unreasonably obstructs a pre-existing Scenic View or Sunlight and who has filed a (Trees, Scenic Views and Sunlight) Application with the City to restore said view or sunlight. 
B.  Certified Arborist shall mean Certified Arborist as that term is defined by the International Society of Arboriculture. 
C.  Crown Reduction/Shaping shall mean a method of comprehensive trimming that reduces a Tree's height and/or spread. Crown reduction entails the reduction of the top, sides or individual limbs of a Tree by removal of leaders or the longest portion of limbs to a lateral large enough to assume to terminal. 
D.  Heading back shall mean a pruning process where overall reduction of the mass of a Tree is achieved by modification to major limbs. 
E.  Imminent Danger shall mean the immediate risk to the health, safety or welfare of any person or real property, whether private or publicly owned. 
F.  Lacing shall mean a comprehensive method of trimming that systematically and sensitively removes excess portions of a Tree and improves the structure of the Tree. 
G.  Mediation shall mean a private, voluntary process in which an impartial and qualified third party facilitates communication between parties to a dispute to promote settlement. 
H.  Obstruction shall mean any substantial blocking or diminishment of Scenic Views and/or Sunlight that is attributable to the growth, improper maintenance or location of a Tree or Vegetation. 
I.  Person shall mean any individual, corporation, partnership, firm, or other legal entity (including the City of Del Mar), owning property or residing within the Del Mar City limits. 
J.  Primary Living Area shall mean that (single) portion of a residence from which a Scenic View is observed most often by the occupants and guests at the residence. The determination of Primary Living Area is to be made on a case-by case basis and shall be consistent with any prior determinations made by the City. 
K.  Protected Tree shall mean any of the following: 
1.  A Tree of the species Cupressus macrocarpa (Monterey Cypress); 
2.  A Tree of the species Pinus torreyana (Torrey Pine); 
3.  A Tree of any species and located on property within the Central Commercial, Open Space Overlay zones of the City, within a public right-of-way, or on public or City-owned property; or 
4.  Any Tree planted as a result of required mitigation for the removal of another Protected Tree. 
L.  Restorative Action shall mean any specific action required to resolve a dispute relating to the unreasonable obstruction of a pre-existing Scenic View or Sunlight. 
M.  Scenic View shall mean a view of the ocean, lagoons, canyons, the community and its landscapes and urban forest character, or other scenic vistas, from the Primary Living Area of a residence. 
N.  Severe Pruning shall mean the cutting of branches and/or trunk of a Tree in a manner which substantially reduces the overall size of the Tree or destroys the existing symmetrical appearance, natural shape or health of the Tree and which results in the removal of main lateral branches leaving the trunk and branches of the Tree in a stub appearance. "Topping" and "Heading back" as defined herein are considered to be severe pruning. 
O.  Site of Subject Tree shall mean the property on which a Subject Tree is located. 
P.  Subject Tree shall mean a Tree for which a claim has been made by an Applicant regarding the unreasonable obstruction of a Scenic View or Sunlight. 
Q.  Sunlight shall mean the availability of direct or indirect Sunlight to the Primary Living Area or to the existing solar energy system of a residence. 
R.  Thinning shall mean the selective removal of entire branches from a Tree so as to improve visibility through the Tree and/or improve the Tree's structural condition. 
S.  Tree shall mean any perennial plant growing on public or private property, having a self-supporting woody main stem or trunk with the potential to obstruct Scenic Views or Sunlight, including but not limited to Trees, shrubs, hedges, and bushes or any plant material planted or growing in a dense continuous line so as to form a thicket barrier or naturally grown fence. References to "Tree" shall include the plural. 
T.  Tree Removal shall mean the elimination of any Tree or plant from its present location. 
U.  Topping shall mean eliminating the upper portion of the trunk or main leader of a Tree. Topping is not recommended in almost all cases. 
V.  Trimming shall mean the selective removal of portions of branches from a Tree so as to modify the Tree shape or profile or otherwise alter the Tree's appearance. 
W.  Vegetation shall mean all plant material, including but not limited to, those referenced in this Section for the term "Tree". 
X.  Windowing shall mean a form of thinning by which openings or "windows" are created to restore Scenic Views and/or Sunlight. 
(Ord. No. 729; Ord. No. 780)  
23.51.030 - Rights Established. 
A.  A person shall have the right to seek restoration and preservation of Scenic Views or Sunlight that existed at the time they purchased or occupied a property or in the last ten years, whichever is shorter, when such Scenic Views from the Primary Living Area, or Sunlight available to the Primary Living Area or solar energy system of a residence, have subsequently been unreasonably obstructed by the growth of Trees or Vegetation located within the Del Mar City limits and 300 feet of the Applicant's property boundary. 
B.  In order to establish such rights pursuant to this Chapter, the Applicant shall follow the process established in this Chapter. 
C.  Any person whose Tree(s) is the subject of a Trees, Scenic Views and Sunlight application shall be granted the right to, under Applicant supervision, access the Applicant's Primary Living Area and personally view and/or document the alleged blockage and Scenic Views and/or Sunlight. By signing the Trees, Scenic Views and Sunlight application, the Applicant shall acknowledge and accept this right given to the Tree owner. 
D.  All persons are advised that the alteration and removal of certain Trees requires a permit under DMMC Chapter 23.50 (Trees). The applicability of DMMC Chapter 23.50 should be determined by the City prior to any action on Trees.  
23.51.040 - Procedure. 
A.  Any person who desires to resolve a conflict between Trees, Scenic Views and Sunlight may submit an application to the Department of Planning and Community Development on a form approved by the Director. 
B.  The application shall be deemed to have been filed when: 
1.  The Director has determined that the application is complete, has been submitted in proper form and meets the criteria established in Subsection 23.51.030.A. of this Chapter; 
2.  The Applicant has submitted to the City the required fee, in an amount to be established by resolution of the City Council, to cover the administrative costs of processing the application; and 
3.  The Director has determined that the Applicant has contacted the Subject Tree owner and has made reasonable efforts, including documented efforts to engage in mediation, to resolve the dispute and that these efforts have not been successful. 
C.  The Director shall cause the application to be presented at a noticed public hearing conducted by the City of Del Mar Planning Commission. 
D.  Within ten working days after the application has been deemed filed, City staff shall notify the Subject Tree owner, in writing, and provide the following: 
1.  A copy of the Trees, Scenic Views and Sunlight application; 
2.  A copy of DMMC Chapter 23.51; 
3.  A statement explaining that there is still time and an opportunity to resolve the matter by discussions between the Applicant and the Subject Tree owner prior to the scheduled public hearing; 
4.  Information about the mediation process, including a handout from the Del Mar Community Mediation Advisory Committee, and encouragement to use mediation. Additional informational materials associated with dispute resolution shall be distributed as they are made available; and 
5.  Notice that a written response to the application may be submitted for review by the Planning Commission prior to the hearing, the deadline for any such response, and the date and time of the hearing. 
E.  At least ten days prior to the public hearing, notice shall be published and mailed to property owners of record of real property within 300 feet of both the Applicant's property boundaries and of the site of the Subject Tree. 
F.  At the hearing, each party shall be allowed time to present evidence pertinent to the application/claim. The public shall also be given an opportunity to comment on the application. The Applicant shall not thereafter raise arguments that were not presented during the public hearing or in the written record. 
G.  The Planning Commission shall make a decision on the Application based on the criteria listed in Section 23.51.050 of this Chapter. An action approving an Application shall be set forth in a Resolution and accompanied by Conditions of Restorative Action that identify the specific manner in which the Subject Tree is to be trimmed, pruned, removed or otherwise altered in accordance with Section 23.51.070 of this Chapter. The Planning Commission's decision shall become final on the 11th working day following such determination, unless the decision is appealed to the City Council in accordance with the provisions of this Code (Section 23.51.100). 
H.  The Conditions of Restorative Action and required term of maintenance (if deemed appropriate) imposed by the Planning Commission may be recorded in a covenant against the deed for the property on which the Subject Tree is located. If required, the covenant shall run with the land to help guarantee permanent preservation of pre-existing Scenic Views and/or Sunlight. 
(Ord. No. 780)  
23.51.050 - Standards for Determining Unreasonable Obstruction. 
Prior to rendering a decision in favor of the Applicant, the Planning Commission shall make the following findings of fact: 
A.  That the Applicant has contacted the Subject Tree owner and has made reasonable efforts to resolve the dispute as set forth in DMMC Subsection 23.51.040.B. Proof of the Applicant's efforts shall include documented attempts (registered mail, etc.) to reach and confer with the Subject Tree owner, and documentation supporting efforts to mediate the dispute; and 
B.  That the Scenic View from or the Sunlight reaching the real property of the Applicant is unreasonably obstructed and the manner in which the Scenic View and/or Sunlight is obstructed. In determining whether the Scenic View from and/or Sunlight reaching the real property of the Applicant is unreasonably obstructed, the Planning Commission shall consider several factors, which include but are not limited to, the following: 
1.  The extent of alleged Scenic View obstruction, expressed as a percentage of the total Scenic View, and calculated by means of a surveyor's transit or by photographs or both; 
2.  Documentable evidence that demonstrates the Scenic Views and/or Sunlight that existed at the time the Applicant purchased or began occupying a property, or in the last ten years, whichever is shorter; 
3.  The quality of the pre-existing Scenic View(s) and/or Sunlight being obstructed; 
4.  That the implementation of a Restorative Action will not create an unreasonable infringement of the Subject Tree owner's privacy that could not be mitigated; 
5.  The extent to which the Subject Tree interferes with efficient operation of an Applicant's pre-existing solar energy systems; 
6.  The extent to which the Subject Tree causes shadows or reduces air circulation and/or light; 
7.  The extent to which the Applicant's Scenic Views and/or Sunlight has been diminished over time by factors other than Subject Tree growth; 
8.  The variety of Subject Tree, its projected rate of growth and maintenance requirements; 
9.  The aesthetic quality of the Subject Tree, including but not limited to species characteristics, size, growth, form and vigor; 
10.  The extent to which the location of the Subject Tree with respect to overall appearance, design, or use benefits the Subject Tree owner's property; 
11.  The extent to which soil stability is provided by the Subject Tree, considering soil structure, degree of slope and extent of the Subject Tree's root system per a report from a licensed soils engineer (if applicable); 
12.  The extent to which privacy (visual and auditory) and wind screening is provided by the Subject Tree to the owner and to neighbors; 
13.  The extent to which energy conservation and/or climate control is provided by the Subject Tree; 
14.  The extent to which wildlife habitat is provided by the Subject Tree; 
15.  Whether the Subject Tree is a "Protected Tree", as defined herein and in Chapter 23.50 (Trees); 
16.  The value of the Subject Tree to the community/neighborhood; and 
17.  Whether the Subject Tree is located on public right-of-way or City-owned property. 
(Ord. No. 780)  
23.51.060 - Criteria for Determining Appropriate Restorative Action. 
After it has been determined, through the hearing process, that unreasonable obstruction has occurred, then the following unweighted factors shall be considered in determining appropriate Restorative Action: 
A.  Any hazards posed by the Subject Tree to persons or structures on the property of the Applicant including, but not limited to, fire danger, as determined by a City Fire Official, and the danger of falling limbs or Trees, as determined by a Certified Arborist; 
B.  The variety of Subject Tree, its projected rate of growth and maintenance requirements; 
C.  The aesthetic quality of the Subject Tree, including but not limited to species characteristics, size, growth, form and vigor; 
D.  The location of the Subject Tree with respect to overall appearance, design, or use of the Subject Tree owner's property; 
E.  Soil stability provided by the Subject Tree considering soil structure, degree of slope and extent of the Subject Tree's root system per a report from a licensed soils engineer; 
F.  Privacy (visual and auditory) and wind screening provided by the Subject Tree to the owner and to neighbors; 
G.  Energy conservation and or climate control provided by the Subject Tree; 
H.  Wildlife habitat provided by the Subject Tree; 
I.  Whether the Subject Tree is a "Protected Tree", as defined herein and in Chapter 23.50 (Trees); 
J.  The value of the Subject Tree to the community/neighborhood; and 
K.  Whether the Subject Tree is located on public right-of-way or City-owned property.  
23.51.070 - Hierarchy of Restorative Actions. 
A.  Restorative Action may include additional written conditions (including ongoing maintenance), and directions as to appropriate timing of such actions, and may be made to run with the land and apply to successors in interest. Where removal is required, replacement by appropriate species should be considered, but may not always be required. 
B.  View and/or Sunlight Restorative Actions must be consistent with all other provisions of this Chapter. In cases where Trimming, Windowing, or other Restorative Action may affect the health of a Tree which is to be preserved, such actions should be carried out in accordance with standards established by the International Society of Arboriculture for use in the State of California. Severe pruning should be avoided due to the damage such practice causes a Tree's form and health. Restorative Actions may include, but are not limited to the following, in order of preference: 
1.  Lacing. Lacing is the most preferred pruning technique that removes excess foliage and can improve the structure of the Tree. 
2.  Windowing. Windowing may be utilized where possible, if it does not adversely affect the Tree's growth pattern or health. Topping should not be done to accomplish windowing. 
3.  Crown reduction/shaping. Crown reduction/shaping is preferable to topping or Tree removal, if it is determined that the impact of crown reduction does not destroy the visual proportions of the Tree, adversely affect the Tree's growth pattern or health, or otherwise constitute a detriment to the Tree in question. 
4.  Heading back. Heading back is only to be permitted for Trees specifically planted and maintained as a hedge, espalier, bonsai or in pollard form and if Restorative Actions 1 through 3 of this Section will not accomplish the determined restoration and the subsequent growth characteristics will not create a future obstruction of greater proportions. 
5.  Tree Removal. Tree removal may be considered when the above-mentioned Restorative Actions are judged to be ineffective and may be accompanied by replacement plantings of appropriate plant materials to restore the maximum level of benefits lost due to Tree removal. The City of Del Mar has designated certain Trees as "Protected Trees". Any alteration or removal of Protected Trees will require a permit from the City's Planning Director pursuant to DMMC Chapter 23.50. 
6.  Stand Thinning. The removal of a portion of the total number of Trees from a grove of Trees, without any replacement plantings.  
23.51.080 - Restorative Work and Allocation of Costs. 
When the Planning Commission has rendered a decision in favor of the Applicant, the following procedures shall be enacted: 
A.  1.  The Subject Tree owner shall submit to the Applicant and the City two itemized estimates for carrying out the Restorative Work required by the Resolution. The estimates shall be supplied by licensed landscape or licensed Tree service contractors, under the supervision of a Certified Arborist, acceptable to the City, within 30 days after the adoption of the Resolution. 
2.  Within 15 days of receiving the cost estimates, the Applicant shall deposit with the City an amount equal to the lower cost estimate. Failure of the Applicant to make the required deposit within 15 days will render the resolution of approval null and void. After the required deposit is received by the City, the Subject Tree owner will then, at her/his sole discretion, choose the company by which she/he wishes the work done, as found acceptable to the City, and shall order the work done within 30 days after receiving the Applicant's deposit or such other period of time as the Planning Commission may determine to be reasonable and appropriate. If the Subject Tree owner does not have the work completed within the time period indicated by the Planning Commission or within 30 days, the City will order the work completed and charge the Subject Tree owner with any costs incurred above the estimate selected. 
3.  Upon completion of the work, the Subject Tree owner shall notify the City and shall submit a copy of an invoice showing that the work was performed. Upon submittal of the invoice and verification by City staff of the compliance, the City shall transmit the funds from the City deposit account to the Subject Tree owner. If the paid invoice submitted by the Subject Tree owner is for an amount less than the funds in the City's trust account, the Subject Tree owner shall only be transmitted an amount equal to the actual cost of the trimming. In such situations, the balance of the trust account shall be refunded back to the Applicant or applied to the Applicant's permit processing account, if that account contains a negative balance. If the paid invoice submitted by the Subject Tree owner is for an amount that exceeds the funds in the City's trust account, the Subject Tree owner shall only receive the funds from the City trust account, and the Subject Tree owner shall be responsible for paying the difference. If a Subject Tree owner chooses to do the required work himself/herself, then the Subject Tree owner shall not be compensated from the City trust account and the amount in the trust account shall be refunded to the Applicant(s). 
B.  In the event that the Planning Commission or Council makes the determination that the Subject Tree constitutes a hazard to the safety of the Applicant or his/her property, and is being maintained by the Subject Tree owner in disregard for the safety of others, the Subject Tree owner shall: 
1.  Cause appropriate corrective work to be performed within 30 days; 
2.  Pay all costs for work performed; and 
3.  Deposit with the City an amount equal to that expended by the Applicant as required by Subsection 23.51.040.B.2. of this Chapter and the fees shall be refunded to the Applicant. 
(Ord. No. 780)  
23.51.090 - Ongoing Maintenance. 
If ongoing maintenance is required as a condition of the Planning Commission's approval in favor of the Applicant, said maintenance work shall be performed according to the time schedule (annually, bi-annually, etc.) established by the Planning Commission. On each occasion that scheduled maintenance is to occur, the procedures indicated in Section 23.51.080 shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 780)  
23.51.100 - Appeal. 
The decision of the Planning Commission may be appealed to the City Council pursuant to this Code. The provisions of Section 1094.6 of the California Code of Civil Procedure are applicable to judicial review of the City of Del Mar's decisions pursuant to this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 780)  
23.51.110 - Enforcement. 
The Subject Tree owner shall comply with any work prescribed by the Planning Commission or Council no later than 90 days after final action on the Application, unless, it is determined that it is less harmful to the Subject Tree for the work to occur at a specific time of the year, in which case, the work shall be performed no later than 90 days from a date set by the Planning Commission or Council. Thereafter, the continued maintenance (if required by Resolution) of the Subject Tree that is not in compliance with the final order prescribed by the Planning Commission or Council shall constitute a misdemeanor or infraction, punishable in accordance with the provisions of DMMC Chapter 1.08 and is declared a public nuisance which may be enjoined or abated as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 780)  
23.51.120 - Limitations. 
A.  It is not the intent of the City in adopting this Chapter to affect obligations imposed by an existing easement or a valid pre-existing covenant or agreement. 
B.  Nothing in the Chapter shall deny private parties the right to seek remedial action for imminent danger caused by Trees.  
Chapter 23.54 - UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICTS 
 
23.54.010 - Definitions. 
Whenever in this Chapter the words or phrases hereinafter in the Section defined are used, they shall have the respective meanings assigned to them in the following definitions: 
Commission means the Public Utilities Commission of the State of California. 
Person means individuals, firms, corporations, partnerships, and their agents and employees. 
Poles, Overhead Wires and Associated Overhead Structures means poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, cables, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments and appurtenances located above ground within a district and used or useful in supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service. 
Underground Utility District or District means an area in the City described in a resolution adopted pursuant to the provision of Section 23.54.030 of this Chapter, within which poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures are prohibited. 
Utility means all persons or entities supplying electric, communication, community antenna television or similar or associated service. 
(Ord. No. 62; Ord. No. 272; Ord. No. 430)  
23.54.020 - Public Hearing by Council. 
The Council may, from time to time, call public hearings to ascertain whether the public health, safety or welfare requires the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures within designated areas of the City and the underground installation of wires and facilities for supply electric, communication, community antenna television, or similar or associated service. The City Clerk shall notify all affected property owners, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and utilities concerned, by mail of the time and place of such hearings at least ten days prior to the date thereof. Each such hearing shall be open to the public and may be continued from time to time. At each such hearing all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard.  
23.54.030 - Council May Designate Underground Utility Districts by Resolution. 
If, after the public hearing, the Council finds that the public health, safety or general welfare requires removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures, and underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric, communication, community antenna television or similar or associated service within a designated area, the Council shall, by resolution, declare all or any portion of the designated area an underground utility district and order the removal and underground installation. The decision of the Council shall be final and conclusive. Immediately following its adoption, the City Clerk shall cause a certified copy of the resolution to be recorded in the office of the County Recorder. The resolution shall include a description and map of the area comprising the district. It shall also provide that the Council shall, by subsequent resolution, fix the time within which: 
A.  Property in the district must be ready to receive underground service, and 
B.  Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures shall be removed. 
A reasonable time shall be allowed for removal and underground installation, having due regard for the availability of labor, materials, and equipment necessary for such removal and for the installation of such underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby.  
23.54.040 - Unlawful Acts. 
Whenever the Council creates an underground utility district and orders the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures therein as provided in Section 23.54.030 hereof, it shall be unlawful for any person or utility to erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures in the district after the date when said overhead facilities are required to be removed by such resolution, except as said overhead facilities may be required to furnish service to an owner or occupant of property prior to the performance by such owner or occupant of the underground work necessary for such owner or occupant to continue to receive utility service as provided in Section 23.54.090 hereof, and for such reasonable time required to remove said facilities after said work has been performed and except as otherwise provided in this Chapter.  
23.54.050 - Exception, Emergency or Unusual Circumstances. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of this Chapter, overhead facilities may be installed and maintained for a period, not to exceed ten days, without authority of the Council in order to provide emergency service. The Council may grant special permission, on such terms as the Council may deem appropriate, in cases of unusual circumstances, without discrimination as to any person or utility, to erect, construct, install, maintain, use or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures.  
23.54.060 - Other Exceptions. 
This Chapter and any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 23.54.030 hereof, unless otherwise provided in such resolution, shall not apply to the following types of facilities: 
A.  Any municipal facility or equipment installed under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the City Engineer. 
B.  Poles and associated overhead structures used exclusively for street lighting or signalization. 
C.  Overhead wires which originate on a pole outside the boundaries of a district and terminate at a point of service on a building within the district. 
D.  Overhead wires, either existing or new, which cross any portion of a district but are suspended from poles, structures or towers located outside the district. 
E.  Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the building to another location of the same building or to an adjacent building without crossing any public street. 
F.  Antenna, associated equipment and supporting structures used by a utility for furnishing communication services. 
G.  Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface mounted transformers, pedestal mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts. 
H.  Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects. 
I.  Stub poles, anchors and guy wires originating in the district but used to support poles outside district.  
23.54.070 - Notification of Affected Persons and Utilities. 
A.  Within ten days after the effective date of a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 23.54.030 hereof, the City Clerk shall notify all affected utility companies and all affected property owners of the provisions of the resolution. The City Clerk specifically shall notify the affected persons that, if they desire to continue to receive electric, communication, community antenna television or similar or associated service, they shall provide, at their own expense, all facility changes on their premises necessary to receive underground service from the lines relocated underground of the supplying utility company subject to applicable rules, regulations, and tariffs of the respective utility company on file with the commission and to all other applicable requirements of State laws and City ordinances. 
B.  Within 15 days of adoption by the Council of the resolution fixing the time within which conversions on private property and pole removal must be accomplished, the City Clerk shall further notify all affected utilities and affected persons that the work required to change the facilities on the premises so as to receive electric, communication, or community antenna television or similar or associated service provided or to be provided by the utility company shall be accomplished on or before the applicable date set forth in the resolution. This notice shall also state the date all poles and related overhead structures are to be removed from within the district. 
C.  Notification by the City Clerk shall be made by mailing a copy of the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 23.54.030, together with a copy of this Chapter, to affected property owners as such are shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the affected utilities.  
23.54.080 - Responsibility of Utility Companies. 
If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within a district created by any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 23.54.030 hereof, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits, conductors and associated equipment required to be furnished by it under its applicable rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the commission.  
23.54.090 - Responsibility of Property Owner. 
Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting a building or structure within a district shall perform construction and provide that portion of the service connection on his property between the facilities referred to in Section 23.54.080, and the termination facility on or within said building or structure being served, all in accordance with applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the commission and in accordance with applicable requirements of State laws and City ordinances.  
23.54.100 - Responsibility of Property Owner—Enforcement. 
In the event any person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting said property does not comply with the provisions of Section 23.54.090 within the time provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant to the provisions of Section 23.54.030 hereof, the City Engineer shall post written notice on the property being served and 30 days thereafter shall have the authority to order the disconnecting and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to said property.  
23.54.110 - Responsibility of Property Owner; Enforcement; Council Hearing. 
If the requirements of Section 23.54.090 are not accomplished in accordance with said provisions and within the time provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 23.54.030 hereof, the City Engineer may determine that the method of enforcement provided in Section 23.54.100 hereof is not an efficient or effective method of enforcement, and may pursue the following procedure for enforcement of the responsibility of property owners set forth in Section 23.54.090. 
A.  The City Engineer shall give notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises, and a notice in writing to the owner thereof as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, to provide the required underground facilities within ten days after receipt of such notice. 
B.  The notice to provide the required underground facilities may be given either by personal service or by mail. In case of service by mail of either of such persons, the notice must be deposited in the United States mail in a sealed envelope with postage prepaid, addressed to the person in possession of such premises at such premises, and the notice must be addressed to the owner thereof as such owner's name appears, and must be addressed to such owner's last known address as the same appears on the last equalized assessment; and when no address appears, to General delivery, City of Del Mar. If notice is given by mail, such notice shall be deemed to have been received by the person to whom it has been sent within 48 hours after the mailing thereof. If notice is given by mail to either the owner or occupant of such premises, the City Engineer shall, within 48 hours after the mailing thereof, cause a copy thereof, printed on a card not less than eight inches by ten inches in size, to be posted in a conspicuous place on said premises. 
C.  The notice given by the City Engineer to provide the required underground facilities shall particularly specify what work is required to be done, and shall state that if said work is not completed within 30 days after receipt of such notice, the City Engineer will provide such required underground facilities, in which case the cost and expense thereof, including engineering, legal, advertising and all incidental expenses, will be assessed against the property benefited and become a lien upon such property. 
D.  If, upon the expiration of the 30-day period, the said required underground facilities have not been provided, the City Engineer shall forthwith proceed to do the work, provided, however, if such premises are unoccupied and no electric or communication services are being furnished thereto, the City Engineer shall, in lieu of providing the required underground facilities, have the authority to order the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to said property. Upon completion of the work by the City Engineer, he shall file a written report with the City Council, setting forth the fact that the required underground facilities have been provided and the cost thereof together with a legal description of the property against which such cost is to be assessed. The Council shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing protests against the assessment of the cost of such work upon such premises, which said time shall not be less than ten days thereafter. 
E.  The City Engineer shall forthwith, upon the time for hearing such protests having been fixed, give a notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises and a notice in writing to the owner thereof, in the manner hereinabove provided for the giving of the notice to provide the required underground facilities, of the time and place that the Council will pass upon such report and will hear protests against such assessment. Such notice shall also set forth the amount of the proposed assessment. 
F.  Upon the date and hour set for the hearing of protests, the Council shall hear and consider the report and all protests, if there are any, and then proceed to affirm, modify or reject the assessment. 
G.  If any assessment is not paid within five days after its confirmation by the Council, the amount of the assessment shall become a lien upon the property against which the assessment is made by the City Engineer, and said City Engineer shall turn over to the assessor and tax collector a notice of lien on each of said properties on which the assessment has not been paid, and said assessor and tax collector shall add the amount of said assessment to the next regular bill for taxes levied against the premises upon which said assessment was not paid. Said assessment shall be due and payable at the same time as said property taxes are due and payable, and if not paid when due and payable, shall bear interest at the rate of eight percent per annum.  
23.54.120 - Responsibility of City. 
City shall remove at its own expense all City-owned equipment from all poles required to be removed hereunder, in ample time to enable the owner or user of such poles to remove the same within the time specified in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 23.54.030.  
23.54.130 - Extension of Time. 
In the event that any act required by this Chapter or by a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 23.54.030 hereof cannot be performed within the time provided on account of short-age of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, civil disobedience, or any other circumstances beyond the control of the act, then the time within which such act will be accomplished shall be extended for a period equivalent to the time of such limitation.  
23.54.140 - Penalty. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this Chapter. Any person violating any provision of this Chapter or failing to comply with any of its requirements shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00 or by imprisonment not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each day during any portion of which any violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person, and shall be punishable therefore as provided for in this Chapter.  
Chapter 23.60 - WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPES 
 
23.60.010 - Title. 
This Chapter shall be known as the "City of Del Mar Water Efficient Landscapes Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 842; Ord. No. 911)  
23.60.020 - Purpose. 
A.  It is the established policy of the City of Del Mar that all public and private users of water within the City shall use such water for reasonable purposes and in a reasonable and conscientious effort to conserve water. 
B.  Consistent with this established City Policy, and with the legislative findings of the State and pursuant to Government Code §§ 65596 et seq., the purpose of this Chapter is to: 
1.  Promote water conservation as a standard requirement of development within the City of Del Mar; 
2.  Promote the values and benefits of landscapes while recognizing the need to invest water and other resources as efficiently as possible; 
3.  Establish a structure for planning, designing, installing, maintaining and managing water efficient landscapes in new construction and rehabilitated projects; 
4.  Establish provisions for water management practices and water waste prevention for existing landscapes; 
5.  Use water efficiently without waste by setting a Maximum Applied Water Allowance as an upper limit for water use and reducing water use to the lowest practical amount; 
6.  Promote the benefits of consistent landscape ordinances with neighboring local and regional agencies; and 
7.  Encourage the use of regional economic incentives that promote the efficient use of water. 
C.  To the degree that the requirements imposed in this Chapter are more stringent than the requirements contained in the State Building Standards Code, the requirements of this Chapter shall prevail and shall be applicable within the City.  
23.60.030 - Definitions. 
Applied Water means the portion of water supplied by the irrigation. system to the landscape. For the purpose of this Chapter, applied water refers to any permanent, or semi-permanent, delivery method utilized in landscapes. 
Authorized Enforcement Staff means any City employee assigned to duties involving permits and other City approvals, inspections, and enforcement related to this Chapter. 
Authorized Enforcement Official means the City Manager or her/his designee. 
Ecological Restoration Project means a project where the site is intentionally altered to establish a defined, indigenous, historic ecosystem. 
Established Landscape means the point at which plants in the landscape have developed significant root growth into the soil. Typically, most plants are established after one or two years of growth. 
ET Adjustment Factor (ETAF) is equal to the plant factor divided by the irrigation efficiency factor for a landscape project, as described in the Guidelines. The ETAF is calculated in the context of local reference evapotranspiration, using site-specific plant factors and irrigation efficiency factors that influence the amount of water that needs to be applied to the specific landscaped area. 
Estimated Total Water Use means the total water used for the landscape as calculated on the Water Efficient Landscape Worksheet in Appendix B. This is based on factors such as reference evapotranspiration rate, the size of the landscaped area, plant water use factors, and the irrigation efficiency within each hydrozone. 
Guidelines refers to the Water Efficient Landscapes: Guidelines for Implementation of the Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance, as adopted by the City, which describes procedures, calculations, and requirements for landscape projects subject to this Chapter. The Guidelines shall be amended as necessary by the City Manager or designee pursuant to Subsection 23.60.040.B. of this Chapter. 
Hardscapes means any durable material or feature (pervious and non-pervious) installed in or around a landscaped area, such as pavements, walls, or artificial turf or similar materials. Pools and other water features are considered part of the landscaped area and not considered hardscape for purposes of this Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance. 
Hydrozone means a portion of the landscaped area having plants with similar water needs. A hydrozone may be irrigated or non-irrigated. 
Irrigation Audit means an in-depth evaluation of the performance of an irrigation system conducted by a Certified Landscape Irrigation Auditor. An irrigation audit includes, but is not limited to: inspection, system tune-up, system test with distribution uniformity or emission uniformity, reporting overspray or runoff that causes overland flow, and preparation and implementation of an irrigation schedule. 
Irrigation Efficiency means the measurement of the amount of water beneficially used divided by the amount of water applied. Irrigation efficiency is derived from measurements and estimates of irrigation system characteristics and management practices. The minimum average irrigation efficiency for purposes of this Water Efficient Landscape Chapter is 0.75. Greater irrigation efficiency can be expected from well designed and maintained systems. 
Infiltration Rate means the rate of water entry into the soil expressed as a depth of water per unit of time (e.g., inches per hour). 
Landscaped area means all the planting areas, turf areas, and water features in a landscape design plan subject to the Maximum Applied Water Allowance and Estimated Total Water Use calculations. The landscaped area does not include footprints of buildings or structures, sidewalks, driveways, parking lots, decks, patios, gravel or stone walks, other pervious or non-pervious hardscape, and other non-irrigated areas designated for non-development (e.g., open spaces and existing native vegetation). 
Landscape Documentation Package means the documents required to be provided to the City for review and approval of landscape design projects, as described in the Guidelines. 
Landscape Project means total area of landscape in a project, as provided in the definition of landscaped area, meeting the applicability requirements of this Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance. 
Low Impact Development (LID) means a storm water management and land development strategy that emphasizes conservation and the use of on-site natural features integrated with engineered, small-scale hydrologic controls to more closely reflect pre-development hydrologic functions. Any LID requirements must be consistent with the requirements and limitations of Chapter 11.30 of the Del Mar Municipal Code and the City's Jurisdictional Urban Runoff Management Program. 
Maximum Applied Water Allowance (MAWA) means the upper limit of annual applied water for the established landscaped area as specified in Section 2.1.2 of the Guidelines. It is based upon the area's reference evapotranspiration, the ET Adjustment Factor, and the size of the landscaped area. The Estimated Total Water Use shall not exceed the Maximum Applied Water Allowance. 
New Construction means, for the purposes of this Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance, a new building with a landscaped area or other new landscape project such as a park, playground, or greenbelt without an associated building. "New Construction" includes substantial remodels of existing structures of more than 50 percent valuation. 
Non-pervious means any surface or natural material that does not allow for the passage of water through the material and into the underlying soil. 
Overspray means the irrigation water which is delivered beyond the target area. 
Pervious means any surface or material that allows the passage of water through the material and into the underlying soil. 
Plant Factor or Plant Water Use Factor is a factor, when multiplied by ETo, estimates the amount of water needed by plants. For purposes of this Chapter, the plant factor range for very low water use plants is 0 to 0.1, the plant factor range for low water use plants is 0.1 to 0.3, the plant factor range for moderate water use plants is 0.4 to 0.6, and the plant factor range for high water use plants is 0.7 to 1.0. Plant factors cited in this Chapter are derived from the Department of Water Resources 2000 publication "Water Use Classification of Landscape Species". Plant factors may also be obtained from horticultural researchers from academic institutions or professional associations as approved by the California Department of Water Resources (DWR). 
Reference Evapotranspiration (ETo) means a standard measurement of environmental parameters which affect the water use of plants. ETo is given expressed in inches per day, month, or year as represented in the Guidelines, and is an estimate of the evapotranspiration of a large field of four- to seven-inch tall, cool-season grass that is well watered. Reference evapotranspiration is used as the basis of determining the Maximum Applied Water Allowances. 
Rehabilitated Landscape means any re-landscaping project that requires a permit, plan check, or design review, meets the applicability criteria of this Chapter, where the modified landscape area is equal or greater than 2,500 square feet. 
Recycled Water or Reclaimed Water means treated or recycled waste water of a quality suitable for non-potable uses such as landscape irrigation and water features. This water is not intended for human consumption. 
Runoff means water which is not absorbed by the soil or landscape to which it is applied and flows from the landscape area. For example, runoff may result from water that is applied at too great a rate (application rate exceeds infiltration rate) or when there is a slope. Runoff from landscaped areas is subject to requirements and limitations of Chapter 11.30 of the Del Mar Municipal Code. 
Special Landscape Area means an area of the landscape dedicated solely to edible plants such as orchards and vegetable gardens, areas irrigated with recycled water, water features using recycled water, and areas dedicated to active play such as parks, sports fields, and where natural turf provides a playing surface. 
Turf means a ground cover surface of mowed grass, including but not limited to: annual bluegrass, Kentucky bluegrass, Perennial ryegrass, Red fescue, Tall fescue, Bermuda grass, Kikuyu grass, Seashore Paspalum, St. Augustine grass, Zoysia grass, Buffalo grass, as well as hybrid and mixed varietals. 
Water Feature means a design element where open water performs an aesthetic or recreational function. Water features include ponds, lakes, waterfalls, fountains, artificial streams, spas, and swimming pools (where water is artificially supplied). The surface area of water features is included in the high water use hydrozone of the landscaped area. Constructed wetlands used for on-site wastewater treatment, habitat protection or storm water best management practices that are not irrigated and used solely for water treatment or storm water retention are not water features and, therefore, are not subject to the water budget calculation. 
WUCOLS means the Water Use Classification of Landscape Species published as "A Guide to Estimating Irrigation Water Needs of Landscape Plantings in California" by the University of California Cooperative Extension, the Department of Water Resources, and the Bureau of Reclamation, 2000. www.water.ca.gov/wateruseefficiency/docs/wucols00.pdf  
23.60.040 - General Provisions. 
A.  Delegation of Authority. The City of Del Mar may designate another agency to implement some or all of the requirements contained in this Chapter. 
B.  Guidelines for Implementation. The City shall adopt guidelines for implementation of the Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance, which describe procedures, calculations, and requirements for landscape projects subject to this Chapter. The Guidelines shall be amended from time to time by the City Manager or designee. 
C.  Severability and Validity. If any section of this Chapter is declared invalid by a court of law, the remaining sections shall remain valid.  
23.60.050 - Applicability. 
A.  This Chapter shall apply to all of the following landscape projects: 
1.  New landscape installation projects with a project landscaped area, including pools or other water features but excluding hardscape, equal to or greater than 500 square feet, and which require a building permit, plan check, or design review; 
2.  Landscape rehabilitation projects with a landscape area, including pools or other water features but excluding hardscape, equal to or greater than 2,500 square feet requiring a building permit, plan check, or design review permit; 
3.  Cemeteries. Recognizing the special landscape management needs of cemeteries, in the event that a new cemetery is proposed within the City limits, requirements shall be limited to the provisions for education, water use analysis and landscape maintenance as outlined in this Chapter and the Guidelines; 
4.  For projects using treated or untreated graywater, recycled water or rainwater captured on site, any lot or parcel within the project that has less than 2,500 square feet of landscape and meets the lot or parcel's landscape water requirement (Estimated Total Water Use) entirely with treated or untreated graywater, recycled water or through stored rainwater captured on site is subject only to Appendix D of the Guidelines—Prescriptive Compliance Option; 
B.  Existing landscapes limited to specific provisions for Existing Landscapes, including irrigation audits, water use analyses, and water waste prevention requirements only, as outlined in the Guidelines and/or this Chapter. 
C.  Landscape Rehabilitation Projects. 
1.  To be subject to the requirements of this Chapter, the modified landscaped area in a Landscape Rehabilitation Project must be greater than 2,500 square feet and represents at least 50 percent of the total landscaped area. 
2.  The requirements of this Chapter may be partially or wholly waived, at the discretion of the City Manager or his/her designee, for landscape rehabilitation projects that are limited to replacement plantings with equal or lower water needs and where the irrigation system is found to be designed, operable and programmed consistent with minimizing water waste in accordance with local regulations. 
D.  This Chapter does not apply to: 
1.  Registered local, State or Federal historical sites; 
2.  Ecological restoration projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system; 
3.  Mined-land reclamation projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system; or 
4.  Plant collections, as part of botanical gardens and arboretums open to the public.  
23.60.060 - Public Education and Outreach. 
A.  Education is a critical component to promote the efficient use of water in landscapes. The use of appropriate principles of design, installation, management and maintenance that save water is encouraged in the community. 
B.  The City of Del Mar shall provide information to the public regarding the design, installation, management, and maintenance of water efficient landscapes including, but not limited to the Guidelines, and work with other local agencies in promoting water saving practices.  
23.60.070 - Implementation Procedures. 
A.  Prior to installation, a Landscape Documentation Package, as set forth in the Guidelines, shall be submitted to the City for review and approval of all landscape projects subject to the provisions of this Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance. Any Landscape Documentation Package submitted to the City shall comply with the provisions set forth in the Guidelines. 
B.  The Landscape Documentation Package shall include a certification by a landscape design professional appropriately licensed in the State of California stating that the landscape design and water use calculations have been prepared by or under the supervision of the licensed professional and are certified to be in compliance with the provisions of this Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance and the Guidelines. 
1.  Landscape and irrigation plans shall be submitted to the City for review and approval with appropriate water use. Water use calculations shall be consistent with the method for calculation set forth in the Guidelines, and shall establish the maximum amount of water to be applied through the irrigation system, based on climate, landscape size, irrigation efficiency, and plant needs. 
2.  All projects shall consider the use of plants that are well-adapted to their particular site and to particular climatic, soil or topographic conditions. In particular, projects shall consider the use of water conserving plants, especially native varietals. 
3.  Landscaping plans shall provide for designs which minimize runoff, prevent excessive erosion, and include the use of mulches in shrub areas, garden beds, and landscaped areas where appropriate and feasible. 
4.  All Landscape Documentation Packages submitted to the City shall include provisions for landscape maintenance practices that foster long-term landscape water conservation. Landscape maintenance practices may include, but are not limited to, performing routine irrigation system repair and adjustments, conducting water audits, and prescribing the amount of water applied per landscaped acre. 
C.  Verification of compliance of the landscape installation with the approved plans shall be obtained through a Certification of Completion in conjunction with a Certificate of Use and Occupancy or other permit final process, as provided in the Guidelines.  
23.60.080 - Landscape Water Use Standards. 
A.  Consistent with the requirements of the City's Stormwater Management and Discharge Control Ordinance and the City's Jurisdictional Urban Runoff Management Program, projects shall utilize low impact design (LID) methods where feasible, to capture and use stormwater onsite and improve water use efficiency. 
B.  Projects submitted shall include irrigation schedules based on climatic conditions, specific terrains and soil types, and other environmental conditions, and when feasible use automatic irrigation systems equipped with moisture sensors. All irrigation devices shall be required to meet local, State, and Federal laws and regulations regarding standards for water-conserving irrigation equipment. 
C.  Water waste resulting from inefficient landscape irrigation existing as runoff leaving the target landscape due to low head drainage, overspray, or other similar conditions where water flows onto adjacent property, non-irrigated areas, walks, roadways, parking lots, or structures is prohibited, and may be subject to enforcement pursuant to Del Mar Municipal Code Chapter 11.30 (Stormwater Management and Discharge Control). 
D.  Overspray may be allowed under the following circumstances: 
1.  All reasonable attempts to minimize overspray have been implemented; and 
2.  The landscape area is adjacent to permeable surfacing and no runoff occurs; or 
3.  The adjacent non-permeable surfaces are designed and constructed to drain entirely to landscaping. 
E.  Where available, and feasible, a recycled water system meeting all public health code standards shall be utilized for decorative water features and irrigation systems. 
1.  All recycled water irrigation systems shall be designed and operated in accordance with all applicable local and State laws; and 
2.  Landscapes using recycled water shall be considered "Special Landscape Areas" in any Landscape Documentation Package components. 
3.  A written exemption from this requirement may be granted by the City, or its designee. Such written exemption must state that recycled water meeting all public health codes and standards is not available and will not be available for the foreseeable future to the project site. 
F.  Landscape Documentation Packages for projects in Urban/Wildland Interface Areas shall address fire safety and prevention consistent with the requirements of Del Mar Municipal Code Section 10.04.175. All projects shall include defensible space or zones around a building or structure consistent with Public Resources Code § 4291(a) and (b), and shall be required to avoid fire-prone plant materials and highly flammable mulches.  
23.60.090 - Penalties. 
A.  Concealment, Misrepresentation and False Statements. Any falsification or misrepresentation made to the City concerning compliance with this Chapter, including any misrepresentation in a voluntary disclosure, any submission of a report that omits required material facts without disclosing such omission, and any withholding of information required to be submitted by or pursuant to this Chapter in order to delay City enforcement action, is a violation of this Chapter. Concealing a violation of the ordinance from which this Section derives is a violation of this Chapter. 
B.  Failure to Promptly Correct Non-compliance. Violations of this Chapter must be corrected with the time period specified by an Authorized Enforcement Official or Authorized Enforcement Staff. Each day (or part thereof) in excess of that period during which action necessary to correct a violation is not initiated and diligently pursued is a separate violation of this Chapter. 
C.  Administrative penalties may be imposed pursuant to Code of Regulatory Ordinances, Division 8, Title 1, Sections 18.101 et seq., hereby adopted by reference. Any later-enacted administrative penalty provision in the County Code shall also be applicable to this Chapter, unless otherwise provided therein. 
D.  Penalties and Remedies Not Exclusive. Penalties and remedies under this Chapter may be cumulative and in addition to other administrative, civil or criminal remedies.  
Chapter 23.70 - CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS RECYCLING 
 
23.70.010 - Definitions. 
A.  Applicant means any individual, firm, limited liability company, association, partnership, political subdivision, government agency, municipality, industry, public or private for profit or nonprofit corporation, or any other entity whatsoever who applies to the City for the applicable permits to undertake any construction, demolition, or renovation project within the City. 
B.  Construction means the building of any improvement or any portion thereof including any tenant improvements to an existing facility or structure. 
C.  Construction and Demolition Debris ("C&D Debris") means used or discarded materials removed from premises during construction or renovation of a structure resulting from construction, remodeling, repair, deconstruction, or demolition operations on any pavement, house, garage, greenwaste, commercial building, or other structure. 
D.  Conversion rate means the rate set forth in the standardized conversion rate table approved by the city pursuant to this chapter for use in estimating the volume or weight of materials identified in a waste management plan. 
E.  Deconstruction means the process of carefully dismantling a building or structure in order to salvage components for reuse and recycling. 
F.  Demolition means the decimating, razing, ruining, tearing down or wrecking of any facility, structure, pavement or building, whether in whole or in part, whether interior or exterior. 
G.  Divert means to use construction or demolition debris for any purpose other than disposal in a landfill or transformation facility. 
H.  Emergency: A sudden, unexpected occurrence demanding immediate action to prevent or mitigate loss of or damage to life, health, property or public services. 
I.  Project means any activity which requires an application for a building or demolition permit or any similar permit from the City. 
J.  Recycling means the process of collecting, sorting, cleansing, treating, and reconstituting materials that would otherwise become solid waste, and returning them to the economic mainstream in the form of raw material for new, reused, or reconstituted products which meet the quality standards necessary to be used in the marketplace. 
K.  Remodel means any change, addition, or modification in an existing structure. 
M.  Renovation means any change, addition, or modification in an existing structure. 
N.  Reuse means the use, in the same form as it was produced, of a material which might otherwise be discarded. 
O.  Salvage means the controlled removal of construction or demolition debris from a permitted building or demolition site for the purpose of recycling, reuse, or storage for later recycling or reuse. 
P.  WMP review fee means the fee for processing WMP applications as adopted by the City Council by resolution, if any. 
Q.  WMP report means the final calculation of construction and demolition debris diversion for the project as described in DMMC 23.70.050. 
(Ord. No. 950 , § 2, 8-5-2019)  
23.70.020 - Construction and demolition debris diversion requirements. 
Owners and builders generating any construction and demolition debris on a project (residential or commercial) must comply with the minimum requirements regarding recycling or reuse for salvage set forth in the California Green Building Standards Code as adopted by Section 23.12 of the Del Mar Municipal Code, Tier I requirements for commercial projects, any applicable state law requirements, and the requirements of this Section. Failure to comply with any of the terms of this Chapter shall subject the project applicant to the full range of penalty and enforcement mechanisms of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 950 , § 3, 8-5-2019)  
23.70.030 - Submission of Waste Management Plan. 
A.  Waste Management Plan (WMP) Forms. Applicants for a Building Permit plan check shall complete and submit a Waste Management Plan on a City-approved form and pay a WMP review fee, if any, before a building or demolition permit may be issued. The completed WMP shall indicate all of the following: 
1.  Estimated weight of C&D debris, by materials type, to be generated; 
2.  Maximum weight of such materials that can feasibly be diverted via reuse or recycling; 
3.  Vendor or facility that the applicant proposes to use to collect or receive that material; 
4.  Estimated weight of C&D materials that will be landfilled; and 
5.  Total square footage of the project. 
6.  Indicates that the minimum required percentage set forth in DMMC 23.70.020 of all C&D debris generated by the project will be diverted. 
B.  Calculating Weight of Debris. In estimating the weight of materials identified in the WMP, the applicant shall use the standardized conversion rates approved by the City. 
C.  Deconstruction. In preparing the WMP, applicants for a building permit plan check involving the removal of all or part of an existing structure shall consider deconstruction, to the maximum extent feasible, and shall make the materials generated thereby available for salvage prior to sending to a landfill. 
(Ord. No. 950 , § 4, 8-5-2019)  
23.70.040 - Review of Waste Management Plan. 
A.  Approval. Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, no Building Permit shall be issued unless the WMP has been approved. Approval shall not be required, however, where an emergency demolition, as determined by the Planning and Community Development Director, is required to protect public health or safety. The WMP shall not be approved unless it provides all of the information set forth in DMMC 23.70.030. 
B.  Non-approval. If the WMP is incomplete or fails to indicate that the minimum required percentage set forth in DMMC 23.70.020 of all C&D debris generated by the project will be diverted, the WMP shall be returned to the applicant marked "Denied," including a statement of reasons, and so notify the Community Development Department, which shall withhold permit issuance until the WMP is resubmitted and approved. 
(Ord. No. 950 , § 5, 8-5-2019)  
23.70.050 - Compliance with Waste Management Plan. 
A.  Documentation. Prior to final inspection, the applicant shall submit documentation to the Building Official that the diversion requirement for the project has been met. If the applicant does not submit the required documentation, the applicant may be subject to enforcement action pursuant to DMMC 23.70.070. The documentation for compliance shall include the following: 
1.  Copies of receipts from the vendor or facility that collected or received each material, showing the actual weight of that material. 
2.  A copy of the approved WMP for the project adding the actual weight of each material diverted and landfilled. 
B.  Weighing of Wastes. Applicants shall make reasonable efforts to ensure that all C&D debris diverted or landfilled is measured and recorded using the most accurate method of measurement available. To the extent practical, all C&D debris shall be weighed by measurement on scales. Such scales shall be in compliance with all regulatory requirements for accuracy and maintenance. For C&D debris for which weighing is not practical due to small size or other considerations, a volumetric measurement shall be used. For conversion of volumetric measurements to weight, the applicant shall use the standardized conversion rates. 
C.  Determination of Compliance. 
1.  Full Compliance. If the applicant has fully complied with the diversion requirement for the project, the final WMP report shall be approved. 
2.  Good Faith Effort to Comply. On a very limited basis, if the diversion requirement has not been achieved, the Planning and Community Development Director shall determine on a case-by-case basis whether the applicant has made a good faith effort to comply considering the following: 
a.  The availability of markets for the C&D debris landfilled; 
b.  The percent of total waste diverted; 
b.  The size of the project; and 
c.  The documented efforts of the applicant to divert C&D debris. 
If the Planning and Community Development Director determines that the applicant has made a good faith effort to comply with this chapter, the Director may approve the final WMP report. 
3.  Noncompliance. If the applicant has been found to have not made a good faith effort to comply with the diversion requirement applicable to the project, or if the applicant fails to submit the documentation required by Subsection A of this Section, then the applicant shall be subject to the enforcement provisions of DMMC 23.70.070. Any penalty assessed must be paid to the City prior to final inspection. 
4.  Noncompliance Notification and Appeal. Upon a determination of noncompliance, the applicant shall be notified of the WMP report findings. The notice shall be in writing and shall identify the specific area(s) of noncompliance with the WMP and inform the applicant that it has a right to a hearing to appeal the determination pursuant to DMMC 1.12. 
(Ord. No. 950 , § 6, 8-5-2019)  
23.70.060 - Exemptions. 
A.  The following project types are exempt from the requirements of this Chapter: 
1.  Projects exempted from the construction waste disposal and recycling requirements of the State Green Building Standards Code, California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 11 (CALGreen Code). The City's Building Department shall maintain an up to date list of exempt project types. 
2.  Emergency demolition projects, if the projects are required to protect public health or safety, as determined by the Planning and Community Development Director in consultation with the City's Building Official. 
B.  Infeasibility Exemption Application. For project types that are not exempt per DMMC 23.70.060 A., if unique circumstances make it infeasible for a project applicant to comply with the diversion requirement, the applicant may apply for an exemption at the time that the applicant submits the required WMP. The applicant shall indicate on the WMP the maximum rate of diversion he or she believes is feasible for each material and the specific unique circumstances that make it infeasible to comply with the diversion requirement. 
C.  Granting of Exemption. The Director of Planning and Community Development shall not issue an infeasibility exemption unless the Director can make at least one of the following findings: 
1.  That circumstances exist that are unique to the project to the effect that compliance with the provisions of this Chapter would create an unusual burden on the project that is different than that of similarly situated properties. 
2.  That for a specific project compliance with this Chapter would result in minimal or no increase in recycled materials or reduction in waste stream. 
3.  That diversion of one or more substances involved in the project presents unique and burdensome obstacles and would create an especially onerous economic burden on the project unless diversion of that substance is reduced or eliminated. 
If one or more of the above findings may be made for a project, the project may be exempted from compliance with this chapter or determine the maximum feasible reduced diversion rate for each material as reported by the applicant and shall indicate this rate on the WMP submitted by the applicant. A copy of the WMP shall be returned to the applicant marked "Approved for Exemption". 
D.  Denial of Exemption. If the Director of Planning and Community Development is unable to make any of the findings required by Subsection C of this Section, the applicant shall be informed in writing. The applicant shall have 30 days to resubmit a WMP form in full compliance with DMMC 23.70.020. If the applicant fails to resubmit the WMP, or if the resubmitted WMP does not comply with DMMC 23.70.030, the Director of Planning and Community Development shall deny the WMP in accordance with DMMC 23.70.030. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, the determination of the WMP compliance officer shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 950 , § 7, 8-5-2019)  
23.70.070 - Enforcement. 
A.  Criminal Action. Any applicant who violates or fails to comply with any provision of this Chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the enforcement provisions of provisions of DMMC 1.08.020. 
B.  Civil Action. The City may redress a violation of, or failure to comply with, any provision of this Chapter pursuant to the provisions of DMMC 1.08.080. 
(Ord. No. 950 , § 8, 8-5-2019)  
TITLE 24 - SUBDIVISIONS  
Chapter 24.01 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
24.01.010 - Citation. 
This Title shall be known as the "Subdivision Ordinance" and may be cited as such, and is adopted to supplement and implement the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. No. 396)  
24.01.020 - Application. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided in this Title, all of the provisions of the Act and this Title shall apply to the creation of subdivisions. 
B.  In applying this Title, the City shall consider the effect of its ordinances and actions on the housing needs of the region, and balance these needs against the public service needs of its residents and available fiscal and environmental resources. (Government Code § 66412.2)  
24.01.030 - Prohibition. 
No person shall create a subdivision except in accordance with provisions of the Act and this Title.  
24.01.040 - Advisory Agency. 
The Planning Commission is hereby designated as the advisory agency and may prescribe, subject to review by the City Council, such additional rules and procedures as are necessary to accomplish their advisory duties.  
24.01.050 - Environmental Impact Review. 
A.  All tentative maps and tentative parcel maps shall be subject to environmental review in accordance with this Code and the rules and procedures adopted by the City Council pursuant to the Environmental Quality Act of 1970. Consequently, decisions to approve, conditionally approve or deny any tentative map or tentative parcel map shall be subject to the following: 
1.  Tentative Maps. 
a.  Negative Declaration. Upon a deter-monition of exemption or receipt of a negative declaration with respect to any tentative map or tentative parcel map, the Planning Commission and the City Council may proceed to consider the map without an environmental impact report. 
b.  Environmental Impact Report. With respect to any tentative map or tentative parcel map for which an environmental impact report is required, the City Council shall consider such report as independent evidence in determining whether to approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the map. 
B.  An application for approval of a subdivision shall not be complete, pursuant to Section 65943 of the Government Code, until after the environmental review for such subdivision has been accomplished.  
24.01.060 - Grading and Erosion Control. 
All subdivisions shall, as a condition of approval, comply with the City standards for erosion and grading control, including prevention of sedimentation or damage to offsite property. (Government Code § 66411)  
24.01.065 - Storm Water Management and Discharge Control. 
To ensure that pollutants and runoff from development subject to the provisions of this Chapter will be reduced to the maximum extent practicable, all subdivisions shall comply with the City standards for Storm Water Management and Discharge Control. 
(Ord. No. 736)  
24.01.070 - Soils Report. 
A.  For every subdivision, a preliminary soils report, prepared by a registered civil engineer and based upon adequate test borings shall be submitted to the building official with respect to the subdivision lots and to the City Engineer with respect to public improvements. (Government Code § 66490) 
B.  A preliminary soils report may be waived by the City providing the City finds that due to the knowledge of the City as to the soils qualities of the soils in the subdivisions, no preliminary analysis is necessary. 
C.  If the preliminary soils report indicates the presence of critically expansive soils or other soils problems which, if not corrected, would lead to structural defects, a soils investigation of each lot in the subdivision may be required by the City. Such soils investigation shall be done by a registered civil engineer, who shall recommend the corrective action which is likely to prevent structural damage to each structure proposed to be constructed in the area where such soils problem exists. 
D.  The City Council may approve the subdivision or portion thereof where such soils problem exists if it determines that the recommended action is likely to prevent structural damage to each structure to be constructed, and as a condition to the issuance of any building permit may require that the approved recommended action be incorporated in the construction of each structure. (Government Code § 66491)  
24.01.080 - Disapproval of Maps. 
The City Council shall not approve or conditionally approve any map if: 
A.  The City Council makes any of the findings contained in Section 66474 of the Act. 
B.  The final or parcel map is not in substantial compliance with the previously approved tentative map. (Government Code § 66474.1) 
C.  The City Council has not taken action in accordance with Section 66474.5 of the Act relating to land projects. 
D.  In accordance with 66473 and 66474.2 of the Act, the map does not comply with the requirements or conditions imposed by this Title and the Act. 
E.  The resulting parcels are too small to sustain agricultural use in accordance with Section 66474.4 of the Act.  
24.01.090 - Discharge of Waste. 
In accordance with Section 66474.6 of the Act, the City Council may disapprove a map based upon the discharge of waste.  
24.01.100 - Condominium, Community Apartment or Stock Cooperative Project. 
A map of a condominium project, a community apartments project, or of the conversion of five or more existing dwelling units to a stock cooperative project shall be processed in accordance with Section 66427 of the Act.  
24.01.110 - Waiver of Nonmaterial Error. 
When the failure of a map is the result of a technical and inadvertent error which does not materially affect the validity of the map, the failure shall be waived and the map approved. (Government Code § 66473)  
24.01.120 - Current Equalized County Assessment Roll. 
Nothing in this Title shall prevent a purchaser of a unit of land created under the provisions of the Act or this Title from subdividing such land one time, pursuant to the provisions of the Act prior to the time that an equalized County assessment roll has been completed reflecting the creating of the unit proposed to be subdivided. (Government Code § 66424.1)  
24.01.130 - Notice of Hearing. 
Notice of a hearing held pursuant to this Title shall be given in accordance with Section 66451.3 of the Act.  
24.01.140 - Reserved.  
24.01.150 - Monuments. 
The subdivider shall place monuments in accordance with City standards.  
24.01.160 - Times to Report and Act. 
A.  The time limits specified in this Title for reporting and acting on maps may be extended by mutual consent of the subdivider and the body required to report or act. However, no body may require a routine waiver of time limits as a condition of accepting the application for, or processing of a map, unless the routine waiver is obtained for the purpose of permitting concurrent processing of a related approval or an environmental review on the same development project. 
B.  At the time that the subdivider makes an application pursuant to this division, the Planning Director shall determine whether or not the City is able to meet the time limits specified in this Chapter for reporting and acting on maps. If it will be unable to meet such time limits, the Planning Director shall, upon request of a subdivider and for the purpose of meeting such time limits, contract or employ a private entity or persons on a temporary basis to perform such services as necessary to permit the City to meet such time limits. However, the City need not enter into such a contract or employ such persons if it determines either that: 
1.  No such entities or persons are available or qualified to perform such services, or 
2.  The City would be able to perform service in a more rapid fashion than would any available and qualified persons or entities. 
C.  Such entities or persons employed by the City may, pursuant to an agreement with the City, perform all functions necessary to process maps and to comply with other requirements imposed pursuant to this Title except those functions reserved by this Title to the City Council. The City Council may charge the subdivider fees in an amount necessary to defray costs directly attributable to employing or contracting with entities or persons performing services pursuant to this Section. (Government Code § 66451.1)  
24.01.170 - Fees. 
At the time of filing, the applicant shall pay a fee to the City for the examination, review, processing and inspection related to such application in an amount established by resolution of the City Council. (Government Code § 66451.2)  
24.01.180 - City Standards. 
The City Council may modify City standards in particular cases. Application for such modification must show special circumstances or conditions affecting the property in question; and that such modification is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the applicant; and that the modification will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property in the immediate vicinity.  
24.01.190 - Subdivision Within or Partially Within Floodplain Overlay Zone. 
A.  All Tentative Maps, Parcel Maps, and Final Maps shall identify the flood hazard area and the elevation of the base flood as shown on the most current FIRM, and shall reference the FIRM and FIRM revision date. 
B.  All Tentative Maps, Parcel Maps, and Final Maps and other proposed new development shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
C.  All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
D.  All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development shall have adequate drainage provided to minimize exposure to flood damage. 
E.  All Parcel Maps and Final Maps will provide the elevations of proposed structure(s), lowest floor, pad(s), and adjacent grade. 
(Ord. No. 516)  
24.01.200 - Severability. 
If any provision of this Title or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of this Chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provisions or application thereof, and to this end the provisions of this Title are severable. 
(Ord. No. 396; Ord. No. 516)  
Chapter 24.04 - DEFINITIONS 
 
24.04.010 - General. 
Terms used in this Title that are not specifically defined in this Chapter, or the Subdivision Map Act, shall bear the meaning assigned to them by general usage. 
(Ord. No. 396)  
24.04.020 - City Standards. 
"City Standards" refers to those standards and specifications, including standard drawings, as may be adopted by resolution by the City Council from time to time. Three copies of these standards are to be on file in the office of the City Clerk and one copy in the office of the City Engineer.  
24.04.030 - Subdivision. 
A.  "Subdivision" is defined by Section 66424 of the Act. 
B.  "Subdivision" does not include: 
1.  Those things described in Government Code §§ 66412 and 66412.1; 
2.  Subdivisions of a portion of the operating right-of-way of a railroad corporation defined as such by Section 230 of the Public Utilities Code, which are created by short-term leases terminable by either party on not more than 30 days notice in writing; (Government Code § 66411) 
3.  Land conveyed to or from a governmental agency, public entity, or public utility, or for land conveyed to such public utility for rights-of-way, unless a showing is made in individual cases, upon substantial evidence that public policy necessitates a map; or (Government Code § 66428) 
4.  Any conveyance of land to a governmental agency, public entity, public utility or subsidiary of a public utility for conveyance to such public utility for rights-of-way shall not be considered a division of land for purposes of computing the number of parcels. (Government Code § 66426.5)  
24.04.040 - Subdivision Map Act. 
Subdivision Map Act or Act means the Subdivision Map Act as set forth in Division 2 of Title 7 of the Government Code of the State of California commencing with Sections 66410 et seq.  
Chapter 24.12 - DESIGN REQUIREMENTS 
 
24.12.010 - Application. 
Unless expressly exempted, every subdivision shall comply with the requirements of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 396)  
24.12.020 - Suspension of Requirements. 
Suspension of any requirement of this Chapter may be granted by the City Council in a particular case, upon the recommendation of the Planning Commission. Application for such suspension must show that there are special circumstances or conditions affecting the property in question. Also, that such suspension is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the applicant; also, that such suspension, if granted, will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property in the immediate vicinity.  
24.12.030 - Lot Size and Configuration. 
A.  The lot dimension of each proposed lot shall comply with the standards set forth in the Zoning Ordinance. 
B.  Through lots shall not be allowed unless vehicular access rights are relinquished to one of the abutting streets. 
C.  Subdivisions abutting prime arterial routes shown on the circulation element of the City Community Plan, railroads, transmission lines, easement and open flood control channels shall be designed so that the lots do not face such rights-of-way. 
D.  Side and rear lot lines shall be located along the top of man-made slopes instead of at the toe or intermediate locations of said slopes. 
E.  Irregularly shaped lots shall only be permitted in those locations where varied and irregularly-shaped lot designs are common, and only where the informality of design is consistent with other lots in the vicinity and with the existing neighborhood character. 
(Ord. No. 726)  
24.12.040 - Connection to Sewer System. 
Each lot shall be designed to connect to the public sewer system.  
24.12.050 - Panhandle Lots. 
A.  Panhandle or flag-shaped lots shall not be permitted in multi-family or commercial zones. 
B.  Where permitted, panhandle-shaped and flag-shaped lots shall have a minimum frontage of 20 feet on a dedicated public street, except where the panhandle or flagpole portions of such lots are adjacent to one another such that the combined frontage on the public street is not less than 25 feet with each lot having access of record over the panhandle or flagpole portion of the other lot.  
24.12.060 - Street Plans. 
All streets shown on a tentative or tentative parcel map shall be in substantial conformance to the circulation element of the General Plan and they shall relate to the existing streets in the areas adjoining the subdivision. Such streets shall conform to any applicable master plans, specific plans or other officially adopted street plans.  
24.12.070 - Bicycle Route Plans. 
Bicycle route and pedestrian trails shall conform to applicable master plans, specific plans or other officially adopted plans. (Government Code § 66475.1)  
24.12.080 - Natural Heating and Cooling Plans. 
The design of a subdivision shall provide for future passive or natural heating or cooling opportunities in accordance with Section 66473.1 of the Act.  
24.12.090 - Telephone Service. 
The design of the subdivision shall provide, to the extent feasible, for the availability of individual household telephone service to each residential unit in the subdivision. (Government Code § 66473.2)  
Chapter 24.16 - IMPROVEMENTS 
 
24.16.010 - Required Improvements Generally. 
Before a final or parcel map is approved by the City Council or by operation of law, it shall be required: 
A.  That the subdivider grade and improve or agree to grade and improve all land dedicated or to be dedicated for streets or easements, bicycle routes, and all private streets and private easements laid out on a final map or parcel map in such manner and with such improvements as are necessary for the use of the lot owners in the subdivision and local neighborhood traffic and drainage needs, and in accordance with the City standards. 
B.  That the subdivider install or agree to install all drainage and flood control structures and facilities required by the City Engineer, which drainage and flood control structures and facilities shall conform to the City standards. 
C.  That the subdivider install or agree to install fire hydrants and connections of a type and location approved by the Fire Chief and City Engineer. 
D.  That the subdivider provide all necessary easements and rights-of-way to accommodate all streets, drainage and flood control structures and facilities and sewer systems extending beyond the boundaries of the subdivision. 
E.  That the subdivider shall provide that the subdivision be connected to a domestic water system approved by the City and all water mains shall be a material subject to the requirements of the water company or agency serving the subdivisions. That the subdivider shall install or agree to install all required water systems necessary to serve the subdivision, including fire hydrants and connections as may be required, and that all water lines, appurtenances and service connections have been constructed or laid prior to paving or provisions have been made to insure said construction. 
F.  That, where a sewer line is constructed or laid within a street or road, the subdivider has installed or agreed to install sewer lines of a type, size and location approved by the City Engineer to the property line of each lot within the subdivision and that all sanitary sewer lines, appurtenances and service connections have been constructed or laid prior to paving or provisions have been made to insure said construction. 
G.  All new and existing utility distribution facilities, including cable television conduit and lines within the boundaries of any new subdivision and within any half-street abutting a new subdivision, shall be placed underground. The subdivider is responsible for complying with the requirements of this Subsection, and he shall make the necessary arrangement with each of the serving utilities, including franchised cable television operators, for the installation of such facilities. Transformers, terminal boxes, meter cabinet, pedestals, concealed ducts and other facilities necessarily appurtenant to such underground utilities and street lighting systems may be placed above ground subject to approval of the City Engineer. The provisions of this Subsection shall not apply to the installation and maintenance of overhead electric transmission lines in excess of 34,500 volts and long distance and trunk communication facilities. The installation of cable television lines may be waived when, in the opinion of the City Council, no franchised cable television operator is found to be willing and able to install cable television lines in the Subdivision. Notwithstanding any such waiver, the installation of cable television conduit is required. 
H.  That the subdivider shall construct or shall cause to be constructed at his cost a street lighting system conforming to the City standards. 
I.  Where the City has adopted a flood control element or drainage element of the General Plan, all improvements shall conform to such element. 
J.  That the subdivider comply or agree to comply with all the conditions of approval contained in the resolution approving the tentative or tentative parcel map and not otherwise provided for by this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 396)  
24.16.020 - Improvements Benefitting Property Outside Subdivision. 
A.  The City Council may require that improvements installed by the subdivider for the benefit of the subdivision shall contain supplemental size, capacity or number for the benefit of property not within the subdivision, and that such improvements be dedicated to the public. (Government Code § 66485) 
B.  If improvements are required under Subsection A., the City Council shall enter into a reimbursement agreement with the subdivider in accordance with Section 66486 of the Act. 
C.  In order to pay the costs as required by the reimbursement agreement, the City Council may proceed in accordance with Section 66487 of the Act.  
24.16.030 - Required Improvements for Specified Minor Subdivision. 
Whenever a proposed subdivision is for four or less lots, required improvements shall be limited in accordance with Section 66411.1 of the Act.  
24.16.040 - Improvement Plan Review. 
A.  Prior to filing the final map or parcel map, all improvement plans shall be subject to plan review by the City Engineer and other appropriate departments. 
B.  Construction and installation of all improvements shall be subject to inspection by the City Engineer and other appropriate agencies. 
C.  A minimum of two copies of the improvement plans shall be submitted to the City Engineer, or as many copies as is deemed necessary by the City Engineer for plan review and inspection by other appropriate departments. The costs to the City in examining improvement plans, inspecting improvements and monuments shall be paid by the subdivider. Upon approval of the improvement plans by the City Engineer, the originals of the improvement plans shall remain on file in the City Engineer's office. Additional copies can be obtained through the engineering division or by a bonded carrier approved by the City Engineer.  
24.16.050 - Improvement of Remainder Parcel. 
When a subdivision is of a portion of any unit or units of improved or unimproved land, the subdivider may designate as a remainder that portion which is not divided for the purpose of sale, lease or financing. The fulfillment of construction requirements for improvements on the remainder parcel shall be in accordance with Section 66424.6 of the Act.  
24.16.060 - Agreements to Improve. 
A.  The City Council may require a subdivider to enter into one of the types of agreements set forth in Subsection B. as specified by the City Council: 
1.  As a condition precedent to the approval of the final or parcel map announced at the time of the approval or conditional approval of the tentative or tentative parcel map; or 
2.  If at the time of approval of a final or parcel map, any improvement required by the City Council has not been completed and accepted in accordance with standards established by the City Council at the time of approval or conditional approval of the tentative or tentative parcel map. 
B.  The City Council may require the subdivider to enter into one of the following types of agreements as specified by the City Council: 
1.  An agreement with the City Council upon mutually agreeable terms to thereafter complete such improvements at the subdivider's expense. 
2.  An agreement with the City Council thereafter: 
a.  Initiate and consummate proceedings under an appropriate special assessment act for the financing and completion of all such improvements, or 
b.  If not completed under such special assessment act, to complete such improvements at the subdivider's expense. 
C.  The City Council, entering into any agreement pursuant to this Chapter, shall require that performance of such agreement be guaranteed by the security specified in this Chapter and that the agreement be recorded. (Government Code § 66462)  
24.16.070 - Off-Site Improvements Acquisition of Property Interests. 
Whenever a subdivider is required as a condition of a tentative map to construct or install off-site improvements on property which neither the subdivider nor the City possesses a sufficient interest to permit the improvements to be made, the subdivider shall provide to the City, no later than 60 days prior to filing the final map, sufficient information, reports and data, including but not limited to an appraisal and title report, to enable the City to commence proceedings to acquire an interest in the land. The subdivider shall agree to complete the improvements at such time as the City has sufficient interest in the property to permit the construction of the improvements. The subdivider shall bear all costs associated with the acquisition of the property interests and the estimated costs thereof shall be secured as provided in this Title. (Government Code § 66462.5)  
24.16.080 - Improvement Security Required. 
The improvement agreement referred to in this Chapter shall be secured, at the election of the City Council, in accordance with Section 66499 of the Act. The form of bonds shall be in substantial compliance with Section 66499.1 and 66499.2 of the Act.  
24.16.090 - Amount of Security. 
Security to guarantee the performance of any act or agreement in this Title shall be fixed by the City Council in accordance with Sections 66499.3 and 66499.4 of the Act.  
24.16.100 - Release of Security. 
The improvement security required shall be released in the following manner: 
A.  In accordance with Section 66499.7 of the Act, subject to Subsection B. herein. 
B.  The City Engineer may release a portion of the security in conjunction with the acceptance of the performance of the act or work as it progresses upon application therefor by the subdivider, provided, how-ever, that no such release shall be for an amount more than 25 percent of the total improvement security given for faithful performance of the act or work and that the security shall not be reduced to an amount less than 50 percent of the total improvement security given for faithful performance until final completion and acceptance of the act or work. In no event shall the City Engineer authorize a release of the improvement security which would reduce such security to an amount below that required to guarantee the completion of the act or work and any other obligation imposed by this Chapter, the Act or the improvement agreement.  
24.16.110 - Forfeiture of Security. 
Upon the failure of the subdivider to complete any improvement, acts or obligations within the time specified, the City Council may, upon notice in writing of not less than ten days served upon the person responsible for the performance thereof, or upon notice in writing of not less than 20 days served by registered mail addressed to the last known address of such person, determine that the subdivider is in default and may cause the improvement security, or such portion thereof as is necessary to complete the work or act and any other obligations of the subdivider secured thereby, to be forfeited to the City.  
24.16.120 - Lien Contract for Improvements. 
The City Council may require the subdivider, as a condition on approving the map, to enter into an agreement with the City to construct the improvements in the future, and require the subdivider to grant the City a lien on the property to be divided securing such future improvements. The lien granted under authority herein may be used to secure future improvements in easements, right-of-way or irrevocable offers of dedication or any other improvements or conditions of the map. The City Manager is authorized to sign such agreements on behalf of the City.  
24.16.130 - Covenant Not to Oppose an Improvement District. 
In connection with a lien contract under this Title, the City Council may require that the subdivider execute a covenant not to oppose the formation of an improvement district. The City Manger is authorized to sign such covenants on behalf of the City.  
Chapter 24.20 - DEDICATION: GENERAL 
 
24.20.010 - Dedications Generally. 
Subject to the other provisions of this Title, the City Council may require, as a condition precedent to the approval of a final or parcel map, that the subdivider dedicate or irrevocably offer to dedicate real property within the subdivision for streets, alleys, access rights, abutter's rights, drainage, public utility easements and other public easements. (Government Code § 66475) 
(Ord. No. 396)  
24.20.020 - Dedication Procedure. 
A.  All dedications or offers of dedication required by the provisions of this Title shall be by certificate on the final or parcel map. 
B.  An offer of dedication shall be in such terms as to be binding on the owner, his heirs, assigns, or successors in interest, and except as provided in Section 66477.2 of the Act, shall continue until such dedication is accepted or the offer is abandoned or otherwise terminated. Any such dedication or offer of dedication shall be free of any burden or encumbrance which would interfere with the purposes of which the dedication or offer of dedication is required. 
C.  The subdivider shall provide a current preliminary title report or equivalent proof of title satisfactory to the City Engineer. 
D.  At the time the City Council approves the final or parcel map, it shall also accept, accept subject to improvement, or reject any offer of dedication. The City Clerk shall certify on the map the action taken. The City Engineer is authorized to act on behalf of the City Council in rejecting or accepting dedications. (Government Code § 66477.1)  
24.20.030 - Reservation of Area for Public Use. 
The City Council may require that areas of real property within the subdivision may be reserved for parks, recreational facilities, fire stations, libraries or other public uses in accordance with Sections 66479 through 66482 of the Act.  
24.20.040 - Protest of Dedication. 
In accordance with Section 66475.4 of the Act, at the time of the imposition of a dedication requirement, the subdivider may file a protest. An administrative review will be conducted by the City Council. If the dedication requirement is determined to be excessive, the City Council may require amendment of the tentative subdivision map, redesign of the subdivision, pay just compensation or delete or modify the dedication found to be excessive.  
Chapter 24.21 - DEDICATION: AFFORDABLE HOUSING MITIGATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Note— This Chapter was amended by Ord. No. 396; Ord. No. 648; Ord. No. 743; Ord. No. 631, and Ord. No. 905. 
 
24.21.010 - Purpose. 
The provisions of this Chapter are required by the public necessity and general welfare. Under State law, the City has an obligation to provide opportunities for housing for a wide range of income levels. These requirements coincide with the City's housing goals, as expressed in the Housing Element component of the Del Mar Community Plan. 
In establishing this Chapter, the City Council finds that the conversion of residential rental units to ownership housing has an adverse impact on the supply and availability of rental housing and can often result in the displacement of residents, who may be required to move from Del Mar due to the lack of opportunities for replacement housing within the community itself. The City Council also finds that due to market conditions of the very high rental rates for apartments in the community, the City's affordable housing goals are not being effectively accomplished in reliance on rental housing stock. While condominium conversions hold the potential for the adverse impacts described above, it is also recognized that, when properly regulated, condominium conversions can provide affordable housing opportunities. In recognitions of these factors, the purpose of this Chapter is to: 
A.  Ensure that the private sector, as well as the public sector, contribute to and share the City's responsibility of providing opportunities for housing for all segments of Del Mar's population, including those households that qualify as being of: extremely low, very low, low or moderate income. It is also the purpose of this Chapter to ensure that residential subdivisions, including conversions of apartments to condominiums and new condominium projects, contribute to the achievement of the affordable housing goals set forth in the Housing Element component of the Del Mar Community (General) Plan. Accordingly, this Chapter includes measures to ensure that mitigation is provided for projects that would otherwise result in an adverse impact on opportunities for a wide array of housing; 
B.  Promote the orderly development of the City, to balance the goals and objectives expressed in the Del Mar Community (General) Plan, while also minimizing impacts on the investment interests of the landowners and developers; 
C.  Help the City meet its obligations to address the regional housing needs of the San Diego region, as required by State law; and 
D.  Provide reasonable protection and mitigation for those persons renting dwelling units, who would be displaced by the conversion of such dwelling units to a condominium, or similar form of ownership.  
24.21.015 - Applicability. 
In addition to the requirements of the California Subdivision Map Act, the provisions of this Chapter shall apply to the conversion of any existing structure or structures to a condominium, stock cooperative, community apartment project, or tenancy-in-common form of ownership. The provisions of this Chapter shall also apply to subdivisions to create new residential lots and new condominium units.  
24.21.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of implementing the provisions of this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning as assigned below. 
A.  Affordable Housing and Affordable Housing Units shall mean housing which is available at rental rates affordable to households that, pursuant to standards identified in this Chapter, qualify as being of extremely low-, very low-, low- or moderate-income. 
B.  Area Median Income or AMI shall mean the median income for San Diego County, as adopted by the California Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD), pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 50093(c). 
C.  Affordable Housing Unit Set-Aside shall mean the reservation of a residential unit(s) for rental for a specified duration at below market rate(s), as identified and required pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter. 
D.  Below-market-rate (BMR) unit shall mean a residential unit which is reserved for a specified duration at a rental rate which is affordable to households that qualify as being of extremely low-, very low-, low-, or moderate-income, pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter. 
E.  Condominium shall mean an estate in real property consisting of a separate interest in a dwelling unit together with an undivided interest in the balance of the property (land and improvements) which is owned in common by the owners of the individual dwelling units, and as further defined in Section 783 of the California Civil Code. 
F.  Condominium conversion shall mean the conversion or division of rental multifamily dwellings or apartments into a common-interest development as defined in the California Civil Code § 1351(c); or into a condominium, community apartment project or stock cooperative project or tenancy-in-common form of ownership. 
G.  Gross household income and gross income shall mean the aggregate income of all members of a household who are at least 18 years of age. Gross household income shall include the categories listed and defined below. 
1.  Extremely low-income household shall mean a household whose gross income is less than 30 percent of AMI. 
2.  Very low-income household shall mean a household whose gross income is in the range of 31 percent up to, and including, 50 percent of AMI. 
3.  Low-income household shall mean a household whose gross income is in the range of 51 percent up to, and including, 80 percent of AMI. 
4.  Moderate-income household shall mean a household whose gross income is in the range of 81 percent up to, and including, 120 percent of AMI. 
5.  Above moderate-income household shall mean a household whose gross income is greater than 120 percent of AMI. 
In the event that one or more of the indexes referenced in this Section is no longer published by the State Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD), the City shall utilize that successor index published by a Federal, State or County agency that most closely corresponds to with the previously used HCD index. 
H.  Household shall mean one person living alone or two or more persons sharing a residential dwelling. 
I.  In-lieu Housing Mitigation Fee shall mean the fee paid to the City by a subdivider in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter as a means to offset and mitigate the adverse impacts that a subdivision, including condominium conversion, would have on providing housing opportunities within the community for a wide range of income levels. 
J.  Market-rate unit shall mean a dwelling unit, offered, for sale or rental, on the open market at the prevailing market rate. 
K.  Rental unit shall mean a dwelling unit designed and intended to be rented independently to a person or family. 
L.  Rent Restrictions shall mean restrictions placed on a residential unit(s) by which the rental rate of such unit(s) will be restricted to ensure affordability and occupancy by extremely low-, very low-, low- and/or moderate-income level households in accordance with the conditions of approval of a tentative parcel map issued pursuant to the provisions of this Title. 
M.  Subdivider shall mean a person, firm, corporation, partnership or association who proposes to divide, divides, or causes real property to be divided into a subdivision for him or herself or for others; except that employees and consultants of such persons or entities, acting in such capacity, shall not constitute subdividers. 
N.  Tenant shall mean a person who enters into a written or oral lease or rental agreement with the owner of property, or owner's agent, for the purpose of using the dwelling as a principal place of residence. "Tenant" shall not include a subtenant or sublessee. 
O.  Unit shall mean a residential dwelling.  
24.21.025 - Affordable Housing Mitigation Requirements for Conversion of Dwelling Units to Condominium, Stock Cooperatives or Community Apartment Conversion Projects. 
A.  As a condition of approval of any application for a tentative parcel map or tentative subdivision map for the conversion of existing dwelling units into condominiums, stock cooperatives, or community apartment projects, or a combination thereof, the subdivider shall comply with the affordable housing mitigation requirements identified in Table A below. 
TABLE A 
MITIGATION REQUIREMENTS—CONDOMINIUM CONVERSIONS 
Total Number of Units 
to be Converted 	Affordable Housing Mitigation Requirement 
Two, three, four or five units 	Option of either: 
 1. Affordable Unit Set-aside of one of the converted units for rental at below market rate to a low income household; or 
	 2. Donation of one off-site unit, within the City's jurisdiction, of a like size and condition to the City or a City approved organization to be reserved for use as Affordable Housing Units; or 
	 3. Payment of an In-lieu Housing Mitigation Fee for each unit to be converted. 
Six, seven, eight or nine units 	Option of either: 
	 1. Affordable Unit Set-aside of one of the converted units for rental at below market rate to a low-income household; or 
	 2. Donation of one off-site unit, within the City's jurisdiction, of a like size and condition to the City or a City approved organization to be reserved for use as Affordable Housing Units. 
Ten—19 units 	Option of either: 
	 1. Affordable Unit Set-aside of 20 percent of the converted units for rental at below market rate to low-income households, with a further requirement that one of the set-aside units be reserved for rental at a below market rate to a very low-income household; or 
	 2. Subject to the approval of City Council, the donation of off-site units within the City's jurisdiction, equivalent to 20 percent of the units converted, of a like size and condition to the City or a City approved organization to be reserved for use as Affordable Housing Units. The proposed off-site donation shall be approved unless the City Council based upon substantial evidence concludes that the off-site units would have a specific adverse impact on public health and safety. 
20—29 units 	Option of either: 
	 1. Affordable Unit Set-aside of 20 percent of the converted units for rental at below market rates to low-income households, with a further requirement that one of the set-aside units be reserved for rental at below market rates to a very low-income household and one of the set-aside units be reserved for rental at below market rate to an extremely low-income household; or 
	 2. Subject to the approval of City Council, the donation of off-site units within the City's jurisdiction, equivalent to 20 percent of the units converted, of a like size and condition to the City or a City approved organization to be reserved for use as Affordable Housing Units. The proposed off-site donation shall be approved unless the City Council based upon substantial evidence concludes that the off-site units would have a specific adverse impact on public health and safety. 
30 or more units 	Option of either: 
	 1. Affordable Unit Set-aside of 20 percent of the new converted units for rental to low-income households, with a further requirement that two of the set-aside units be reserved for rental at below market rates to a very low-income household and two of the set-aside units be reserved for rental at below market rates to an extremely low-income household; or 
	 2. Subject to the approval of City Council, the donation of off-site units within the City's jurisdiction, equivalent to 20 percent of the units converted, of a like size and condition to the City or a City approved organization to be reserved for use as Affordable Housing Units. The proposed off-site donation shall be approved unless the City Council based upon substantial evidence concludes that the off-site units would have a specific adverse impact on public health and safety. 
 
(Ord. No. 942 , § 1, 10-29-2018)  
24.21.030 - Affordable Housing Mitigation Requirements for New Condominium, Stock Cooperatives and Community Apartment Units. 
A.  As a condition of approval of any application for a tentative parcel map or tentative subdivision map for new condominiums, stock cooperatives, or community apartment projects, or a combination thereof, the subdivider shall comply with the affordable housing mitigation requirements identified in Table B below. 
TABLE B 
MITIGATION REQUIREMENTS—NEW CONDOMINIUM UNITS 
Total Number of 
New Units 	Affordable Housing Mitigation Requirement 
Two, three, four or five units 	Option of either: 
 1. Affordable Housing Unit Set-aside of one of the new units for rental at below market rate to a low-income households; or 
	 2. Payment of an In-lieu Housing Mitigation Fee for each new unit. 
Six, seven, eight or nine units 	Affordable Housing Unit Set-aside of one of the new units for rental at a below market rate to a low-income household. 
Ten—19 units 	Affordable Unit Set-aside of 20 percent of the new units for rental at below market rates to low-income households, with a further requirement that one of the set-aside units be reserved for rental at a below market rate to a very low-income household. 
20—29 units 	Affordable Unit Set-aside of 20 percent of the new units for rental to low-income households, with a further requirement that one of the set-aside units be reserved for rental at a below market rate to a very low-income household and one of the set-aside units be reserved for rental at a below market rate to an extremely low-income household. 
30 or more units 	Affordable Unit Set-aside of 20 percent of the new units for rental to low-income households, with a further requirement that two of the set-aside units be reserved for rental at below market rates to a very low-income household and two of the set-aside units reserved for rental at below market rates to an extremely low-income household. 
  
24.21.035 - Affordable Housing Requirement for Subdivisions Involving the Creation of New Residential Lots. 
As a condition of approval of any tentative parcel map or tentative subdivision map that proposes the creation of residential lots, the subdivider shall pay one In-lieu Housing Mitigation Fee for each of the lots to be created as part of the subdivision.  
24.21.040 - Maximum Allowable Rents for Affordable Housing Units. 
A.  The maximum allowable rent that may be charged for any Affordable Unit restricted to below market rental rates pursuant to this Chapter shall be determined in accordance with Section 50053 of the Health and Safety Code. The maximum allowable rent, including a reasonable utility allowance, shall not exceed the following: 
1.  For extremely low income households, the product of 30 percent times 30 percent of the area median income, as adjusted for family size appropriate for the unit. 
2.  For very low income households, the product of 30 percent times 50 percent of the area median income, as adjusted for family size appropriate for the unit. 
3.  For lower income households whose gross incomes exceed the maximum income for very low income households, the product of 30 percent times 65 percent of the area median income, as adjusted for family size appropriate for the unit. In addition, for those lower income households with gross incomes that exceed 65 percent of the area median income adjusted for family size, it shall be optional that the maximum allowable rent be established at a level not to exceed 30 percent of gross income of the household up to and including 80 percent AMI for 50 percent of the set-aside units in any project. 
4.  For moderate-income households, the product of 30 percent times 110 percent of the area median income, as adjusted for family size appropriate for the unit. In addition, for those moderate-income households whose gross incomes exceed 110 percent of the area median income, as adjusted for family size, it shall be optional for any State or local funding agency to require that the maximum allowable rent be established at a level not to exceed 30 percent of gross income of the household.  
24.21.045 - Duration of Affordable Rental Rate Restrictions. 
Each Affordable Housing Unit set aside for rental at below-market rates pursuant to the requirements of this Chapter shall be limited to such below-market rates for a period of not less than 55 years, commencing from the date of the City's written authorization for occupancy of the unit.  
24.21.050 - Subdivider's Identification of Methodology for Satisfying Affordable Housing Requirements. 
In those circumstances where the provisions of this Chapter provide an option of how affordable housing mitigation measures may be satisfied, the subdivider shall, at the time of filing an application for a tentative parcel map, notify the City of which of the options identified in this Chapter will be used to satisfy such requirements.  
24.21.055 - Number of Units—Calculation. 
A.  The calculation of the number of housing units required to comply with the affordable housing mitigation provisions of this Chapter shall be made based on the total number of housing units in the development, including any units added as a result of a density bonus granted pursuant to Government Code § 65915 et seq. and/or the provisions of DMMC Chapter 30.90. 
B.  Where the calculation of the affordable housing mitigation requirements of this Chapter results in a fraction of one-half or greater, such fraction shall be rounded up to the next whole number, with that resulting unit subject to the Affordable Housing Mitigation requirements of this Chapter.  
24.21.060 - Annual Limit on Number of Condominium Conversions. 
A.  In order to guard against an inappropriate loss of rental housing stock that might otherwise occur, the City shall not authorize the condominium conversion of more than 60 dwelling units in any calendar year. 
B.  Notwithstanding the limitations of Subsection A. above, the City Council shall have the authority to authorize the condominium conversion of more than 60 dwelling units in a calendar year, upon making a finding, at a noticed public hearing, that such authorization will further the City's interest in providing affordable housing opportunities and will not result in an adverse impact on the community. 
C.  Applications for condominium conversions shall be processed on a first-come, first-serve basis, based on the date of submittal of a complete application for the tentative parcel or tentative subdivision map for the condominium conversion. 
D.  The annual limitation specified in this Section shall not apply to applications for condominium conversions projects involving only two dwelling units.  
24.21.065 - Recordation of Affordable Housing Requirements. 
Where a unit(s)/lot(s) is to be set aside (reserved) for rental at rates established pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, the subdivider shall record a covenant, development agreement, or other similar document against the deed for the property memorializing the terms and conditions of the authorization for the subdivision, including its affordable housing mitigation requirements. The covenant or other recorded document shall be prepared to the satisfaction of the Planning Director or designee.  
24.21.070 - Conditions for Affordable Housing Requirements. 
Where, in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, a subdivider has elected the option to pay an In-Lieu Housing Mitigation Fee, the requirement for payment of the Fee shall be included as a condition of approval of the tentative parcel map. The condition shall specify that all required In-Lieu Housing Mitigation Fees are to be paid to the City prior to approval of the subdivision's final parcel map at the rate of the In-Lieu Housing Mitigation Fee in existence at the time of payment.  
24.21.075 - Design, Distribution and Construction of Affordable Housing Set-aside Units. 
A.  All Affordable Housing Set-aside Units provided pursuant to the requirements of this Chapter shall be fully integrated into the design of the residential development and shall be comparable with the market-rate units of the development with respect to the infrastructure serving the units (including sewer, water and other utilities); construction quality and exterior design. Specifically: 
1.  All Affordable Housing Set-aside Units shall reflect the range and numbers of bedrooms provided in the project as a whole, and shall not be distinguished by design, construction, or materials. The Affordable Housing Set-aside Units shall be dispersed throughout the project. 
2.  Tenants of all Affordable Housing Set-aside Units shall have the same access to project amenities and recreational facilities as are available to tenants of market-rate units. 
B.  No building permits shall be issued for market-rate units until permits for all Affordable Housing Set-aside Units have been obtained, unless the Affordable Housing Set-aside Units are to be constructed in phases pursuant the terms of the City approved permit(s) for the development project. 
C.  Market-rate units shall not be issued a Certificate of Occupancy until all Affordable Housing Set-aside Units have been constructed and are, likewise ready for issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy, unless the Affordable Housing Set-aide Units are to be constructed in phases pursuant the terms of the City approved permit(s) for the development project.  
24.21.080 - Affordable Housing Unit Set-Aside Plan. 
A.  Any application subject to the provision of Affordable Housing Set-aside Units pursuant to this Chapter shall include an Affordable Housing Unit Set-aside Plan (AHUSP). The AHUSP shall be subject to a written determination by the Planning Director as to whether the AHUSP is complete. If incomplete, the AHUSP shall be returned to the applicant with a list of the deficiencies or the information required. 
B.  The Affordable Unit Set-Aside Plan shall include address all of the following: 
1.  The basis for calculating the number of Affordable Housing Set-aside Units; 
2.  A floor or site plan depicting the location of the Affordable Housing Set-aside Units; 
3.  The income levels to which each Affordable Housing Set-aside Unit will be made affordable; 
4.  The documents that will be used to ensure that the Affordable Housing Set-aside Units will remain affordable for the required duration, including, but not limited rental restrictions, deeds of trust, rights of first refusal and other documents; 
5.  For phased projects, a phasing plan that provides for the timely development of the number of Affordable Housing Set-aside Units proportionate to each proposed phase of the project; 
6.  A marketing plan that describes how the Applicant will inform the public of the availability of Affordable Housing Set-aside Units; and 
7.  Any other information reasonably requested by the Planning Director to assist with evaluation of the AUSP.  
24.21.085 - Affordability Requirements to Run With Land—City Action to Ensure Compliance with Chapter. 
A.  The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to all agents, successors and assignees of a subdivider, applicant, developer, builder or property owner proposing a development project subject to the provisions of this Chapter. 
B.  The City, or its designee, may institute any appropriate legal actions or proceedings necessary to ensure compliance herewith, including, but not limited to, actions to revoke, deny or suspend any permit or development approval.  
24.21.090 - Rate of In-Lieu Housing Mitigation Fee. 
The rate of the In-lieu Housing Mitigation Fee shall be as established or amended by resolution of the City Council.  
24.21.095 - Del Mar Housing Assistance Fund. 
A.  All In-Lieu Housing Mitigation Fees collected pursuant to this Chapter shall be deposited in the dedicated City of Del Mar Housing Assistance Fund. 
B.  The funds in the Housing Assistance Fund shall be administered by City Manager, or designee, who shall have the authority to govern its use consistent with the provisions and purpose of this Chapter and with the goals and policies contained in the Housing Element of the Del Mar Community Plan. 
C.  Moneys deposited in the Housing Assistance Fund, along with any interest earnings on such moneys, shall be used solely for one or more of the following purposes: 
1.  To increase and improve the supply of housing affordable to households of extremely low-, very low, low and moderate income; including, but not limited to, acquisition of property and property rights; cost of construction, including costs associated with planning; administration and design, as well as actual building or installation; any other costs associated with the construction or financing of affordable housing; or reimbursement to the City for such costs if funds were advanced by the City from other sources. 
2.  Administrative expenses not reimbursed through processing fees, including consultant and legal expenses related to the establishment and/or administration of the Housing Assistance Fund. 
D.  No portion of the housing fund may be diverted to other purposes by way of loan or other similar action.  
24.21.100 - Affordable Income Eligibility Compliance Requirements. 
A.  The household income of each renter of an Affordable Set-aside Unit shall be verified annually by the City, or its designee, to confirm the household's continued eligibility. 
B.  Reserved. 
C.  The City shall establish compliance procedures and guidelines for use by property owners in their management and administration of set-aside units. Such procedures shall be incorporated, as necessary in a Development Agreement with the Subdivider.  
24.21.105 - Notice Provided to Tenants of Application for Condominium Conversion. 
Notice provided to tenants of a dwelling unit proposed for a condominium conversion shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 24.40 of this Title, as may be amended.  
24.21.100 - Compliance with Regulations Does Not Qualify for Density Bonus Concessions. 
Compliance with the provisions of this Chapter shall not, in and of itself, entitle a residential development to a density bonus concession(s), as defined and regulated by the DMMC.  
24.21.115 - Adoption of Administrative Guidelines. 
The City may, from time to time, adopt by resolution, administrative guidelines necessary for the implementation of the provisions of this Chapter.  
24.21.120 - City Committed Assistance. 
As part of the City's committed assistance to provide affordable housing, the City shall waive a portion of the application processing fees for those proposed subdivisions, including condominium conversions, that will result in affordable housing set-aside units or payment of Affordable Housing Mitigation Fees, with the extent of such fee reduction commensurate with extent of affordable housing mitigation required of the project pursuant to this Chapter.  
24.21.125 - Tenant Relocation Assistance. 
As a condition of approval of any application for a condominium conversion, the subdivider shall provide a Tenant Relocation Payment to the tenants of the rental units who would be displaced as a result of the condominium conversion and who meet the criteria of either a "Qualified Tenant" or an "Eligible Tenant," as specified in this Section. 
A.  For purposes of this Section, the following terms shall apply: 
1.  Qualified Tenant shall mean a tenant, 18 years of age or older, who has resided in the rental unit to be converted for at least 90 days prior to date at which provision of a notice of intent of a condominium conversion is issued pursuant to the requirements of DMMC Chapter 24.40 and who, as of the date of the City's authorization of the condominium conversion, meets one or more of the following criteria: 
a.  Is 62 years of age or older; 
b.  Has a disability, as defined by criteria set forth by the Social Security Administration (SSA); or 
c.  Has one or more minor dependent children who has lived with the tenant for at least 300 days of the current or previous calendar year. 
2.  Eligible Tenant shall mean a person, 18 years of age or older, who has resided at the property for at least 90 days prior to date at which provision of a notice of intent of a condominium conversion is issued pursuant to the requirements of DMMC Chapter 24.40 but who does not meet the criteria of a Qualified Tenant, as specified in this Section. 
B.  The rate of the Tenant Relocation Payment shall be as set by resolution of the City Council. 
C.  The payment of the Tenant Relocation Payment shall be paid as follows: 
1.  If the rental unit is occupied solely by a single Qualified or Eligible Tenant, they shall be paid the full amount of the Tenant Relocation Payment. 
2.  If a rental unit is occupied by two or more persons, each shall be paid a pro-rata share of the Tenant Relocation Fee based on their qualification as either a Qualified or Eligible Tenant. 
D.  The disbursement of Tenant Relocation Payments shall be paid by cashier's check, sent by registered mail a minimum of 60 days prior to the date at which the Qualified or Eligible Tenants are required to relocate from the premises. 
E.  A minimum of 20 calendar days prior to dispersing Tenant Relocation Payments, the Subdivider shall provide the Planning Director with a summary of the Tenant Relocation Payments to be made.  
24.21.130 - First Right of Refusal to Purchase Converted Units. 
A.  The tenant(s), of a dwelling unit proposed and approved for condominium conversion shall be afforded the first right of refusal to purchase one of converted units. 
B.  If the number of displaced tenants desiring to purchase one of the converted units is greater than the number of units available, a lottery system shall be used to determine a priority ranking.  
Chapter 24.22 - DEDICATION: BIKE PATH 
 
24.22.010 - Requirement. 
Whenever a subdivider is required to dedicate roadways, the City Council may require a subdivider to dedicate such real property as may be necessary and feasible to provide bicycle paths for the use and safety of the residents of the subdivision; provided that the subdivision as shown on the final map contains 200 or more lots. (Government Code § 66475.1) 
(Ord. No. 396)  
Chapter 24.23 - DEDICATION: ELEMENTARY SCHOOL 
 
24.23.010 - Requirement. 
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 66478 of the Act, the City Council may require the subdivider to dedicate such land as deemed necessary for the construction of elementary schools. 
(Ord. No. 396)  
Chapter 24.25 - DEDICATION: PARK/RECREATION 
 
24.25.010 - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this Chapter to impose upon a subdivider the obligation to provide land or in lieu fees for park or recreation purposes. The amount and location of land to be dedicated or the fees to be paid is intended to bear a reasonable relationship to the use of the park and recreational facilities by the future inhabitants of the subdivision. (Government Code § 66477) 
(Ord. No. 396)  
24.25.020 - Exemptions. 
A.  In accordance with Government Code § 66477(h), this Chapter has a limited application to nonresidential subdivisions of less than five parcels. 
B.  In accordance with Government Code § 66477(g), this Chapter has a limited application to subdivisions containing 50 parcels or less. 
C.  In accordance with Government Code § 66477, this Chapter has a limited application to commercial subdivisions, industrial subdivisions and to condominium projects or stock cooperatives.  
24.25.030 - Use of Land/Fees. 
A.  As required by Government Code § 66477(d), this Chapter shall be administered in accordance with an adopted general plan or specific plan containing policies and standards for parks and recreation facilities and then only for park and recreational facilities that are in accordance with definite principles and standards. 
B.  In accordance with Government Code § 66477(f), land and fees shall be used in accordance with a schedule adopted by the City Council or refunded. 
C.  Fees shall be paid to the City for deposit into a segregated fund. 
D.  Land and fees exacted in accordance with this Chapter shall be used only for purposes authorized by the Act. (Government Code § 66477(c))  
24.25.040 - Exaction. 
A.  The City Council shall determine whether to require a dedication of land, impose a requirement to pay fees or require a combination of both. 
B.  In accordance with Government Code § 66477(b), the amount of land to be dedicated shall be determined as follows: 
  
C.  The amount of the fee required in lieu of a dedication of land shall be the fair market value of the amount of land for which the fee is being paid in lieu of dedication.  
24.25.050 - In Lieu Fee. 
A.  The calculation of the in lieu fee shall be based upon the estimated current cost to the City for the purchase of open space and parklands to serve the residents of the Subsection per Section 24.25.030 of this Chapter. Said estimated purchase value per square foot shall be determined by the City Council by resolution by computing the average per square foot cost to the City of the purchase of a representative sample of parklands purchased by the City in the recent past. Those purchases to be included in the sample from which the average is computed shall be determined by the City Council upon recommendation of staff, taking into account all of the circumstances of the particular transaction, type of property, type of park use and related factors, which the Council deems relevant. Selection of those purchases to be included in the sample and computation of the average per square foot value thereof shall be adopted by resolution of the City Council. Council may at its discretion from time to time, update the sample purchases use for computing the average by adding new purchases or be deleting old ones and may thereupon recompute a new average cost per square foot. 
The total fee paid by the subdivider at the time of final map approval shall equal the average value per square foot as set forth in said resolution, adjusted for changes in the Consumer Price Index (CPI-U) times the total number of square feet of land otherwise required pursuant to the formula contained in Section 24.25.040 herein. 
B.  As a condition for receiving approval of the proposed final or parcel map, the subdivider shall pay the entire in lieu fee or at the subdivider's option, execute a covenant burdening each lot for a prorata share of the in lieu fee, due as a condition for the issuance of a building permit for such lot.  
24.25.060 - Credit. 
In accordance with Government Code §§ 66477(i) et seq., at the time of submitting a proposed tentative or tentative parcel map, the subdivider may apply to the City Council for credit against the payment of fees or dedication of land required by this Chapter.  
Chapter 24.26 - DEDICATION: PUBLIC ACCESS 
 
24.26.010 - Requirement. 
Whenever any land to be subdivided is bound by an inlet, bay, estuary, lagoon, river, stream, lake, reservoir or by the Pacific Ocean, there shall be a street to and along such inlet, bay, estuary, lagoon, river, stream, lake, reservoir or ocean front, or adequate public access to and along such boundary shall be provided or be made otherwise available in lieu of such street or any combination as the City may require to insure compliance with Chapter 4, Article 3.5 of the Act. (Government Code §§ 66478.1 et seq.) 
(Ord. No. 396)  
Chapter 24.28 - DEDICATION: DRAINAGE/FLOOD FACILITY 
 
24.28.010 - Requirement. 
A.  Where a drainage facility or flood control facility is necessary for the use of lot owners or for the protection of lots, adequate rights-of-way for such drainage facilities or flood control facilities shall be offered for dedication to the City or to such other public entities as the City Council designates and shall be shown on the map. 
B.  Where it is necessary to extend a drainage facility or flood control facility beyond the boundaries of the subdivision for adequate drainage or flood control needs, the required rights-of-way shall be offered for dedication. 
C.  Drainage facilities and flood control facilities within and without the subdivision shall be provided so as to carry storm runoff, both tributary to and originating within the subdivision. 
D.  Facilities required under this Chapter shall be constructed in accordance with City Standards to the satisfaction of the City Engineer. 
(Ord. No. 396)  
Chapter 24.29 - DEDICATION: STREETS 
 
24.29.010 - Requirement. 
The dedication of streets by the subdivider shall be in accord with the following: 
A.  The subdivider shall offer to dedicate rights-of-way for streets within the subdivision in accordance with the City standards. 
B.  No final or parcel map shall be approved unless the street or streets providing primary access to the subdivision are dedicated to and maintained by the City, a county or state; and the street or the streets meet City standards. 
C.  Where it is necessary to extend a street beyond the boundaries of a subdivision to provide adequate circulation for residents of the subdivision, the subdivider shall cause the required easements in accordance with City standards. 
D.  The City Engineer may impose a requirement that any dedication or offer of dedication of a street shall include a waiver of direct access rights to such street from any property waiver of direct access rights to such street from any property shown on the final or parcel map as abutting thereon, and that if the dedication is accepted, such waiver shall become effective in accordance with the provisions of the waiver of direct access. (Government Code § 66476) 
E.  City standards as adopted by resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 396)  
Chapter 24.40 - CONVERSION OF RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY 
 
24.40.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Chapter is: 
A.  To establish criteria for the conversion of existing housing to condominiums or stock cooperative. 
B.  To reduce the impact of such conversions on residents in rental housing who may be required to relocate due to the conversion of apartments to condominiums by providing for procedures for notification and adequate time and assistance for such relocation. 
C.  To assure that purchasers of converted housing have been properly informed as to the physical conditions of the structure which is offered for purchase. 
D.  To insure that converted housing achieves a high degree of appearance, quality, and safety, and is consistent with the goals of the City. 
(Ord. No. 396)  
24.40.020 - Physical Elements Report. 
A report on the physical elements of all structures and facilities shall be submitted with the tentative subdivision or parcel map. The report shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
A.  A report detailing the structural condition of all elements of the property including foundations, electrical plumbing, utilities, walls, ceiling, windows, recreational facilities, sound transmission of each building, mechanical equipment, parking facilities and appliances. Regarding each such element, the report shall state, to the best knowledge or estimate of the applicant, when such element was built; the condition of each element; when said element was replaced; the approximate condition of each element; the approximate date upon which said application for conversion was filed and accepted by the City. The report shall identify any defection or unsafe elements and set forth the proposed corrective measures to be employed. 
B.  A report from a licensed structural pest control operator, approved by the City, on each structure and each unit within the structure. 
C.  A report on any known soil and geological conditions regarding soil deposits, rock formations, faults, groundwater and landslides in the vicinity of the project and a statement regarding any known evidence of soils problems relating to the structures. Reference shall be made to any previous oils reports for the site and a copy submitted with said report. 
D.  A statement of repairs and improvements to be made by the subdivider necessary to refurbish and restore the project to achieve a high degree of appearance of safety.  
24.40.030 - Acceptance of Reports. 
The final form of the physical elements report and other documents shall be subject to approval by the City. The reports in their accepted form shall remain on file with the community development department for review by any interested persons. The report shall be referenced in the subdivision report to the Planning Commission.  
24.40.040 - Copy to Buyers. 
The subdivider shall provide each purchaser with a copy of all reports (in their final, accepted form), prior to said purchaser executing any purchase agreement or other contract to purchase a unit in the project and said developer shall give the purchaser sufficient time to review said reports. Copies of the reports shall be made available at all times at the sales office and shall be posted at various locations, as approved by the City, at the project site.  
24.40.050 - Physical Standards for Condominium Conversions. 
A.  To achieve the purpose of this Chapter, the City shall require that all condominium conversions conform to the Municipal Code in effect at the time of tentative map approval except as otherwise provided in this Chapter. 
B.  All provisions of the Municipal Code must be met and violations corrected prior to the approval of the final map.  
24.40.060 - Specific Physical Standards. 
The City shall require conformance with the standards of this Section in approving the map. 
A.  Building Regulations. The project shall conform to the applicable standards of the City building code in effect at the time the application for conversion was accepted by the City except as herein provided. 
B.  Zoning Regulations. The project shall conform to the applicable standards of the Zoning Ordinance in effect at the time the application for conversion was accepted by the City except as herein provided. Except, if the applicant demonstrates that some aspect of the property or improvements is legally nonconforming, the structure may be converted so long as the nonconforming aspect is not expanded. In cases where modification of the nonconformity can be reasonably achieved in terms of financial or structural feasibility, the City shall require such modification as a condition of approval for conversion. 
C.  Fire Prevention. 
1.  Smoke Detectors. Each living unit shall be provided with approved detectors of products of combustion other than heat conforming to the latest U.B.C. standards, mounted on the ceiling or wall at a point centrally located in the corridor or area giving access to rooms used for sleeping purposes. 
2.  Maintenance of Fire Protection Systems. All fire hydrants, fire alarm systems, portable fire extinguishers and other fire protective appliances shall be retained in an operable condition at all times. 
D.  Sound Transmission. 
1.  Shock Mounting of Mechanical Equipment. All permanent mechanical equipment such as motors, compressors, pumps, and compactors which is determined by the Department of Community Development to be a source of structural vibration or structure-borne noise shall be shock mounted with inertia blocks or bases and/or vibration isolators in a manner approved by the Department of Community Development. 
2.  Noise Standards. The structure shall conform to all interior and exterior sound transmission standards of the Uniform Building Code. In such cases where present standards cannot reasonably be met, the City Council may require the applicant to notify potential buyers of the noise deficiency currently existing within these units. 
E.  Utility Metering. Each dwelling unit shall be separately metered for gas and electricity. A plan for equitable sharing of communal water metering shall be developed prior to final map approval and included in the covenants, conditions and restrictions. In such cases where the subdivider can demonstrate that this standard cannot or should not reasonably be met, this standard may be modified by the City Council. 
F.  Private Storage Space. Each unit shall have at least 200 cubic feet of enclosed weather-proofed and lockable private storage space in addition to guest, linen, pantry and clothes customarily provided. Such space may be provided in any location approved by the Community Development Department, but shall not be divided into two or more locations. In such cases where the subdivider can demonstrate that this standard cannot or should not reasonably be met, this standard may be modified by the City Council. 
G.  Laundry Facilities. A laundry area shall be provided on each unit; or if common laundry areas are provided, such facilities shall consist of not less than one automatic washer and dryer for each five units or fraction thereof. In such cases where the subdivider can demonstrate that this standard cannot or should not reasonably be met, this standard may be modified by the City Council. 
H.  Landscape Maintenance. All landscaping shall be restored as necessary and maintained to achieve a high degree of appearance and quality. 
I.  Condition of Equipment and Appliances. The developer shall provide written certification to the buyer of each unit at the close of escrow that any dishwashers, garbage disposals, stoves, refrigerators, hot water tanks, and air conditioners that are provided are in operable working condition as of the close of escrow. At such time as the homeowners' association takes over management of the development, the developer shall provide written certification to the association that any pool and pool equipment (filter, pumps, chlorinator) and any appliances and mechanical equipment to be owned in common by the association is in operable working condition.  
24.40.070 - Notice to Tenants. 
A.  The City Council shall not approve a final map or parcel map for a subdivision to be created from the conversion of residential real property into a condominium project, a community apartment project, or a stock cooperative project unless it makes all of the findings set forth in Section 66427.1 of the Subdivision Map Act relating to notices and offers to tenants. 
B.  The subdivider shall give notice to prospective tenants in accordance with Section 66452.17 of the Subdivision Map Act. 
C.  In accordance with Section 66452.18 of the Subdivision Map Act, subdivider shall give notice of the filing of the tentative map or tentative parcel map. 
D.  Subdivider shall provide evidence of receipt of each tenant of the notices required herein. 
E.  In addition to the provision of the other notice of applications or submittals required by this Section, the subdivider shall provide to the occupant of each unit to be converted, a copy of the notice for the agenda of the City Planning Commission and City Council hearings at which the application for tentative parcel map or tentative subdivision map will be reviewed. 
(Ord. No. 905)  
24.40.080 - Stock Cooperatives Owners' Vote. 
In accordance with Section 66452.10 of the Act, a stock cooperative will not be converted to a condominium unless a majority of the owners have voted in favor of the conversion.  
24.40.090 - Conversion to Stock Cooperative. 
The City shall approve or disapprove the conversion of an existing building to a stock cooperative within 120 days following receipt of a completed application for approval of such conversion. (Government Code § 66427.2)  
24.40.100 - Findings. 
The City Council shall not approve an application for conversion unless the City Council finds that: 
A.  All provisions of this Chapter are met; 
B.  The proposed conversion is consistent with the City General Plan; 
C.  The proposed conversion will conform to the Municipal Code in effect at the time of tentative map approval except as otherwise provided in this Chapter; 
D.  The overall design and physical condition of the conversion achieves a high degree of appearance, quality and safety; 
E.  The conversion would not displace predominantly low and moderate income families or tenants without adequate provision for suitable relocation of such families or tenants.  
24.40.110. - Allowance for Conversion of Over-density Apartment Projects. 
A.  Notwithstanding the other provisions of the Del Mar Municipal Code (DMMC), dwelling units located on a property that is nonconforming with the underlying zoning designation's maximum density development standards may be converted to a condominium, community apartment project, stock cooperative project or tenancy-in-common form of ownership, provided the proposed conversion will be compliant with all other applicable provisions of the DMMC, including Chapter 24.21. 
(Ord. No. 905)  
Chapter 24.42 - REGIONAL TRANSPORTATION CONGESTION IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM (RTCIP) 
 
24.42.010 - Title. 
This Chapter shall be known as the "Del Mar Regional Transportation Congestion Improvement Program (RTCIP) Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 803; Ord. No. 840)  
24.42.020 - Findings. 
In adopting this Chapter, the City Council of the City of Del Mar finds and determines that: 
A.  The City is a member agency of the San Diego Association of Governments ("SANDAG"), a joint powers agency consisting of the City, the County of San Diego, and the 17 other cities situated in San Diego County. Acting in concert, the member agencies of SANDAG, acting in their capacity as the San Diego County Regional Transportation Commission, developed a plan whereby the shortfall in funds needed to enlarge the capacity of the regional system of highways and arterials in San Diego County (the "regional arterial system") could be made up in part by a transportation uniform mitigation fee on future residential development. As a member agency of SANDAG, the City participated in the preparation of a certain "RTCIP Impact Fee Nexus Study," dated November 27, 2007 (the "Nexus Study") prepared pursuant to California Government Code §§ 66000 et seq., the Mitigation Fee Act. 
B.  The City Council has been informed and advised, and finds, that future development within San Diego County and the cities therein will result in traffic volumes exceeding the capacity of the regional arterial system as it presently exists. 
C.  The City Council has been further informed and advised, and finds, that if the capacity of the regional arterial system is not enlarged, the result will be substantial traffic congestion in all parts of San Diego County and the City, with unacceptable levels of service throughout San Diego County by 2030. 
D.  The City Council has been further advised, and so finds that funding, in addition to those fees adopted pursuant to the Nexus Study, will be inadequate to fund construction of the regional arterial system. Absent implementation of a regional transportation improvement plan ("RTCIP") fee based on the Nexus Study, existing and known future funding sources will be inadequate to provide necessary improvements to the regional arterial system, resulting in an unacceptably high level of traffic congestion within and around San Diego County and the City. 
E.  The City Council has reviewed the Nexus Study, and finds that future development within the county and City will substantially adversely affect the regional arterial system, and that unless such development contributes to the cost of improving the regional arterial system, the regional arterial system will operate at unacceptable levels of service. 
F.  The City Council finds and determines that the failure to mitigate growing traffic impacts on the regional arterial system within San Diego County and the City will substantially impair the ability of public safety services (police and fire) to respond. The failure to mitigate impacts on the regional arterial system will adversely affect the public health, safety and welfare. 
G.  The City Council further finds and determines that there is a reasonable and rational relationship between the use of the RTCIP fee and the type of development projects on which the fees are imposed because the fees will be used to construct the transportation improvements that are necessary for the safety, health and welfare of the residential and nonresidential users of the development projects on which the RTCIP fee will be levied. 
H.  The City Council finds and determines that there is a reasonable and rational relationship between the need for the improvements to the regional arterial system and the type of development projects on which the RTCIP fee is imposed because it will be necessary for the residential users of such projects to have access to the regional arterial system. Such development will benefit from the regional arterial system improvements and the burden of such development will be mitigated in part by the payment of the RTCIP fee. 
I.  The City Council further finds and determines that the cost estimates set forth in the Nexus Study are reasonable cost estimates for constructing the regional arterial system improvements, and that the amount of the RTCIP fee expected to be generated by new development will not exceed the total fair share cost to such development. 
J.  The City Council further finds that the cost estimates set forth in the Nexus Study are reasonable cost estimates for the facilities that comprise the regional arterial system, and that RTCIP fee program revenues to be generated by new development will not exceed the total fair share of these costs. 
K.  The fees collected pursuant to this Chapter shall be used to help pay for the construction and acquisition of the regional arterial system improvements identified in the Nexus Study. The need for the improvements is related to new development because such development results in additional traffic, thus creating the demand for the improvements. 
L.  The City Council finds that the Nexus Study proposes a fair and equitable method for distributing a portion of the unfunded costs of improvements to the regional arterial system. 
M.  The City Council adopts the Nexus Study and incorporates it in this Chapter as though set forth in full.  
24.42.030 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following words, terms and phrases shall have the following meanings: 
Commission means the San Diego County Regional Transportation Commission, formed pursuant to the San Diego County Regional Transportation Commission Act (California Public Utilities Code §§ 132000, et seq.), which is governed by the board of directors of SANDAG. 
Development project or project means any project undertaken for the purpose of residential development, or development that includes, as a component, residential development, such as "mixed use" development, including the issuance of a permit for construction. 
Low income residential housing means new moderate, low, very low, and extremely low income residential units as defined in Health and Safety Code §§ 50079.5, 50093, 50105, 50106, and by reference in Government Code § 65585.1. 
Multifamily residential property means property, which, under the current City land use plan or any specific plan, is designated as RM-South, with or without any overlay, or equivalent. 
Nexus Study means the RTCIP Impact Fee Nexus Study pursuant to California Government Code §§ 66000 et seq., which Nexus Study is on file in the City Clerk's office. 
Residential dwelling unit means a building or portion thereof used by one family and containing but one kitchen, which is designed primarily for residential occupancy including single-family and multifamily dwellings. "Residential dwelling unit" shall not include hotels or motels. 
RTCIP administrative plan means the TransNet Extension Ordinance and Extension Plan adopted by the San Diego County Regional Transportation Commission Ordinance No. 04-01 on May 28, 2004, containing the detailed administrative procedures concerning the implementation of this Chapter the RTCIP program, as may be amended from time to time, a copy of which is on file in the City Clerk's office. 
SANDAG means the San Diego Association of Governments, a joint powers agency consisting of the City, the county of San Diego, and the 18 cities situated in San Diego County. 
Single-family residential unit means each residential dwelling unit in a development on property, which, under the current City land use plan or any specific plan, is designated as R1-40, R1-14, R1-10, R1-10B, R1-5, R1-5B, R2, RM-East, RM-West, RM-Central, CVPP, RC, or PC, with or without any overlay, or equivalent.  
24.42.040 - Establishment of the transportation uniform mitigation fee. 
A.  Adoption. The schedule of fees shall be adopted by resolution approved by the City Council ("resolution"). 
B.  Fee Calculation. The fees shall be calculated according to the calculation methodology set forth in Table 11 of the Nexus Study, as may be amended from time to time. 
C.  Fee Adjustment. The fee schedule may be periodically reviewed and the amounts adjusted by the San Diego County Regional Transportation Commission. Pursuant to the TransNet Extension Ordinance the RTCIP fee shall be automatically adjusted annually for inflation on July 1 for each year. The inflation adjustment will be two percent or based on the CalTrans highway construction cost index, whichever is higher. 
By amendment to the resolution, the fees may be increased or decreased to reflect changes in actual and estimated costs of the regional arterial system including, but not limited to, debt service, lease payments and construction costs. The adjustment of the fees may also reflect changes in the facilities required to be constructed, in estimated revenues received pursuant to this Chapter, as well as the availability or lack thereof of other funds with which to construct the regional arterial system. SANDAG shall review the RTCIP fee program no less than every ten years after July 1, 2009. 
D.  Purpose. The purpose of the RTCIP fee is to fund those certain improvements to the regional arterial system identified in the Nexus Study. The Nexus Study is applicable to specific residential construction impacts on the designated Regional Arterials within the boundaries of the City. Nothing herein prevents the City from collecting fees pursuant to other provisions of Chapter 24 or any other fee program for other impacts from residential or non-residential development not specifically addressed in the Nexus Study for bridges or other infrastructure within the City. The amount of fees adopted under this Chapter may also exceed the amount of the Nexus Study based on further studies prepared by the City or SANDAG that justifies an increased amount. 
E.  Applicability. The RTCIP shall apply to all new development projects within the City, which include the development of one or more residential dwelling units, unless otherwise exempted by the provision of this Chapter. 
F.  Exemptions. The following new development shall be exempt from the RTCIP fee: 
1.  Low income residential housing; 
2.  Government/public buildings, public schools and public facilities; 
3.  The rehabilitation and/or reconstruction of any legal, residential structure and/or the replacement of a previously existing residential dwelling unit; 
4.  All new, rehabilitated, and/or reconstructed non-residential structures; 
5.  Development projects which are the subject of a public facilities development agreement entered into pursuant to Government Code §§ 65864 et seq., prior to the effective date of this Chapter, wherein the imposition of new fees are expressly prohibited; provided however that, if the term of such a development agreement is extended by amendment or by any other manner after July 1, 2008, the RTCIP fee shall be imposed; 
6.  Guest dwellings, as defined in Chapter 30 of the Del Mar Municipal Code; 
7.  Additional residential units located on the same parcel pursuant to the provisions of any agricultural zoning classifications set forth in Chapter 30 of the Del Mar Municipal Code; 
8.  Kennels and catteries established in connection with an existing residential unit and as defined in Chapter 30 of the Del Mar Municipal Code; 
9.  The sanctuary building of a church, mosque, synagogue, or other house of worship, eligible for a property tax exemption; 
10.  Residential units that have been issued a building permit prior to July 1, 2008; and 
11.  Condominium conversions. 
G.  Credit. Regional system improvements may be credited toward the RTCIP fee in accordance with the RTCIP administrative plan and the following: 
1.  Regional Tier. 
a.  Arterial Credits. If a developer funds or constructs arterial improvements identified on SANDAG's Regional Arterial System and/or that arise out of SANDAG's Congestion Management Program, the developer shall receive credit for all costs associated with the arterial improvements, offsetting the revenue requirements of the RTCIP administrative plan. 
b.  Other Credits. In special circumstances, when a developer constructs off-site improvements such as an interchange, bridge, or railroad grade separation, credits shall be determined by the City in consultation with the developer. 
c.  The amount of the development fee credit shall not exceed the revenue requirements of the City's most current funding program (determined by the most current unit cost assumptions) for its share of the regional system or actual costs, whichever is less. 
2.  Local Tier. 
a.  The City shall compare facilities in local fee programs against the regional system and eliminate any overlap in its local fee program except where a recognized financing district has been established. 
b.  If there is a recognized financing district established, the City may credit that portion of the facility identified in both programs against the RTCIP fee in accordance with the RTCIP administrative plan. 
(Ord. No. 840)  
24.42.050 - Reimbursements. 
Should a developer construct regional arterial system improvements in excess of the RTCIP fee obligation, the developer may be reimbursed based on actual costs or the approved unit cost assumptions, whichever is less. Reimbursements shall be enacted through a three-party agreement including the developer, SANDAG and the City, contingent on funds being available. In all cases, however, reimbursements under such special agreements must coincide with construction of the transportation improvements as scheduled in the five-year capital improvements program adopted annually by SANDAG.  
24.42.060 - Procedures for the Levy, Collection, and Disposition of Fees. 
A.  Authority of the Community Development Department. The Director of Community Development, or his/her designee, is authorized to levy and collect the RTCIP fee and make all determinations required by this Chapter. 
B.  Payment. Payment of the fees shall be as follows: 
1.  The fees shall be paid at the time a certificate of occupancy is issued for the development project or upon final inspection, whichever come first (the "payment date"). However, this Section should not be construed to prevent payment of the fees prior to issuance of an occupancy permit or final inspection. Fees may be paid at the time application is made for a building permit and the fee payment shall be calculated based on the fee in effect at that time, provided the developer tenders the full amount of his/her RTCIP fee obligation. If the developer makes only a partial payment prior to the payment date, the amount of the fee due shall be based on the RTCIP fee schedule in place on the payment date. The fees shall be calculated according to the fee schedule set forth in the Resolution and the calculation methodology set forth in Table 11 of the Nexus Study, in effect on the payment date. 
2.  The fees required to be paid shall be the fee amounts in effect at the time payment is due under this Chapter, not the date the ordinance approving this Chapter is initially adopted. The City shall not enter into a development agreement, which freezes future adjustments of the RTCIP fee. 
3.  If all or part of any development project is sold prior to payment of the fee, the property shall continue to be subject to the requirement for payment of the fee, accordingly, the fees shall run with the land. 
4.  Fees shall not be waived. 
C.  Disposition of Fees. All fees collected hereunder shall be transmitted to a fund established and designated by the City for deposit, investment, accounting and expenditure in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter and the Mitigation Fee Act. 
D.  Appeals. Appeals shall be filed with the City Council in accordance with the provisions of the Chapter 1.12 of the Del Mar Municipal Code. Appealable issues shall be the application of the fee, application of credits, application of reimbursement, application of the legal action stay and application of exemption. 
E.  Reports to SANDAG. The Director of Community Development, or his/her designee, shall prepare and deliver to the executive director of SANDAG, periodic reports as will be established under Section 24.42.070 of this Chapter.  
24.42.070 - RTCIP Fee Administrator. 
A.  The Director of Community Development is appointed as the administrator of the transportation uniform mitigation fee program. He or she is authorized to receive all fees generated from the RTCIP fee within the City, and to invest, account for and expend such fees in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter and the Mitigation Fee Act. The detailed administrative procedures concerning the implementation of this Chapter shall be contained in the RTCIP administrative plan developed by the RTCIP administrator. Furthermore, the RTCIP administrator shall use the Nexus Study for the purpose of calculating a developer's RTCIP fee obligation. In addition to detailing the methodology for calculating all RTCIP fee obligations of different categories of new development, the purpose of the Nexus Study is to clarify for the RTCIP administrator, where necessary, the definition and calculation methodology for uses not clearly defined in this Chapter. 
B.  The City shall expend only that amount of the funds generated from the RTCIP fee for staff support, audit, administrative expenses, and contract services that are necessary and reasonable to carry out its responsibilities and in no case shall the funds expended for salaries and benefits exceed the annual net amount of revenue raised by the RTCIP fee. The RTCIP administrative plan further outlines the fiscal responsibilities and limitations of the administrator.  
Chapter 24.44 - CONVERSION OF MOBILE HOME PARK 
 
24.44.010 - Report Required. 
At the time of filing a tentative or tentative parcel map for a subdivision to be created from the conversion of a mobile home park to another use, the subdivider shall file a report in accordance with Section 66427.4 of the Act. 
(Ord. No. 396)  
24.44.020 - Procedure. 
In approving a conversion of a mobile home park to another use, the City Council shall comply with the requirements of Section 66427.4 of the Act.  
Chapter 24.50 - MAJOR SUBDIVISION: TENTATIVE MAP PROCEDURE 
 
24.50.010 - Requirements. 
A.  Every subdivider proposing to create a major subdivision shall comply with the procedures contained in this Chapter. Prior to the filing of a tentative map, the subdivider or his authorized agent shall confer with the Planning Director and the City Engineer regarding the preparation of the map. 
B.  A vesting tentative map shall be filed in accordance with the procedures contained in this Chapter. (Government Code § 66452) 
(Ord. No. 396)  
24.50.020 - Filing of Tentative Map. 
A.  The subdivider shall submit to the Planning Director, in as many copies as required by the City, the proposed tentative map. 
B.  A proposed tentative map shall not be deemed filed until: 
1.  All necessary zoning approvals have been secured. 
2.  An environmental impact report, negative declaration, or exemption determination, as required, has been certified for the project covered by the application. 
3.  The map complies with the form as content requirements of this Title. 
4.  The filing fee has been paid in full.  
24.50.030 - Notice to School Board. 
Within ten days of the filing of a tentative map, the Planning Director shall send a notice in accordance with Section 66455.7 of the Act.  
24.50.040 - Preparation of Tentative Map. 
The tentative map shall be based upon a reasonably accurate or detailed survey and shall be prepared in accordance with the provisions relating to final maps contained in Subsections 24.54.040.A., B., and E.  
24.50.050 - Contents of Tentative Map. 
Each tentative map shall depict all contiguous property owned by the subdivider and shall contain the following information: 
A.  Name and address of the owner whose property is proposed to be subdivided and the name and address of the subdivider. 
B.  Name and address of registered civil engineer or licensed surveyor, who prepared the map. 
C.  North arrow. 
D.  Scale. 
E.  Date of preparation. 
F.  The location, width and proposed names of all streets within the boundaries of the proposed subdivision and approximate grades thereof and point of access from each lot. 
G.  Locations and width of alleys. 
H.  Names, location and width of adjacent streets. 
I.  Lot lines and approximate dimensions and numbers of each lot. 
J.  Approximate location and width of watercourses of areas subject to inundation from floods, and location of structures, irrigation ditches and other permanent features. 
K.  Approximate contours at two-foot intervals. 
L.  Approximate location of existing buildings and permanent structures. 
M.  Location of all major vegetation showing size and type. 
N.  Legal description of the exterior boundaries of the subdivisions. 
O.  Width and location of all existing and proposed public or private easement, for example utilities and bicycle paths. 
P.  Classification of lots as to be intended residential, commercial, industrial or otherwise. 
Q.  Location of railroads and rights-of-way. 
R.  Approximate radii of curves. 
S.  Any proposed phasing by units. 
T.  Number of units to be constructed when a condominium or community apartment project is involved. 
U.  At the time a vesting tentative map is filed, it shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words "Vesting Tentative Map." 
V.  Locations of existing structures within the subdivision and structures outside the subdivision but within 25 feet of the subdivision boundaries.  
24.50.060 - Additional Information Required with Tentative Map. 
Shown either on the proposed tentative map or on accompanying documents shall be the information regarding the following matters: 
A.  Source of water supply. 
B.  Type of street improvement and utilities which the subdivider proposes to install. 
C.  Proposed method of sewage disposal, including location of facilities. 
D.  Proposed storm water sewer or other means of drainage, including the location of such facilities. 
E.  Protective covenants to be recorded. 
F.  Proposed tree plantings. 
G.  Landscaping and irrigation conceptual plan.  
24.50.070 - Grading Plan. 
There shall be filed with the tentative map a grading plan showing any grading proposed for the creation of building sites within the subdivision or for construction of improvements to serve the subdivision. The grading plan together with the original topographical contours may be shown on the tentative map. This plan shall indicate approximate earthwork volumes of proposed excavation and filling operations. In the event no such grading is proposed, a statement to that effect shall be filed with the tentative map.  
24.50.080 - Preliminary Title Report. 
There shall be filed with the tentative map a current preliminary title report for the property being subdivided.  
24.50.090 - Planning Department Processing of Tentative Map. 
A.  The Planning Department shall obtain recommendations from the City staff, concerned governmental agencies and other persons affected by or integrated in the proposed subdivision and shall present those recommendations to the subdivider for discussion at a pre-hearing conference. 
B.  The Planning Department shall prepare a staff report to the Planning Commission containing recommendations regarding the proposed tentative map.  
25.50.100 - Report in Writing—Fee. 
Any report or recommendation on a tentative map by the staff to the Planning Commission or City Council shall be in writing and a copy thereof served on the subdivider and on each tenant of the subject property; in the case of a proposed conversion of residential real property to a condominium project, community apartment project, or stock cooperative project, at least three days prior to any hearing or action on such map by the advisory agency. A fee in an amount set by resolution, from time to time, by the City Council shall be collected from the subdivider for expenses incurred under this Section. (Government Code § 66452.3)  
24.50.110 - Planning Commission's Processing of Proposed Tentative Map. 
A.  The Planning Commission shall conduct a public hearing on the proposed tentative map. 
B.  The Planning Commission shall investigate each proposed tentative map filed pursuant to this Chapter. The Commission shall consider the proposed design of the subdivision and the kind, nature, and extent of proposed improvements. 
C.  Within 50 days of the filing of the tentative map with the secretary of the Planning Commission, the Planning Commission shall file with the City Clerk its findings and its recommendation based on those findings. The Planning Commission will recommend to the City Council the approval, conditional approval or denial of the tentative map. As appropriate, the Planning Commission shall recommend the kind, nature, and extent of improvements that should be constructed or installed. (Government Code § 66452.1(a))  
24.50.120 - Placing Proposed Tentative Map on City Council Agenda. 
A.  When a report on a tentative map is filed with the City Clerk, the Clerk is directed, unless otherwise directed by the City Council, to act prior to the next regular meeting of the City Council by setting the matter on the City Council agenda for public hearing, which date shall be within 30 days of that next regular meeting. The City Council shall approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the tentative map within that same 30-day period. (Government Code § 66452.2) 
B.  The City Council shall comply with the time periods set forth in Section 66452.2(c) of the Act.  
24.50.130 - Expiration/Extension of Tentative Map. 
A.  In accordance with Section 66452.6 of the Act, a tentative map shall expire 24 months after its approval or conditional approval. 
B.  Upon application received at a meeting of the City Council at least 60 days prior to the expiration of the tentative map, the City Council may extend the time of expiration for a period not to exceed three years from the date of approval of the tentative map. (Government Code § 66463.5)  
24.50.140 - Revised Tentative Map. 
A.  Where a subdivider desires to revise or alter a proposed subdivision for which a tentative map has been approved by the City Council, the subdivider may file with the Planning Department a revised tentative map on payment of the established fees. 
B.  A revised tentative map shall conform to the following requirements: 
1.  The proposed subdivision shown on such map shall generally conform to the street and lot pattern shown on the approved tentative map. 
2.  The proposed subdivision shown on such map shall include only one contiguous area consisting of all or a portion of the subdivision shown on the approved tentative map together with such additional land, if any, as the subdivider desires to include. 
3.  The revised tentative map shall contain all of the information required on tentative maps and shall be accompanied by such data as is required to be filed with proposed tentative maps. 
C.  A revised tentative map shall be filed within 24 months after the approval of the tentative map by the City Council or, if an extension of time is granted within the period specified in such extension. 
D.  Upon the filing of a revised tentative map and payment of the prescribed fee, such revised tentative map shall be treated in all respects as an original tentative map and shall be reported on, approved, conditionally approved, or disapproved, in the same manner as a tentative map, provided, however, that the subdivider shall have 12 months from the approval or conditional approval of the original tentative map within which to obtain final map approval, unless such period is extended pursuant to this Chapter, in which case, the subdivider shall obtain final map approval within the period of any such extension.  
24.50.150 - Replacement of Tentative Map. 
At any time following the filing of a tentative map with the secretary of the Planning Commission, the City engineer may direct the subdivider to submit a replacement tentative map. Such direction shall be based upon the City Engineer's finding that the number or nature of the changes necessary for approval are such that they cannot be shown clearly or simply on the original tentative map.  
Chapter 24.54 - MAJOR SUBDIVISION: FINAL MAP PROCEDURE 
 
24.54.010 - Requirements. 
After the approval or conditional approval of a tentative map and prior to the expiration of such map, a subdivider may cause the real property included within the map, or any part thereof, to be subdivided by complying with the procedures contained in this Chapter. (Government Code § 66456) 
(Ord. No. 396)  
24.54.020 - Multiple Final Maps. 
The subdivider may file multiple final maps prior to the expiration of the tentative map in accordance with Section 66456.1 of the Act.  
24.54.030 - Preparation of Final Map. 
The final map shall be prepared by or under the direction of a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor, shall be based upon a field survey, and shall conform to all of the requirements of Section 66434 of the Act.  
24.54.040 - Supplemental Information on Final Map. 
Every final map shall: 
A.  Contain a definite description of the land subdivided by references to recorded deeds, recorded maps and official United States surveys. Reference to tracts, recorded deeds and recorded maps shall be spelled out, worded identically with original records, and show the book and page of records or map numbers. 
B.  Show the basis of bearings used, the relationship of said bearings to the true meridian, and the north arrow of said map shall appear on each street thereof. 
C.  Show the acreage of all parcels to the nearest hundredth, and corresponding square footage. 
D.  Clearly indicate, by description or a distinctive boundary line, any area subject to flooding at times of high tide or heavy rainfall, and state that such is subject to flooding at time of high tide or heavy rainfall. 
E.  Show a solid line separating all private ways, easements and other rights-of-way not to be accepted as public streets and shown on said map from public streets, and clearly designate their nature and the manner in which the right is reserved or granted.  
24.54.050 - Record of Easements. 
Every final map shall: 
A.  Indicate the centerline data, width and side lines of all easements to which the real property is subject or will be subjected by the approval of the final map. 
B.  Easements for storm drains, sewer and other purposes shall be denoted by broken lines. 
C.  The easement shall be clearly labeled and identified and, if already of record, proper reference to the records given. 
D.  Easements being dedicated shall be so indicated in the certificate of dedication. 
E.  Easements for public utility companies shall be designated on the final map as easements for public utilities.  
24.54.060 - Survey Data. 
A.  The final map shall show the centerlines of all streets, length, tangents, radii and central angles or radial bearings of all curves, the total width of each street, the width of the portion being dedicated, and the width of existing dedication and the width of each side of the centerline; also, the width or rights-of-way of railroads, flood control or drainage channels and any other easements existing or being dedicated by the map. 
B.  Surveys in connection with maps prepared pursuant to this Chapter shall be made in accordance with standard practices and principles for land surveying. A traverse of the boundaries of the subdivisions and all lots and blocks shall close. Sufficient data shall be shown to determine readily the bearing and length of each line. Dimensions of lots shall be net dimensions, and no ditto marks shall be used. 
C.  Traverse sheets and work sheets showing the closure of the exterior boundaries and of each irregular block and lot shall be provided. 
D.  The final map shall also have indicated thereon the following: 
1.  Suitable primary survey control points. 
a.  Section corners. 
b.  Monuments (existing outside of subdivision). 
2.  Location of all permanent monuments within the subdivisions. 
3.  Ties to any City or County boundary lines involved. 
4.  Ties to and identification of adjacent subdivisions. 
5.  Required certificates.  
24.54.070 - Lot Numbers. 
A.  The lots shall be numbered consecutively, commencing with the number "1" with no omissions or duplications. In the case of successive subdivisions of the same basic name, the numbering may be successively extended from the previous subdivision bearing the same general name. 
B.  Each lot shall be shown entirely on one sheet.  
24.54.080 - Established Lines. 
A.  Whenever the City Engineer has established the centerline of a street or alley, such data shall be considered in making the surveys and in preparing the final map, and all monuments found shall be indicated and proper references made to field books or maps of public record relating to the monuments. If the points were reset by ties, that fact shall be stated. 
B.  The final map shall show City boundaries crossing or adjoining the subdivision clearly designated and tied in.  
24.54.090 - Additional Certificates on Final Map. 
In addition to certificates and other material required by the Subdivision Map Act and this Title, every final map shall bear the following certificates or endorsements: 
A.  A certificate by the City Treasurer and the County Director of Sanitation and Flood Control, where applicable, to the effect that there are no unpaid special assessments or bonds which may be paid in full shown by the records in their offices against the subdivision or any part thereof. 
B.  A certificate by the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors that the provisions of Division 2, Title 7 of the Government Code have been complied with regarding deposits for taxes on the property within the subdivision. (Government Code § 66492) 
C.  Certificate of the County Recorder as to the filing of the map. 
D.  A certificate signed and sealed by the engineer-surveyor in accordance with Section 66441 of the Subdivision Map Act. 
E.  A certificate signed by the City Engineer in accordance with Section 66442 of the Act. 
F.  A certificate for execution by the City Clerk, stating that the City Council approved the final map; and accepted, accepted subject to improvement or rejected, on behalf of the public, any real property offered for dedication for public use in conformity with the terms of the offer of dedication. (Government Code § 66440) 
G.  A certificate, signed and acknowledged before a notary, by all parties, and if a corporation, a certified copy of the appropriate resolution of such corporation, having any record title interest in the real property subdivided, consenting to the preparation and recordation of the final map is required, except as set forth in Section 66436 of the Act. (Government Code § 66430) 
H.  Where dedications are required, a certificate offering to dedicate interests in real property for specified public purposes in accordance with the Act. The certificate shall be properly signed and acknowledged before a notary public and shall be signed by all parties having any record title interest in the real property being subdivided subject to the provisions of Section 66436 of the Act. In case any dedication or consent shown on a subdivision map is signed by a corporation, a certified copy of the resolution passed by the board of directors must accompany the final map. (Government Code § 66439) 
I.  The certificate of a qualified title company that the parties who executed the owner's certificate required by Section 66436 of the Act are all the parties having any record title interest in the land subdivided. Said certificates shall also set forth the names of the parties owning the interests set forth in Section 66436 of the Act, together with a description of said interests and the reasons the parties did not execute the owner's certificate. The title company shall, on the date the final map will be transmitted to the County Recorder, present to the County Recorder a letter stating that on said date the names of the parties and the other facts set forth in the title company's certificate were the same as shown by the certificate. (Government Code § 66443) 
J.  In the event that a grant of an open space easement is to be made over any portion of the subdivision, the final map shall contain a certificate signed and acknowledged by those parties having any record title interest in the subdivided land granting such open space easement and stating the conditions of the grant. (Government Code § 66443) 
K.  A notice in accordance with Section 66434.1 of the Act relating to the development lien created under the Education Code.  
24.54.100 - Certificates by Separate Instrument. 
A.  The City may require that the certificates and acknowledgements required by this Title be made by separate instrument to be recorded concurrently with the final map being filed for record. 
B.  Whenever a certificate or acknowledgement is made by separate instrument, there shall appear on the final map a reference to the separately recorded documents. This reference shall be completed by the San Diego County Recorder pursuant to Section 66468.1 of the Act.  
24.54.110 - Title Company Subdivision Guarantee. 
In lieu of the title company certificate required by this Chapter there may be filed with the City Engineer a subdivision guarantee from a qualified title company which guarantees that the parties names therein are the only parties having any record title interest in the land subdivided. The title company shall, on the date the final map will be transmitted to the County Recorder, present to the County Recorder pursuant to the requirements of Section 66465 of the Act, a letter stating that at the time of filing of the final or parcel map in the office of the County Recorder, the parties consenting to such filing are all of the parties having a record title interest in the real property being subdivided who signatures are required by Division 2 of Title 7 of the Act, as shown by the records in the office of the Recorder.  
24.54.120 - Soils Report Certificate. 
A.  When a soils report, a geologic report, or soils and geologic reports have been prepared specifically for the subdivision, such fact shall be noted on the final map, together with the date of such report or reports, the name of the engineer making the soils report and geologist making the geologic report and the location where the reports are on file. 
B.  The soils report, geologic report or soils and geologic reports specified in Subsection A. shall be kept for public inspection by the City. (Government Code § 66434.5)  
24.54.130 - Processing of Final Map by Planning Department. 
A.  The final map shall be submitted to the Planning Department at least 60 days prior to its expiration together with the established fee. 
B.  The Planning Department will obtain recommendations from all appropriate City staff and governmental agencies regarding the form and content of the proposed final map. 
C.  The Planning Department shall prepare a report to the City Council and provide to the subdivider a copy.  
24.54.140 - Processing of Final Map by City Council. 
A.  Upon receipt of the department report, the City Clerk shall place the matter on the agenda of the City Council at the next regular meeting. 
B.  The City Council shall approve the map if it conforms to all the requirements of this Title applicable at the time of approval or conditional approval of the tentative map and any rulings made thereunder; or, if it does not so conform, disapprove the map. If the City Council does not act within the prescribed time, or any authorized extension thereof, and the map conforms to all said requirements and rulings, it shall be deemed approved, and the City Clerk shall certify its approval thereon. (Government Code § 66458)  
24.54.150 - Transmittal of Final Map to County Recorder. 
After the approval by the City of a final map of a subdivision, the City Clerk shall transmit the map to the Clerk of the County Board of Supervisors for ultimate transmittal to the County Recorder. The City Clerk shall transmit parcel maps approved by the City directly to the County Recorder. (Government Code § 66464)  
24.54.160 - Correction and Amendment of Final Map. 
Correction of and amendments to the final map shall be made pursuant to Sections 66469 et seq. of the Act.  
24.54.170 - Expiration of Vesting Tentative Map. 
The rights conferred by a vesting tentative map shall last for an initial time period of two years beyond the recording of the final map. Extension of the initial time period shall be in accordance with Section 66452.6(g) of the Act.  
Chapter 24.60 - MINOR SUBDIVISION: TENTATIVE PARCEL MAP 
 
24.60.010 - Requirement. 
Every subdivider proposing to create a minor subdivision shall comply with the procedure and requirements contained in this Chapter. (Government Code § 66428) 
(Ord. No. 396)  
24.60.020 - Tentative Map Contents and Procedures. 
Unless otherwise provided in this Title, tentative parcel maps shall be subject to the requirements and procedures applicable to tentative maps contained in Chapter 24.50.  
Chapter 24.64 - MINOR SUBDIVISION: PARCEL MAP 
 
24.64.010 - Requirement. 
After the approval or conditional approval of a tentative parcel map and prior to the expiration of such map, a subdivider may cause the real property included within the tentative parcel map, or any part thereof, to be subdivided by complying with the procedures contained in this Chapter. (Government Code § 66463) 
(Ord. No. 396; Ord. No. 681)  
24.64.020 - Preparation of Parcel Map. 
The parcel map shall be prepared by or under the direction of a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor, shall show the location of streets and property lines bounding the property and shall conform to all of the following provisions: 
A.  The provisions of Section 66445 of the Act. 
B.  Shall be based upon a field survey made in conformity with the Land Surveyors Act. (Government Code § 66448)  
24.64.030 - Supplemental Information of Parcel Map. 
A.  The parcel map shall contain the information required of a final map as set forth in Chapter 24.54, portions of which may be waived by the City Engineer when not required to achieve the purposes of this Title. 
B.  A certificate of an engineer or land surveyor in accordance with Section 66449 of the Act. 
C.  A certificate in accordance with Section 66450 of the Act relating to unincorporated territory.  
24.64.040 - Processing of Parcel Map. 
A parcel map shall be processed in accordance with the procedure made applicable to final map by Chapter 24.54.  
24.64.050 - Waiver of Parcel Map. 
Notwithstanding the other provisions of this Chapter, where a valid Tentative Parcel Map has been approved for either a condominium conversion where no new lots are being created, or a lot consolidation resulting in the creation of one single lot, the owner of such property may make an application for a waiver from the requirement to obtain a Parcel Map. Upon a determination by the Director of the Department of Planning and Community Development that such application is complete, the request shall be scheduled for review by the Planning Commission at a noticed public hearing. 
The application for a Parcel Map Waiver shall be approved by the Planning Commission upon a finding that each of the following is correct: 
A.  The subdivider has applied for, and it is appropriate to issue, a Certificate of Compliance or Conditional Certificate of Compliance which includes an accompanying plat that can be recorded with the County Recorder to accurately depict the lot lines and which includes provisions for permanent monumentation and other features deemed necessary by the City Engineer; 
B.  The proposed subdivision complies with the requirements established by the State and the City concerning lot area and dimensions, improvement and design, flood water drainage control, dedication of rights-of-way and easements, appropriately improved public roads and access thereto, sanitary disposal facilities, water supply availability, fire protection facilities, environmental protection, and with all other requirements of State and City law, including the provisions of DMMC Title 24 which would otherwise be applicable to the proposed subdivision; and 
C.  The subdivider has complied with each and all of the conditions imposed on the Tentative Parcel Map. 
(Ord. No. 681)  
Chapter 24.65 - DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Note— For the statutory provision regarding development agreements, see Government Code §§ 65864 et seq. 
 
24.65.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish procedures and requirements for the City's consideration of development agreements upon application by, or on behalf of, a property owner or other person having a legal or equitable interest in the property which is to be the subject of a development agreement. In adopting this Chapter, the City Council has considered the Community Plan (General Plan) of the City of Del Mar, and the legislative findings and declarations set forth in Section 65864 of the Government Code. 
(Ord. No. 811, § 1(part), 2008)  
24.65.020 - Development agreement—Authorized. 
Pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 2.5 of Division 1 of Title 7 of the Government Code (Sections 65864 et seq.), the City Council is hereby authorized to enter into development agreements upon application by, or on behalf of, a property owner or other person having a legal or equitable interest in the property which is the subject of the proposed agreement. 
(Ord. No. 811, § 1(part), 2008)  
24.65.030 - Same—Application, fees. 
A.  A developer wishing to enter into a development agreement with the City shall submit to the Director of Planning and Community Development a written application on a form provided by the Director of Planning and Community Development. 
B.  The Director of Planning and Community Development may require the developer to submit such additional information and supporting data as may be considered necessary to properly evaluate the proposed development agreement. 
C.  The written application required herein shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable processing fee in an amount as set by Resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 811, § 1(part), 2008)  
24.65.040 - Proposed form of agreement. 
Each application shall be accompanied by the form of development agreement proposed by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 811, § 1(part), 2008)  
24.65.050 - Review of application. 
The Director of Planning and Community Development shall review the application to determine whether or not it is complete. If it is found that the application is complete, the Director of Planning and Community Development shall accept it for filing. If the application is found to be incomplete, the Director of Planning and Community Development shall refuse to accept the application for filing and shall inform the applicant of the items necessary to properly complete the application. 
(Ord. No. 811, § 1(part), 2008)  
24.65.060 - Development agreement—Hearing by Planning Commission. 
A.  The Director of Planning and Community Development shall refer all applications for development agreements to the Planning Commission for a public hearing. 
B.  Upon receipt of the application, the Planning Commission shall set a date for the public hearing. 
C.  The Director of Planning and Community Development shall insure that the public is given proper notice of said public hearing in accordance with Section 24.65.070. 
(Ord. No. 811, § 1(part), 2008)  
24.65.070 - Public hearing, notice. 
Any public hearing held pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter shall be noticed as follows: 
A.  Time and Manner of Notice. Notice shall be given at least ten calendar days before the hearing in the following manner. 
1.  Publication at least once in a newspaper of general circulation, published and circulated in the City. 
2.  Notice of the hearing shall be mailed or delivered at least ten days prior to the hearing to the owner of the subject real property or the owner's duly authorized agent, and to the project applicant. 
3.  Notice of the hearing shall be mailed or delivered at least ten days prior to the hearing to each local agency expected to provide water, sewage, streets, roads, schools, or other essential facilities or services to the project, whose ability to provide those facilities and services may be significantly affected. 
4.  Notice of the hearing shall be mailed or delivered at least ten days prior to the hearing to all owners of real property as shown on the latest equalized assessment roll within 300 feet of the real property that is the subject of the hearing. In lieu of utilizing the assessment roll, the City Clerk may utilize the records of the County Assessor or Tax Collector which contain more recent information than the assessment roll. If the number of owners to whom notice would be mailed or delivered pursuant to this Subsection or Subsection 2. is greater than 1,000, the City Clerk, in lieu of mailed or delivered notice, may provide notice by placing a display advertisement of at least one-eighth page in a newspaper of general circulation within the City of Del Mar at least ten days prior to the hearing. 
5.  If the notice is mailed or delivered pursuant to Subsection 4., the notice shall also be posted at least ten days prior to the hearing in at least three public places in the City of Del Mar, including one public place in the area directly affected by the proceeding. 
B.  Content of Notice. The notice required herein shall contain the following information: 
1.  The date, time and place of the hearing. 
2.  The identity of the body conducting the hearing. 
3.  A general explanation of the matter to be considered. 
4.  A general description, in text or by diagram, of the location of the real property that is the subject of the Development Agreement. 
5.  Other information required by specific provision of these regulations or which the City, through its Department Heads, may consider necessary or desirable. 
C.  Declaration of Existing Law. The notice requirements referred to in Subsections A. and B. are declaratory of existing law (Government Code § 65867 and §§ 65090 and 65091 as referenced therein). If State law prescribes a different notice requirement, notice shall be given in that manner. 
D.  Failure to Receive Notice. The failure of any person so entitled to receive the notice required herein shall not affect the authority of the City to enter into a development agreement. 
(Ord. No. 811, § 1(part), 2008)  
24.65.080 - Conduct of hearing. 
The public hearing held pursuant to this Chapter shall be conducted as nearly as may be possible in accordance with the procedural standards adopted under Government Code § 65804 for the conduct of zoning hearings. Each person interested in the matter shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The applicant shall have the burden of proof at the public hearing on the proposed development agreement. 
(Ord. No. 811, § 1(part), 2008)  
24.65.090 - Irregularity in proceedings. 
No action, inaction or recommendation regarding the proposed development agreement shall be held void or invalid, or be set aside by a court by reason of any error, irregularity, informality, neglect or omission, ("error") as to any matter pertaining to petition, application, notice, finding, record, hearing, report, recommendation, or any matters of procedure whatever unless after an examination of the entire case, including the evidence, the court is of the opinion that the error complained of was prejudicial and that by reason of the error the complaining party sustained and suffered substantial injury, and that a different result would have been probable if the error had not occurred or existed. There is no presumption that error is prejudicial or that injury was done if error is shown. 
(Ord. No. 811, § 1(part), 2008)  
24.65.100 - Determination by Planning Commission. 
A.  After the hearing by the Planning Commission, the Planning Commission shall forward its written recommendation and the application to the City Council. The recommendation shall include the Planning Commission's determination of whether or not the development agreement proposed: 
1.  Is consistent with the objectives, policies, general land uses and programs specified in the general plan and any applicable specific plan; 
2.  Is compatible with the uses authorized in, and the regulations prescribed for the land use district in which the real property is located; 
3.  Is in conformity with public convenience, general welfare and good land use practice; 
4.  Will be detrimental to the health, safety and general welfare; 
5.  Will adversely affect the orderly development of property or the preservation of property valued. 
B.  The recommendation shall include the factual bases for said determinations. 
(Ord. No. 811, § 1(part), 2008)  
24.65.110 - Development agreement—Hearing by City Council. 
A.  Upon receipt of the application and the written recommendation of the Planning Commission, the City Council shall set a date for a public hearing on the matter. 
B.  The City Clerk shall insure that the public is given notice of the public hearing in accordance with Section 24.65.070. 
C.  The public hearing shall be conducted as required by Section 24.65.080. 
(Ord. No. 811, § 1(part), 2008)  
24.65.120 - Action by City Council. 
A.  After the public hearing, the City Council may approve, modify or disapprove the recommendation of the Planning Commission. It may refer back to the Planning Commission, for report and recommendation, matters not previously considered by the Planning Commission. 
B.  Upon receipt of a referral as set forth in Subsection A., the Planning Commission, without further public hearing, shall consider the new matters and report its recommendations in writing to the City Council within 40 days after receipt of said referral. Failure to act within the 40-day limit shall constitute a favorable endorsement on the matters set forth in the referral. 
C.  If the City Council approves the development agreement it shall do so by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 811, § 1(part), 2008)  
24.65.130 - Requirements for approval. 
No development agreement may be approved by the City Council unless all of the following conditions are met: 
A.  The City Council must find that: 
1.  The provisions of the agreement are consistent with the Community Plan and any applicable specific plan, and 
2.  The development agreement complies with all applicable zoning, subdivision, and building regulations and with the general and any relevant specific plan. 
B.  The agreement must state: 
1.  The specific duration of the agreement; 
2.  The permitted uses of the property; 
3.  The density and intensity of use; 
4.  The maximum height and size of proposed buildings; 
5.  Specific provisions for reservation or dedication of land for public purposes. 
(Ord. No. 811, § 1(part), 2008)  
24.65.140 - Effective date of development agreement. 
In adopting this Chapter, the City Council recognizes the fact that a development agreement is a legislative act which is subject to referendum. Therefore, notwithstanding the fact that the City Council adopts an ordinance approving a development agreement and causes said agreement to be signed, said agreement shall be effective and shall only create obligations on the part of the City from and after the date that the ordinance approving said development agreement takes effect. 
(Ord. No. 811, § 1(part), 2008)  
24.65.150 - Development agreement—Amendment or cancellation. 
Either party may propose an amendment to or cancellation in whole or in part of a development agreement previously entered into. However, with the exception of modification or revocation pursuant to Sections 24.65.190 through 24.65.240, both parties must agree in writing to an amendment, or cancellation, of a development agreement before it shall be effective. 
(Ord. No. 811, § 1(part), 2008)  
24.65.160 - Amendment or cancellation procedure. 
A.  The procedure for proposing an adoption of an amendment to or cancellation in whole or in part of the development agreement is the same as the procedure for entering into an agreement in the first instance as outlined in this Chapter. 
B.  However, where the City Council initiates the proposed amendment to or cancellation in whole or in part of the development agreement, it shall first give notice to the property owner of its intention to initiate such proceedings at least 15 calendar days in advance of the giving of notice of the public hearing regarding the amendment or cancellation pursuant to Section 24.65.070. 
(Ord. No. 811, § 1(part), 2008)  
24.65.170 - Recordation of development agreement, amendment or cancellation. 
A.  Within ten days after the effective date of the development agreement, the City Clerk shall have the agreement recorded with the County Recorder. 
B.  If the parties to the agreement or their successors in interest amend or cancel the agreement as provided in Government Code § 65868, or if the City terminates or modifies the agreement as provided in Government Code § 65865.1 for failure of the applicant to comply in good faith with the terms or conditions of the agreement, the City Clerk shall have notice of such action recorded with the County Recorder. 
(Ord. No. 811, § 1(part), 2008)  
24.65.180 - Development agreement—Duration. 
The City Council may establish the term of a development agreement at the time said development agreement is approved by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 811, § 1(part), 2008)  
24.65.190 - Same—Periodic review. 
A.  Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 24.65.180, periodic reviews of the development agreement shall be conducted as follows: 
1.  The City Council shall review the development agreement at least once every 12 months after the effective date of the adopting ordinance (hereinafter "annual review"). 
2.  The City Council may, on its own motion or on the advice of the City Manager, review the development agreement more often than once every 12 months as it is deemed necessary (hereinafter "special review"). 
3.  The City Council may delegate or refer the periodic review of the development agreement to the City Manager or his/her designated representative. 
(Ord. No. 811, § 1(part), 2008)  
24.65.200 - Notice of periodic review. 
Notice of periodic review shall be given as follows: 
A.  Notice to Developer. 
1.  The Director of Planning and Community Development shall give the developer 30 calendar days' advance notice of annual review, by placing such notice to the developer into the U.S. Mail, first class, postage prepaid, and addressed to such address as the developer has listed in the development agreement. 
2.  The City Clerk shall give the developer notice of a special review in the same manner as provided in Subsection A.1. above for annual review. 
B.  Notice to the Public. Public notice of annual or special reviews shall be accomplished as set forth in Section 24.65.070. 
(Ord. No. 811, § 1(part), 2008)  
24.65.210 - Periodic review—Hearing, burden, findings. 
A.  Any periodic review conducted pursuant to Section 24.65.190 shall be accomplished in the form of a public hearing as required by Section 24.65.080. 
B.  The burden shall be on the developer, or his successor in interest, to demonstrate good-faith compliance with the terms of the agreement. 
C.  At the conclusion of the public hearing, the City Council shall make findings regarding whether or not the developer has, for the period under review, complied in good faith with the terms and conditions of the agreement. 
(Ord. No. 811, § 1(part), 2008)  
24.65.220 - Same—Action by council. 
A.  If the City Council finds and determines on the basis of the evidence given that the property owner has complied in good faith with the terms and conditions of the agreement during the period under review, the review for that period shall be concluded. 
B.  If the City Council finds and determines on the basis of substantial evidence that the property owner has not complied in good faith with the terms and conditions of the agreement during the period under review, the council may modify or terminate the agreement. 
C.  If the periodic review has been referred by the City Council to the City Manager or his/her designated representative, the determination resulting from said review shall be appealable in writing to the City Council within ten calendar days after the final action. A hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the City Council's rules for consideration of appeals. 
D.  If the periodic review is conducted by the City Council, the determination resulting from said review shall be deemed to be final for all purposes. 
(Ord. No. 811, § 1(part), 2008)  
24.65.230 - Same—Modification or termination of agreement—Public hearing, notice. 
A.  If, upon a finding pursuant to Subsection 24.65.220.B., the City determines to proceed with modification or termination of the agreement, the City shall set a hearing date and give notice to the property owner and the public of the hearing. Said notice shall be given in the manner set forth in Sections 24.65.200 and 24.65.070. 
B.  In addition to the informational content required by Sections 24.65.200 and 24.65.070, the notice required by this Section shall contain: 
1.  A statement concerning whether the City proposes to terminate or to modify the development agreement; 
2.  Other information which the City considers necessary to inform the property owner of the nature of the proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 811, § 1(part), 2008)  
24.65.240 - Same—Modification or termination—Hearing. 
A.  Any public hearing on the subject of modification or termination of the agreement based upon a periodic review, shall be conducted in the manner prescribed by Section 24.65.080. 
B.  Upon concluding said hearing, the City Council may take whatever action it deems necessary to protect the interests of the City. 
C.  The decision of the City Council shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 811, § 1(part), 2008)  
Chapter 24.70 - LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS 
 
24.70.010 - Requirements. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Title to the contrary, every person desiring to adjust a lot line(s) between two or more adjacent legal lots, where the land taken from one lot is added to an adjacent lot, without creating a greater number of lots, shall comply with the procedures set forth in this Chapter for obtaining authorization for a Lot Line Adjustment. (Government Code § 66412(d)) 
(Ord. No. 396; Ord. No. 726)  
24.70.020 - Filing of Application. 
A.  The applicant shall file with the Planning Department a proposed plat depicting the Lot Line Adjustment. The form and content of the proposed plat shall comply with the requirements contained in this Title for parcel maps creating minor subdivisions. 
B.  No tentative parcel map or parcel map shall be required. 
C.  In addition to the required Lot Line Adjustment plat, the applicant shall provide a title report for the lots to be adjusted, along with any other information deemed necessary by the Director of Planning and Community Development for the processing of the application. The applicant shall also pay the established fee before the application is accepted for filing.  
24.70.030 - Issuing Authority/Planning Director's Action. 
A.  Unless otherwise specified in this Chapter, the Director of Planning and Community Development shall serve as the issuing authority on the application and shall act within 45 days of filing of a complete application. 
B.  Unless otherwise specified in this Chapter, the Director of Planning and Community Development is authorized to approve, disapprove or direct the revision of the proposed Lot Line Adjustment plat. 
C.  Where the Director of Planning and Community Development serves as the issuing authority for an application for a Lot Line Adjustment, the decision of the Director of Planning and Community Development shall become final 15 days after the decision, unless a timely appeal is filed.  
24.70.040 - Disapproval of Application. 
The application for a lot line adjustment shall be disapproved if the issuing authority makes one or more of the following findings: 
A.  The proposed adjustment will create a greater number of lots than originally existed. 
B.  The proposed adjustment will create a condition that does not comply with building or zoning regulations. 
C.  The proposed adjustment will create a lot that does not conform to the lot size and configuration design requirements applicable for the lot, unless such requirements are otherwise suspended in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. 
D.  The proposed adjustment will result in denying adequate access or adequate utility service to one or more of the adjusted lots or to adjacent property. 
E.  The proposed adjustment fails to provide adequate easements to serve the adjusted lots or adjacent property. 
F.  The proposed adjustment will extend beyond the City limit boundary. 
G.  The proposed adjustment will require substantial alteration of any existing improvement or creates a need for any new improvement. 
H.  The proposed adjustment will adjust the boundary line between lots that are subject to an agreement for public improvements, unless the City Engineer finds that the proposed adjustment will not materially affect such agreement for the security therefore.  
24.70.050 - Directed Revision. 
The Director of Planning and Community Development is authorized to withhold approval of the application and direct that the following revisions be made: 
A.  Relocation of lot lines to provide lots that comply with the applicable building and zoning regulations and that conform to the lot size and configuration design requirements specified in this Title, unless an application for suspension of design requirements is submitted by the applicant and approved by the City Council in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. 
B.  Provision of safe and adequate access and adequate utility service easements to each lot and adjacent property. 
C.  Addition of further information on the proposed Lot Line Adjustment plat as determined appropriate by the City Engineer.  
24.70.060 - Failure to File Directed Revisions. 
If the applicant fails to file revisions to a submitted Lot Line Adjustment plat as directed by the Director of Planning and Community Development within six months from the date of the Director's action requiring such revisions, the application shall be deemed denied and all proceedings shall terminate.  
24.70.070 - Appeal of Director of Planning and Community Development's Decision. 
A.  Within 15 days after a decision made by the Director of Planning and Community Development approving, denying or directing revision of the Lot Line Adjustment application, any person affected thereby, may appeal the decision to the City Council by filing with the City Clerk, a Notice of Appeal which specifies the decision or part thereof appealed from and the specific errors alleged as the basis for the appeal. 
B.  Upon the receipt of a sufficient Notice of Appeal, together with the established fee, the City Clerk shall set the matter for consideration by the City Council.  
24.70.080 - City Council Action on Appeal. 
The City Council shall review an appeal of the Director of Planning and Community Development's decision in accordance with the provisions of the Municipal Code and shall uphold, overrule or modify the Director's decision. With the concurrence of the applicant, the matter may be returned to the Director for further action.  
24.70.090 - Suspension of Design Requirements. 
A.  An applicant for a Lot Line Adjustment may request that the requirement for compliance with the lot size and configuration design requirements applicable to the adjusted lots be suspended. When a request for suspension of design requirements is made, the City Council shall assume responsibility as the issuing authority for the Lot line Adjustment application. 
B.  The City Council may suspend the requirement for compliance with the applicable lot design requirements upon making both of the following findings: 
1.  That the suspension of the design requirements will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property in the immediate vicinity; and 
2.  That there is an overriding public benefit to be derived from the suspension of the otherwise-required design requirements. 
C.  Where the City Council assumes responsibility as the issuing authority for an application for a Lot Line Adjustment, the application shall be scheduled for a hearing before the City Council with public notice provided in accordance with the requirements for public notice as set forth in this Title for applications for Tentative Parcel Maps. 
D.  Where the City Council assumes responsibility as the issuing authority for an application for a Lot Line Adjustment, the City Council shall approve or disapprove the proposed Lot Line Adjustment plat based upon the standards contained within this Chapter. The City Council's action on the matter shall be final.  
24.70.100 - Monumentation and Legal Descriptions. 
Upon approval of an application for a Lot Line Adjustment, the applicant shall: 
A.  Prepare and install, to the City Engineer's satisfaction, permanent property corner monumentation that reflects the approved Lot Line Adjustment Plat; and 
B.  Receive approval for and record a Certificate of Compliance reflecting the legal description of the lot lines authorized by the Lot Line Adjustment Plat.  
Chapter 24.74 - REVERSION TO ACREAGE 
 
24.74.010 - Requirement. 
The City Council on its own motion or all of the owners of record of the real property by petition may revert the subdivided real property to acreage pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter. (Government Code §§ 66499.11, 66499.12). 
(Ord. No. 396)  
24.74.020 - Petition. 
The petition shall be in a form prescribed by the Community Development Director and shall contain, without limitation, the following: 
A.  Adequate evidence of title to the real property within the subdivision. 
B.  Sufficient data to enable the City Council to make all of the required determinations and findings. 
C.  A final map which delineates dedications which will not be vacated and dedications which are a condition to reversion or a parcel map in accordance with Section 66499.20 1/4 of the Act for four or less contiguous parcels in the form prescribed by this Title, there being no tentative map required. 
D.  Evidence of the consent of all of the owners of an interest in the property. 
E.  Evidence that none of the improvements required to be made have been made within two years from the date the final map or parcel map was filed for record or within the time allowed by agreement for completion of the improvements, whichever is later. 
F.  Evidence that no lots shown on the final or parcel map have been sold within five years from the date such final or parcel map was filed for record. (Government Code § 66499.13).  
24.74.030 - Procedure. 
A.  Upon payment of the established fee and the filing of a sufficient petition and proposed map, the Planning Director shall prepare a report and submit the matter to the Planning Commission. (Government Code § 66499.14). 
B.  The petition shall be set on the agenda of the Planning Commission for noticed, public hearing. (Government Code § 66499.15) 
C.  The reversion to acreage will be approved only if the Planning Commission makes the findings set forth in Section 66499.16 of the Act. 
D.  The Planning Commission shall impose the required conditions set forth in Section 66499.17 of the Act. Upon approval of the reversing, the map shall be delivered to the County Recorder for filing.  
24.74.040 - Appeal of Planning Commission Decision. 
A.  Within 15 days after the adoption of a resolution approving, denying or conditionally approving the petition, any person affected thereby may appeal the decision to the City Council by filing with the City Clerk a Notice of Appeal which specifies the decision or part thereof appealed from and the specific errors alleged as the basis of the appeal. 
B.  Upon receipt of a sufficient Notice of Appeal together with the established fee, the City Clerk shall set the matter for a noticed, public hearing by the City Council.  
24.74.050 - City Council Action on Appeal. 
A.  The City Council shall conduct a noticed public hearing. 
B.  The City Council shall sustain, overrule, or modify the Planning Commission decision. With the concurrence of the applicant, the matter may be returned to the Planning Commission for further action.  
Chapter 24.80 - ENFORCEMENT 
 
24.80.010 - Requirement. 
The Planning Director shall investigate reported violations of this Title and initiate enforcement proceedings as required. 
(Ord. No. 396)  
24.80.020 - Lots Created Prior to March 4, 1972. 
Any parcel created prior to March 4, 1972, shall be dealt with in accordance with Sections 66412.6 and 66412.8 of the Act.  
24.80.030 - Withholding Development Permits and Approvals. 
In accordance with Section 66499.34 of the Act, the City may deny or conditionally approve the issuance of permits or other approvals necessary to develop real property divided in violation of the provisions of this Title or the Act.  
24.80.040 - Certification of Compliance. 
The City shall issue certificates of compliance in accordance with Section 66499.36 of the Act.  
24.80.050 - Notice of Violation. 
The City shall record notices of violations in accordance with Section 66499.36 of the Act.  
24.80.060 - Merger of Parcels. 
The City shall process merger of parcels in accordance with Sections 66451.10 through 66451.21 of the Act, utilizing the procedures applicable to Lot Line Adjustments.  
24.80.070 - Unmerger of Parcels. 
The City shall proceed with the unmerger of parcels in accordance with Sections 66451.30 through 66451.33 of the Act.  
TITLE 30 - ZONING  
Chapter 30.01 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
30.01.010 - Purpose. 
A.  This Title is adopted to regulate the use of real property and the buildings, structures, and improvements located thereon so as to protect, promote, and enhance the public safety, health, and welfare. 
B.  The regulatory provisions of this Title shall implement the provisions of the General Plan to carry out the objectives contained therein. 
C.  This Title shall be known as the "Zoning Regulations." 
D.  Director means the Director of Planning and Community Development.  
30.01.020 - Interpretation of Provisions. 
A.  When, in the opinion of the Director, it is necessary for the City to render an administrative interpretation of one or more of the provisions of this Title, the Director may cause a noticed public hearing to be conducted by the Planning Commission. 
B.  After hearing, the Planning Commission may render an interpretation which shall thereafter control development within the City unless an appeal is filed.  
30.01.030 - Determination of Allowable Use. 
A.  A determination of whether a particular use is within the scope of permitted uses and allowable accessory uses in a particular zone shall constitute a "determination of allowable use." 
B.  A person with an interest in real property located within a particular zone who intends to develop such real property with a use not expressly allowed in such zone shall be entitled to apply to the Planning Commission for a determination of allowable use. 
C.  Upon the making of the application and the payment of the fee set by resolution of the City Council, the Director shall cause a noticed public hearing to be conducted by the Planning Commission. 
D.  After hearing, a written determination of allowable use rendered by the Planning Commission shall be final and thereafter control development within the particular zone unless an appeal is filed.  
30.01.040 - Determination of Development Compliance. 
A.  A determination of whether a particular project complies with the nondiscretionary development regulations applicable to the particular project shall constitute a "determination of development compliance." 
B.  A determination of development compliance rendered by the Director may be appealed to the Plan-ning Commission for reconsideration. The request for reconsideration shall be filed within ten (10) days of such determination. The written determination of the Planning Commission shall be final, unless an appeal is filed. 
C.  A determination of development compliance shall not substitute for an application for relief from the regulations of this Title.  
30.01.050 - Zones. 
A.  The City shall be divided into use zones and the boundaries of those zones shall be depicted on a map known as the "Zoning Map of the City" which shall be on file with the Director and available to the public for review. 
B.  The boundaries of a zone shall be described by an ordinance which shall direct that the Zoning Map of the City be drawn to depict the described boundaries. 
C.  Where possible, zone boundaries shall follow the center line of the streets, highways or shall follow alleys or lot lines depicted on a recorded map.  
30.01.060 - Applications. 
A.  An application for a discretionary or ministerial approval or permit authorized by this Title shall be made on a form approved by the Director, and shall be recorded in the department's records. 
B.  To be received for filing, the application must be complete and the applicant must deposit a sum in an amount determined by the Director to be the estimated processing fee. 
C.  The Director shall determine the amount of the deposit by reference to a cost schedule approved by resolution of the City Council. 
D.  Additions to the deposit may be required by the Director and shall be paid by the applicant or the processing of the application shall be terminated. 
E.  Any funds remaining on deposit after the withdrawal of the processing fee shall be returned to the applicant. 
F.  If the application is denied, the same or similar application shall not be received for filing within one year of the date of denial.  
30.01.070 - Noticed Public Hearings. 
A.  Any matter for which a noticed public hearing must be conducted shall be processed in accordance with this Section. 
B.  Notice shall contain the date, place, and time set for hearing, which shall be not less than ten days nor more than 40 days from the date of notice. Notice shall describe the purpose of the hearing and a description of the areas affected. 
C.  Notice shall be made as follows: 
1.  Published once in a newspaper of general circulation within the City. 
2.  Mailed to all owners as shown on the County Tax Assessors rolls of real property within 300 feet of the exterior boundaries of the property which is the subject of the hearing. 
3.  Posting at City Hall and on the real property which is the subject of the hearing. 
4.  As an alternative to mailing and posting notice, where the number of property owners to whom notice would be sent is greater than 1,000, the Direc-tor may elect to publish a notice by placing a display advertisement of at least one quarter page in a newspaper having the greatest circulation in the area affected by the proposed change, and in at least one additional newspaper of general circulation within such area. 
5.  Notwithstanding the notice procedures described above, the Director shall mail notice by first class mail to any person who has filed a written request therefore and has paid the required fee. Such a request may be submitted at any time during the calendar year and shall apply for the balance of such calendar year. It may then be renewed annually during January.  
30.01.080 - Conflict with State or Federal Rights. 
A.  Upon timely application by a person with an interest in real property or a use, building, structure or improvement, the Planning Commission shall determine whether the operation of the provisions of this Title conflict with such person's right under the law of the State of California or the United States. 
B.  In the event of an affirmative determination, the Planning Commission may, by resolution, adjust the impact of this Title on such person to alleviate the conflict. The determination of the Planning Commission shall be final and shall thereafter control the operation of this Title on the subject property unless an appeal is filed. 
C.  This Section shall not constitute a substitute for any of the other procedures provided for in this Title.  
30.01.090 - Enforcement. 
Enforcement of the provisions of this Title shall be accomplished in accordance with the procedures contained in Title 1 of this Code.  
30.01.100 - Complaints of Violation. 
Whenever a violation of this Chapter occurs or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a complaint in regard thereto. All such complaints shall be in writing and signed by the complainant and shall fully state the location of the alleged violation, the cause of the complaint, and basis thereof. Upon receipt of a complaint, the enforcement officer shall cause an investigation of the alleged violation and take action thereon as provided by this Chapter.  
Chapter 30.04 - DEFINITIONS 
 
30.04.010 - "A" Words and Phrases Defined. 
A.  Access means the place or way by which pedestrians and vehicles have safe, adequate, and suitable ingress and egress to a property or use. 
B.  Accessory Building means an attached portion of the primary dwelling unit or main building that is devoted exclusively to an accessory use, or a detached subordinate building located on the same lot or premises, which is devoted exclusively to either the primary use of the lot or to an accessory use. An Accessory Building may be constructed as either accessory habitable or non-habitable space and used subordinate to the primary use of the lot. Where an Accessory Building is habitable construction and has a kitchen it has the same meaning as "Accessory Dwelling Unit" or "Junior Accessory Dwelling Unit". 
C.  Accessory Dwelling Unit, consistent with the California Government Code, means an additional smaller attached or detached dwelling unit that is located on the same property as a Primary Dwelling Unit and that is designed with separate living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation amenities and that is used or intended to be used as complete independent living facilities for use by one or more persons. Also known as "ADU." 
D.  Accessory Use means a use of land or building, or portion thereof, that is customarily incidental to, related to and clearly subordinate to the primary use of the land or building located upon the same lot or premises. 
E.  Acre means the same as "Acre, Net" unless otherwise specified. 
F.  Acre, Gross means 43,560 square feet of land area, including public and private streets and road easements lying within said area. 
G.  Acre, Net means 43,560 square feet of land area, not including public streets or road easements. 
H.  Addition means the result of any work that increases the volume of an existing structure. Compare "Alteration" and "Structural Alteration." 
I.  Adjacent Grade means shall mean the same as Adjoining Grade. 
J.  Adjoining Grade means the ground contiguous to a given point. Compare "Average Adjoining Grade." 
K.  Agriculture means the use of land for agricultural purposes including farming, dairying, pasturage, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture, and animal and poultry husbandry, and the necessary accessory uses for handling, treating or storing the produces; provided, however, that the operation of any such accessory use shall be secondary to that of normal agricultural activity. 
L.  Alley means a public or private way, not more than twenty feet wide, generally reserved as a secondary means of access to abutting property. 
M.  Alteration means any work on a structure that does not result in any addition to the structure. Compare "Addition" and "Structural Alteration." 
N.  Amendment means a change in the wording or substance of this Chapter, or a change in the zone boundaries (rezoning) upon this map which is a part of this Chapter, when adopted by ordinance passed by the City Council in the manner prescribed by law. 
O.  Animal, Domestic means any household pet commonly maintained in residence with man, or any domesticated animal. 
P.  Apartment [and] Apartment Unit means a room or suite of two or more rooms in a multiple dwelling, occupied or suitable for occupancy as a residence for one family. The same as "Dwelling unit." 
Q.  Apartment Hotel means a building or portion thereof designed for or containing both individual guest rooms, or suites of rooms, and dwelling units. 
R.  Architectural Projection means anything attached to and extending outside the outer face of the exterior wall of a structure and not intended for shelter or occupancy. 
S.  Attic means an unfinished area between the roof and the ceiling beneath. 
T.  Auditorium means the part of a church, school, college, university, public building, or room designated for public assembly, lectures, entertainment, dances or similar use. 
U.  Auto court means the same as "Motel." 
V.  Automobile. See "Motor Vehicle." 
W.  Automobile Repair Business means the activity of doing repair work on motor vehicles, or the replacing of or the adding of parts thereto for compensation. Tire changing, brake adjustments, tire repairing, lamp globe changing, fan belt changing, the changing or charging of batteries, changing or installing of ornamental accessories, lubricating motor vehicles, and such activities as are incidental to the business of selling motor fuel or ornamental accessories shall not be considered as engaging in the automobile repair business. 
X.  Automobile Service Station means a retail place of business engaged in supplying goods and services essential to the normal operation of automobiles, including dispensing of automotive fuel and motor oil, lubrication service, vehicle washing, motor tune-up, brake relining, wheel alignment with portable equipment, and the sale of and servicing of tires, batteries, replacement items, and other automobile accessories. Specifically excluded are such uses as the display of cars for sale, body and fender work, painting, motor and transmission overhaul and replacement, turning of brake drums, and recapping of tires. 
Y.  Automobile Wrecking means the dismantling or wrecking of used motor vehicles or trailers, or storage, sale or dumping of dismantled or wrecked vehicles or their parts. The presence on any lot or parcel of land of two or more motor vehicles which for a period exceeding 30 days have not been capable of operating under their own power, and from which have been or are to be removed for reuse or sale shall constitute prima facie evidence of an automobile wrecking yard. 
Z.  Average Adjoining Grade means a single numerical figure which represents the average grade elevation of the perimeter of a structure. This figure shall be based on the sum of the elevations taken at points where the exterior wall intersects the natural two-foot contour lines plotted on a topographical map for the property. At each intersection point, the lower of the natural or proposed finished grade shall be used in establishing the average grade elevation (AE) between such intersection points. Average Adjoining Grade is calculated as follows: 
AAG. =   Sum (AE X WL)  
   Sum WL 
Where: AE is as defined above and WL (wall length) is the distance measure along the wall between points of intersection. 
AA.  Aviary means any lot, building, structure, enclosure or premise whereupon or wherein are kept more than 25 ornamental or song birds, in any combination, whether such keeping is for pleasure, profit, breeding or exhibiting, but not including poultry or birds kept for production and sale of meat or eggs, or both. 
AB.  Awning means a temporary shelter supported by an exterior wall of a building and of a type which can be retracted, folded or collapsed against the face of the supporting building. Compare "Canopy, Marquee." 
(Ord. No. 541; Ord. No. 601; Ord. No. 724; Ord. No. 795; Ord. No. 932 , § 1, 10-2-2017)  
30.04.020 - "B" Words and Phrases Defined. 
A.  Balcony means a platform enclosed by a railing or parapet projecting from the wall of building for the private use of tenants or for exterior access to an above-grade floor level. 
B.  Bar means a drinking establishment which includes the on-site sale and consumption of beverages and/or food. 
C.  Basement means a level of a building fully or partially below the lower of the finished or natural grade adjacent to the floor area. 
D.  Billboard or Outdoor Advertising Structure means the same as "Sign." 
E.  Boardinghouse or Lodginghouse means a building where lodging and meals are provided for compensation, but not including rest homes. 
F.  Buildable Area means the portion of a lot or parcel which, under the provisions of this Chapter, may be occupied by buildings or structures. 
G.  Building, Accessory. See "Accessory Building." 
H.  Building Addition. See "Addition." 
I.  Building Coverage. See "Lot Coverage." 
J.  Building Height. See "Height, Building or Structure." 
K.  Building, Main means the principal building on a lot or building sites designed or used to accommodate the primary use to which the premises are devoted. Where a permissible use involves more than one structure designed or used for the primary purpose, as in the case of group houses, each such permissible building on one lot, as defined by this Chapter, shall be construed as constituting a main building. 
L.  Building, Site shall mean: 
1.  The ground area of one lot, as defined in this Chapter; or 
2.  The ground area of two or more lots when used in combination for a building or permitted group of buildings, together with all open spaces as required by this Chapter; or 
3.  A parcel of real property other than a "lot," as defined in this Section, which was held as a separate ownership of record on April 4, 1960, which has vehicular access to a street, and which has not merged. 
M.  Bulk Floor Area. For purposes of determining compliance with the bulk floor area limitations contained in this Chapter, "bulk floor area" is the total horizontal area, expressed in square feet, of all floors below a roof having any portion of the floor's perimeter within the walls of a building, calculated from the outside face of those walls and where there is no wall, then from the floor area under the roof. (Bulk Floor Area Chapter 30.72.) 
N.  Business means the purchase, sale, lease, rent or other transaction involving the handling or disposition of any article, service, substance or commodity for livelihood or profit; or the management of office buildings, offices, recreational or amusement enterprises, or the maintenance or use of office, structures, and premises by professions and trades rendering services. 
(Ord. No. 541; Ord. No. 724)  
30.04.030 - "C" Words and Phrases Defined. 
A.  Canopy means a fixed shelter without enclosing walls used only as a roof and attached to the exterior wall or walls of a building and used only for purposes accessory to the building to which it is attached. A canopy may have column support in addition to the support provided by the building to which it is attached. Compare "Awning" and "Marquee." 
B.  Carport means a roofed structure with not more than two enclosed sides to be used for an automobile shelter and storage. See "Garage, Private." 
C.  Cellar shall mean the same as "Basement." 
D.  Reserved. 
E.  Centerline of Streets and Alleys means the centerline established by the City Engineer for any proposed or dedicated public way which, in whole or in part, is included in any street or alley. 
F.  Certificate of Occupancy means a permission to occupy the premises, either by the issuance of a separate certificate by the building department or by an authorized City staff signature on the building permit indicating satisfactory completion of the work performed. 
G.  Charter means the Charter of the City of Del Mar. 
H.  Child Day Care Center or Child Care Nursery means any building or other premises or portion thereof appropriated to the day care, apart from their parents or guardian, of children. Similar terms are day nursery, nursery school, and child day care nursery. Rooms accessory to a church and used for religious education on not more than two days a week are not considered child day care centers. 
I.  City means the City of Del Mar. 
J.  City Engineer means the City Engineer of the City of Del Mar, or his duly authorized representative. 
K.  Clearance of Vegetation means the removal of vegetation through grading or the disturbance of soil. 
L.  Clinic means any facility used for the care, diagnosis, and treatment of sick, active, infirm or injured persons, but not providing board or facilities for overnight accommodations. "Clinic" includes dental clinic, health clinic, medical clinic, and doctors' offices, and may include laboratory facilities in conjunction with normal clinic services. 
M.  Club means any building or premises used by an association of persons organized for some common purpose, whether incorporated or unincorporated, but not including a group organized solely or primarily to render a service customarily carried on as a commercial enterprise. 
N.  Code means the Municipal Code of the City of Del Mar. 
O.  Commercial Mobile Radio Service Facilities—Minor means wireless communication facilities designed to provide mobile and portable radio communication services such as two-way mobile voice communication, paging, voicemail, dispatching, conference calling, facsimile, video telecommunications, electronic mail, and data transmissions. The term "Commercial Mobile Radio Service Facilities—Minor" shall include Cellular Communications, Personal Communication Services (PCS), and Enhanced Specialized Mobile Radio (ESMR) facilities in which all antennas and antenna support structures are mounted on an existing building and the accessory support equipment is installed as an appurtenance to such building. The term "Commercial Mobile Radio Service Facilities—Minor" shall not include any freestanding monopoles or lattice towers. 
P.  Commission means the Planning Commission of the City of Del Mar. 
Q.  Community Care Facility, Small means any facility, place or building, serving six or fewer persons, that is maintained and operated to provide non-medical residential care, day treatment, adult day care or foster family agency services for children, adults, or children and adults, including but not limited to, the physically handicapped, mentally impaired, incompetent person, and abused or neglected children consistent with State law (CA Health and Safety Code §§ 1500 et seq.). For purposes of this Title of the DMMC, a boardinghouse or lodginghouse shall not qualify as, or be deemed to be, a Community Care Facility, Small. 
R.  Community Care Facility, Large means any facility, place or building, serving seven or more persons, that is maintained and operated to provide non-medical residential care, day treatment, adult day care or foster family agency services for children, adults, or children and adults, including but not limited to, the physically handicapped, mentally impaired, incompetent person, and abused or neglected children consistent with State law (CA Health and Safety Code §§ 1500 et seq.). For purposes of this Title of the DMMC, a boardinghouse or lodginghouse shall not qualify as, or be deemed to be, a Community Care Facility, Large. 
S.  Community Plan. See "General Plan." 
T.  Conditional Use Permit means a permit granted by the Planning Commission or City Council in accordance with the terms of this Chapter, for specific cases and for special uses to accommodate needs exceptional in character, and which may be granted contingent upon acceptance and observance of specified conditions to serve the common health, safety and welfare. 
U.  Condominium means an estate in real property consisting of undivided interest in common in a portion of a parcel of real property together with a separate interest in a space in a residential, industrial or commercial building on such real property, such as an apartment, office or store. A condominium may include, in addition, a separate interest in other portions of such real property. 
V.  Contiguous Properties means two or more lots or parcels of land sharing a common boundary line. For purposes of this Chapter, lots or parcels held under common ownership and separated by street of 20 feet or less in width shall be considered as being contiguous. 
W.  Corner Lot. See "Lot, Corner." 
X.  Council. The City Council of The City of Del Mar. 
Y.  County. The County of San Diego. 
Z.  Coverage. See "Lot Coverage." 
AA.  Curb Level. The level of the established top of the curb in front of the building measured at the center of such front. Where no curb exists or no curb level has been established, the City Engineer shall establish such curb level or its equivalent. 
(Ord. No. 541; Ord. No. 582; Ord. No. 635; Ord. No. 669; Ord. No. 758; Ord. No. 896)  
30.04.040 - "D" Words and Phrases Defined. 
A.  Day Care Facility, Large Family means a facility for the care of seven to 14 children consistent with the State law (CA Health and Safety Code §§ 1596 and 1597 et seq.). 
B.  Day Care Facility, Small Family means a facility for the care of eight or fewer children consistent with State law (CA Health and Safety Code §§ 1596 and 1597 et seq.). 
C.  Density means the number of dwelling units per acre or per square feet of lot area. 
D.  Department means the Planning and Community Development Department of the City of Del Mar. 
E.  Depth of Lot. See "Lot, Depth." 
F.  Director, Planning Director, or Director of Planning and Community Development means the Director of Planning and Community Development for the City of Del Mar. 
G.  Drive-In and Drive-Thru Establishments means any establishment accommodating customers who remain in or are served in their automobiles, whether such service is on the premises or at the curb adjacent to the premises. This definition shall not include gasoline service stations. 
H.  Driveway means vehicular access to off-street parking or loading space. Unless otherwise dedicated as such, a driveway shall not be considered as a public right-of-way. 
I.  Duplex means a building or lot occupied by two dwelling units, attached or detached. 
J.  Dwelling Unit means one or more rooms in a building or portion thereof designed with a kitchen and living, sleeping, and eating areas that are used by or intended to be used and occupied by one or more persons living together with common access to and common use of all areas within the unit. 
K.  Dwelling Unit, Attached means a dwelling unit attached to another dwelling unit by use of a common wall. 
L.  Dwelling Unit, Clustered means a dwelling unit that is sited in close proximity to another dwelling unit or dwelling units. In the RM and R-2 Zones, the dwelling units may be attached. 
(Ord. No. 725; Ord. No. 795; Ord. No. 932 , § 2, 10-2-2017)  
30.04.050 - "E" Words and Phrases Defined. 
A.  Efficiency Unit means the same as "Dwelling Unit, Studio." 
B.  Enforcement Officer, Zoning Enforcement Officer means the City Manager of the City of Del Mar, enforcement duties of who may be delegated to the Director of Planning and Community Development. 
C.  Existing Grade means the grade level that existed on a site prior to the start of any current or proposed site preparation, grading, or construction, as established to the satisfaction of the Planning Department. 
(Ord. No. 541; Ord. No. 724)  
30.04.060 - "F" Words and Phrases Defined. 
A.  Facade means the principal face or front of a building. 
B.  Family means one or more persons living together in a dwelling unit, with common access to, and common use of all living, kitchen, and eating areas within the dwelling unit. 
C.  Fence means a free standing structure resting on or partially buried in the ground and rising above ground level, and used for confinement, privacy, protection, screening or partition purposes. See "Landscaping, screening." 
D.  Finished Grade means the grade level on a site that is created, or is proposed to be created, as part of a development proposal. 
E.  Final Map means a map prepared in accordance with the land division regulations of the City of Del Mar and with any applicable provisions of the Subdivision Map Act, prepared for recordation with the County Recorder. 
F.  Flea Market. See "Outdoor sales." 
G.  Flood, Flood Hazard. 
1.  A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
a.  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; 
b.  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; or 
c.  Mudslides (i.e., mudflows) which are approximately caused or precipitated by accumulations of water on or under the ground; or 
2.  The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined herein. 
H.  Flood, 100-Year Period means a flood having an average of occurrence of once in 100 years. The 100-year flood means the same as a flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
I.  Floodplain means the land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. See "Flood." 
J.  Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
K.  Floodway means the Channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the 100-year frequency flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
L.  Floor means a continuous, supporting surface extending horizontally throughout a building. The floor shall be considered to include interior elevator shafts, interior stairwells, and other similar interior spaces. See "Floor Area." 
M.  Frontage. See "Street Frontage." 
N.  Front Property Line. See "Lot Line, Front." 
(Ord. No. 724; Ord. No. 718; Ord. No. 893)  
30.04.070 - "G" Words and Phrases Defined. 
A.  Garage, Private means an accessory building or an accessory portion of the main building designed and/or used for shelter or storage of vehicles owned or operated by the occupants. 
B.  Garage, Public means a structure other than a private garage used for the shelter or storage of vehicles. 
C.  Garage, Repair. See "Automobile Repair Business." 
D.  General Plan means a comprehensive declaration of purposes, policies, and programs for the orderly and planned development of the City, including diagrams, maps and text setting forth the objectives, principles, standards, and other features which have been adopted by the City. Unless otherwise specified, same as Del Mar Community Plan. 
E.  Grade. See "Adjoining Grade," "Average Adjoining Grade," "Existing Grade," and "Natural Grade." 
F.  Gross Floor Area. 
1.  The horizontal area expressed in square feet of the area included within the surrounding exterior walls of a building or a portion of a building, exclusive of vent shafts and courts, calculated from the outside face of wall studs; and 
2.  The horizontal area, expressed in square feet of a building that is not provided with surrounding exterior walls but is covered by a roof. 
G.  Guest Room means any habitable room which does not contain cooking facilities and is designed or used for occupancy by one or more persons, other than a dwelling unit. 
(Ord. No. 541; Ord. No. 932 , § 3, 10-2-2017)  
30.04.080 - "H" Words and Phrases Defined. 
A.  Height, Building or Structure. Building or structure height shall be the greatest vertical dimension computed by using any or all of the following, at any point within or around the structure: 
1.  The vertical distance from the lower of the natural or finished average adjoining grade to the highest part of the roof or structure. 
2.  The vertical distance from the lower of the natural or finished exterior adjoining grade to the highest part of the roof immediately above or of any structure located on such roof. 
3.  The vertical distance from any point of the roof or structure to the natural grade directly below. 
B.  Historic Property, Designated Historic Landmark means any site so designated by the City Council pursuant to Chapter 30.58 of this Title. 
C.  Home Occupation means an occupation or business conducted entirely within the main building by a member of a family residing therein, conducted as an incidental use to the primary residential use thereof, and in which there is no sign used; no display; no stock in trade or commodity stored, rented or sold upon the premises; no person employed other than the member of the resident family; no deliveries made or other pedestrian or vehicular traffic generated; no mechanical equipment used or kept on the premises except those customarily found in the home; no commercial vehicle used or kept on the premises in connection with such home occupation or business. 
D.  Hotel means a building or group of buildings in which there are six or more guest rooms where lodging with or without meals is provided for compensation, and where no provision is made for cooking in any individual room or suite. "Hotel" shall include jails, hospitals, asylums, sanitariums, orphanages, prisons, detention homes, and similar buildings where human beings are housed and detained under legal or medical restraint. 
(Ord. No. 562; Ord. No. 724)  
30.04.090 - "I" Words and Phrases Defined. 
A.  Including means including, but not limited to. 
B.  Inundation means ponded water or water in motion of sufficient depth to damaged property due to the presence of water or deposits of silt.  
30.04.100 - "J" Words and Phrases Defined. 
A.  Junior Accessory Dwelling Unit means a small dwelling unit that is no more than 500 square feet in size and contained entirely within, and accessory to, an existing habitable Single Dwelling Unit pursuant to the regulations in Section 30.91.050 and California Government Code Section 65852.22. Also known as "JrADU." 
B.  Junk or Salvage Yard means any premises used for the keeping or storage of junk, including but not limited to, iron and scrap metals, paper, rags, glass, wood, and similar materials; and shall include the dismantling of machinery or the storage or keeping for sale of parts and equipment resulting from dismantling or wrecking operations on said property or elsewhere. Junk and salvage yard shall also include baling of cardboard, cardboard boxes, paper and paper cartons. See "Automobile Wrecking." 
(Ord. No. 932 , § 4, 10-2-2017)  
30.04.110 - "K" Words and Phrases Defined. 
A.  Kennel means any lot, building, structure, enclosure or premises whereupon or wherein are kept seven or more dogs, cats or similar small animals in any combination for more than ten days, whether such keeping is for pleasure, profit, breeding or exhibiting, including places where dogs or cats or similar small animals in any combination are boarded, kept for sale or kept for hire. 
B.  Kitchen means any room or portion of a room used or intended or designed to be used for cooking or the preparation of meals.  
30.04.120 - "L" Words and Phrases Defined. 
A.  Land Area, Gross. See "Lot Area, Gross". 
B.  Land Area, Net. See "Lot Area, Net". 
C.  Landscaping means trees, grass, ground cover, shrubs, vines, rock gardens, planter boxes installed and maintained, but not including paving, decking or artificial plants. 
D.  Level means a horizontal division of a building extending from a floor to the next floor above, or if there is no higher floor, to the ceiling directly above. If the finished floor of one portion of a building lies no more than four feet above or below that of an adjacent finished floor, it shall be considered as being the same level as that of the adjacent floor. A level may or may not be a story. See "Story." 
E.  Lightwell means the enclosed area open from ground to sky directly abutting a glazed opening in a basement wall. 
F.  Loading Facility means an area other than a street or alley, either open or enclosed, or partially enclosed within a structure or portion thereof, designed or used for the temporary parking of commercial vehicles while loading or unloading goods or materials. 
G.  Lodginghouse. See "Boardinghouse." 
H.  Loft. Shall mean the same as "Mezzanine." 
I.  Lot, Legal Lot of Record. shall mean: 
1.  A parcel of real property shown as a delineated parcel of land with a number, letter or other designation on a final map of subdivision recorded in the Office of the County Recorder, provided said parcel has not merged pursuant to Section 30.86.120 of this Chapter. 
2.  A parcel of land, the dimensions or boundaries of which are defined by a record of survey map recorded in the Office of the County Recorder in accordance with the law regulating the subdivision of land, provided said parcel has not merged pursuant to this Code. See also "Building Site." 
J.  Lot Area, Gross means the total area of a lot or parcel, including public rights-of-way, road easements and private streets. "Lot Area, Gross" shall mean the same as "Land Area, Gross." 
K.  Lot Area, Net means the area of a lot or parcel, exclusive of any portion of such land devoted to or encumbered by a public right-of-way granted or condemned for the purposes of vehicular access. Lot Area, Net is also exclusive of any portion of such land devoted to or encumbered by a private road or easement which provides vehicular access to five or more dwelling units, except that Lot Area, Gross shall not be reduced by the amount of private road or easement which provides public benefit when compared to a configuration which provides individual access to the dwelling units. Public benefit shall include but is not limited to: 1) a reduction in the extent of paving for vehicular access; 2) a reduction in the number of curb-cuts on or along a public right-of-way with a commensurate increase in the amount of on-street parking available to the public; 3) a reduction in the number of vehicular intersections with a commensurate reduction in the potential for vehicular accidents, and/or 4) avoidance of degradation to the existing environment. Public benefit shall be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Director of Planning and Community Development. 
L.  Lot, Corner means a lot situated at the intersection of two or more streets, which streets have an angle of intersection measured within said lot of not more than 135 degrees. 
M.  Lot Coverage means that percentage of a lot which, when viewed directly from above, would be covered by a structure or structures, or any part thereof, including any area under roof, cantilevered decks, balconies, roof overhangs, and eaves. Paved areas, swimming pool decks, and other similar structures constructed at or below grade level, or in no event higher than 30 inches above adjoining grade of said structures, shall not be considered at "lot coverage." 
N.  Lot Depth means the horizontal length of a straight line drawn from the midpoint of the front property line of the lot to the midpoint of the rear lot line. On panhandle or flag shaped lots, the access strip portion shall be excluded when calculating lot depth. 
O.  Lot, Interior means a lot other than a corner lot or reversed corner lot. 
P.  Lot, Irregularly shaped means a lot that is other than substantially square-, rectangular-, panhandle- or pie-shaped. 
Q.  Lot, Key means the first lot to the rear of a reversed corner lot whether or not separated by an alley. 
R.  Lot Line Building means either: 
1.  A building constructed and located on, or less than one foot from the property line on any boundary of a building site; or 
2.  Any overhang of a building constructed and located on, or less than one foot from the property line on any boundary of a building site. 
S.  Lot Line, Front means: 
1.  In the case of an interior lot, a line separating a lot from the street. 
2.  In the case of a corner lot, a line separating the narrower street frontage from the street. 
3.  In the case of either an interior or corner lot which extends from one street to another, the lines separating the lot from the streets on both frontages, except where the right of vehicular access has been waived to one of the streets as required by governmental agency, the line separating the lot from the street upon which access has been waived becomes the rear property line. 
T.  Lot Line, Rear means the record lot line or lines most distant from and generally opposite the front lot line; except that in the case of an interior triangular or pie-shaped lot, it shall mean a straight line ten feet in length which: 
1.  Is parallel to the front lot line or the chord of a curved front lot line; and 
2.  Intersects the two other lot lines at points most distant from the front lot line. 
U.  Lot Line, Side means any lot line of record not a front line or a rear lot line. 
V.  Lot, Panhandle means a lot whose largest area is located to the rear of another lot or lots and which lot has its only access by means of a narrow, fee ownership strip of land connecting such lot to a street; same as "Flag Lot." 
W.  Lot, Reversed Corner means a corner lot, the street side line of which is a continuation of the front line of the lot abutting the rear of such reversed corner lot. 
X.  Lot, Through means a lot having a frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel streets. 
Y.  Lot Width means the horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at right angles to the line comprising the depth of the lot at a point midway between the front and rear lot lines. 
(Ord. No. 541; Ord. No. 615; Ord. No. 727; Ord. No. 795)  
30.04.130 - "M" Words and Phrases Defined. 
A.  Manufactured Home means a one-family dwelling constructed wholly or partially off-site that is installed on a permanent foundation and which is complaint with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 and with Section 18551 of the California Health and Safety Code. For purposes of this Title, a manufactured home shall be subject to the same regulatory standards and permit review process applicable to other one-family dwellings in the zone in which it is located. 
B.  Marquee means a fixed shelter used only as a roof and extended over a building line, and which is entirely supported by the building to which it is attached. Compare "Awning," "Canopy." 
C.  Mezzanine or Mezzanine Floor means an intermediate floor placed in any story or room. When the total area of any such "mezzanine floor" exceeds one-third the total floor area in that room, it shall be considered as constituting an additional "story." 
D.  Motel or Tourist Court means a group of attached or detached buildings containing individual sleeping or living units where a majority of such units open individually and directly to the outside, and where a garage is attached or a parking space is conveniently located to each unit, all for the temporary use by automobile tourists or transients, including auto courts and motor lodges. 
E.  Motor Vehicle means a self-propelled device used or intended to be used for the transportation of freight or passengers upon a street or highway, excepting a device moved by human power or a device used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
F.  Multiple Dwelling Unit means a building or lot containing two or more dwelling units on a single lot. The term does not include a Single Dwelling Unit, Accessory Dwelling Unit, or Junior Accessory Dwelling Unit. 
G.  Municipal Code means the Municipal Code of the City of Del Mar. 
(Ord. No. 902; Ord. No. 932 , § 5, 10-2-2017)  
30.04.140 - "N" Words and Phrases Defined. 
A.  Natural Grade means the original grade level that historically existed on a site prior to any site preparation, grading, or construction, as established to the satisfaction of the Planning Department. If natural grade cannot be determined, "existing grade" shall be considered as the natural grade. 
B.  Nonconforming Lot means an existing lot lawfully established and maintained which does not conform to the area, street frontage, width or depth requirements of the applicable zoning category, either as of the effective date of this Chapter or as a result of prior or subsequent ordinances which make such lot nonconforming. 
C.  Nonoperating Vehicles, Storage Of means the presence on any lot or parcel of land of two or more motor vehicles which for a period exceeding thirty days have not been capable of operating under their own power, and from which no parts have been or are to be removed for reuse or sale, shall constitute prima facie evidence of the storage of nonoperating motor vehicles. The storage of such nonoperating motor vehicles shall not include automobile wrecking. 
(Ord. No. 541; Ord. No. 724)  
30.04.150 - "O" Words and Phrases Defined. 
A.  Off-street Parking Space means an off-street permanently maintained parking space of a size and location as may be required by this Chapter. 
B.  Outdoor Display Area means an area located on the exterior of a structure housing a retail sales operation, where new and/or used goods or commodities associated with the enclosed sales operation are displayed but not sold. 
C.  Outdoor Sales means a retail sales activity, not located within a structure housing a retail sales operation and not associated with a structure housing a retail sales operation, where groups of individual sellers offer goods or commodities, new and/or used, for sale to the public (does not include garage or yard sales.) Same as "flea market". 
D.  Outdoor Storage means storage of goods and materials outside of any building or structure, but not including storage of a temporary or emergency nature. 
E.  Owner means the holder of the fee title to property, whether a person, partnership, corporation or other entity recognized by law, and his or its lessees, permittees, assignees or successors in interest. 
(Ord. No. 718)  
30.04.160 - "P" Words and Phrases Defined. 
A.  Panhandle Lot. See "Lot, Panhandle." 
B.  Parcel Map means a map showing the division of land as described in the State Subdivision Map Act and prepared in accordance with Chapter 24 of the Del Mar Municipal Code. 
C.  Parcel of Land means a contiguous quantity of land in the possession of, or owned by, or recorded as the property of, the same person. 
D.  Parking Space. See "Off-street Parking Space." 
E.  Person with Disabilities has the meaning set forth in the Federal Fair Housing Act and the California Fair Employment and Housing Act and is an individual who: 
1.  Has a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities; 
2.  Is regarded as having such an impairment; or 
3.  Has a record of such impairment. 
F.  Primary Dwelling Unit means a dwelling unit that occupies the majority of the area of a lot containing a smaller Accessory Dwelling Unit or Accessory Building that is incidental to, related to, and clearly subordinate to the dwelling unit. 
G.  Primary Use means the allowed use on a premises that occupies a majority of the area of the premises. 
H.  Private Road, Private Road Easement means a parcel of land not dedicated as a public right-of-way but intersecting or connecting with a public right-of-way, or another private street, and for which a private easement for road purposes has been granted to owners of property contiguous or adjacent thereto and which has been recorded with the Office of the County Recorder. 
I.  Public Right-of-Way means any public street, road, avenue, highway, named or unnamed alley, lane, court, place trail, or other public way, operated and/or controlled by the City or other public entity, or subject to an easement owned by or dedicated or granted to City. A public right-of-way shall include all of the areas as listed above in this Section, be they improved and existing or be they reserved or described but not yet improved; and all extensions thereof, and additions thereto. A public right-of-way shall include the space on, above or below the dedicated area. See also "Street" for related definition. 
(Ord. No. 795; Ord. No. 917 , § 1, 9-19-2016; Ord. No. 932 , § 6, 10-2-2017)  
30.04.170 - "R" Words and Phrases Defined. 
A.  Reasonable Accommodation means a deviation that provides relief from, and flexibility in, the application of the City's zoning, building, and land use laws, regulations, policies or procedures, which is necessary to provide disabled persons with an equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling or commercial or industrial facility. 
B.  Recreational Vehicle. Recreational vehicles include the following: 
1.  Travel Trailer means a vehicular portable structure built on a chassis designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational, and vacation purposes. 
2.  Camper means a structure designed primarily to be mounted upon a motor vehicle and with sufficient facilities to render it suitable for uses as a temporary dwelling for camping, travel, recreational, and vacation purposes. 
3.  Motorized home means a portable dwelling designed and constructed as an integral part of a self-propelled vehicle. 
4.  Boats, boat trailers, dune buggies, and other motorized or towed vehicles used solely for recreational purposes. 
C.  Rest Home means a home operated as a boarding home, and in which nursing, dietary and other personal services are furnished to convalescents, invalids, and aged persons, but in which no persons suffering from a mental sickness, disease, disorder or ailment or from a contagious or communicable disease are kept, and in which no surgical or other primary treatments such as are customarily provided in sanitariums or hospitals are performed. 
D.  Restaurant means an eating establishment which includes the on-site sale and consumption of food and/or beverages. 
E.  Roadway means that portion of a right-of-way or private road designed or used for accommodating the movement of vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 795; Ord. No. 917 , § 1, 9-19-2016)  
30.04.180 - "S" Words and Phrases Defined. 
A.  Screening means solid walls, solid fences or dense hedges for the purpose of concealing from view the area behind such structure or hedges. See also "Fence" and "Landscaping." 
B.  Service Road or Frontage Road means a street lying adjacent and approximately parallel to and separated from a freeway or highway and which affords access to abutting property. 
C.  Service Station means the same as "Automobile Service Station." 
D.  Setback Line means a line which defines a front, rear or side yard as required by this Chapter, other than a property line between which line and the property line no building, structure, or portion thereof shall be permitted, erected, constructed, or placed unless specifically permitted by this Chapter. 
E.  Sign means any word, letter, placard, board, notice, logo, insignia, flag or banner used to advertise or promote the interest of any person, institution, business or product. 
F.  Single Dwelling Unit means a dwelling unit located on an individual lot. This term does not include an Accessory Dwelling Unit or Junior Accessory Dwelling Unit. 
G.  Story means that portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above it. If any part of any level of a building is considered a story, that entire level shall be considered a story. If there is no floor above, then the space between such floor and the highest point of the finished ceiling next above it shall be considered a story. A story shall include: 
1.  A basement, if at any point the finished floor above is higher than three feet above the lowest point of the natural or finished adjacent grade, whichever is lower. 
2.  An attic with a vertical dimension of five feet six inches or more between the floor and the level of the finished roof immediately above. 
3.  Any space with a vertical dimension of five feet six inches or more between the floor and the finished floor above or, where there is no floor above, the level of the finished roof immediately above; and 
4.  A mezzanine when such mezzanine exceeds one-third of the total floor area of the larger space in which it is located. 
H.  Story, Two or More. A two or more story structure is one in which a story or portion thereof is directly above another lower story. 
I.  Street means a thoroughfare dedicated, condemned, and accepted for public use and/or which affords primary means of vehicular access to abutting property, including boulevard, avenue, place, drive, court, lane, or other thoroughfare dedicated to such public travel. "Street" shall not include an alley or walk as defined herein, except where lots have been recorded which abut only on an alley or walk, said alley or walk shall be considered to be a street. 
J.  Street Frontage means the distance measured along a property line of a lot or parcel where said property line separates the lot or parcel from a street. Same as "Street Line." 
K.  Structural Alterations means any change in the supporting members of a building such as foundations, bearing walls, column beams, floor or roof joists, girders or rafters, or changes to enclose additional space. 
L.  Structure means anything constructed or erected which requires location on the ground or attachment to something having a location on the ground. "Structure" shall include any kind of building, porch, pier, column, porch post, sign, billboard, immobilized trailer coach, or other building obstruction. 
M.  Subdivider means any person, firm, corporation, partnership or association which causes real property to be subdivided. 
N.  Subdivision means any act which causes real property to be divided into separate ownership pursuant to the Subdivision Map Act and City ordinances. 
O.  Subdivision Map Act means the Subdivision Map Act of the State of California, Title 7, Division 2, of the California Government Code commencing with Section 66410 thereof. 
P.  Substantial Construction means completion of a minimum of ten percent of the total amount of construction authorized by the permit based on the monetary value of construction costs including grading, site preparation and construction but specifically excluding all costs associated with the acquisition of interest in the project site and all costs associated with the preparation and processing of permits or plans. 
Q.  Substantial Slope means a slope exceeding 25 percent with a vertical rise of 20 feet or more. 
R.  Studio means a dwelling unit that combines kitchen, living, and sleeping rooms into one room; same as a bachelor or efficiency unit. 
S.  Supportive Housing means housing with no limit on length of stay, that is occupied by the target population, and that is linked to an onsite or offsite service that assists the supportive housing resident in retaining the housing, improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live and, when possible, work in the community. 
(Ord. No. 541; Ord. No. 641; Ord. No. 893; Ord. No. 900; Ord. No. 932 , § 7, 10-2-2017)  
30.04.190 - "T" Words and Phrases Defined. 
A.  Tandem Parking Space means a parking space located directly behind another parking space. 
B.  Target Population means persons with low incomes who have one or more disabilities, including mental illness, HIV or AIDS, substance abuse, or other chronic health condition, or individuals eligible for services provided pursuant to the Lanterman Developmental Disabilities Services Act (Division 4.5, commencing with Section 4500) of the Welfare and Institutions Code) and may include, among other populations, adults, emancipated minors, families with children, elderly persons, young adults aging out of the foster care system, individuals exiting from institutional settings, veterans, and homeless people. 
C.  Temporary Enclosure means a membrane designed and used to cover or partially cover and/or enclose or partially enclose a portion of a lot's bulk floor area and which membrane is designed to be removed and/or retracted quickly and easily so as to render the bulk floor area uncovered and/or unenclosed. 
D.  Trailer Coach means any camp car, mobile home, trailer or other vehicle, with or without motive power, designed and constructed to travel on the public thoroughfares in accordance with the provisions of the vehicle code of the State, and designed for use for human habitation. 
E.  Trailer Court or Trailer Park means any premises on which there is located one or more occupied trailer coaches or where space for trailer coaches is rented, held for rent or one which fee occupancy or camping is permitted to trailer coach users, but shall not include premises on which unoccupied trailer coaches are parked for inspection and sale. 
F.  Transitional Housing means buildings configured as rental housing developments, but operated under programs that require the termination of assistance and recirculating of the assisted unit to another eligible program recipient at a predetermined future point in time that shall be no less than six months from the beginning of the assistance. Shall mean the same as Transitional Housing Development. 
G.  Trellis means open construction using thin strips of wood, metal, etc. crossing each other in open patterns. 
(Ord. No. 640; Ord. No. 744; Ord. No. 893)  
30.04.200 - "U" Words and Phrases Defined. 
A.  Underground Parking Structure means an attached or detached parking structure, constructed so that more than one-half of the vertical height between the floor ceiling of the uppermost story of the parking structure is, on average, below the structure's average adjoining grade. 
B.  Use means the purpose for which land or structures are arranged, designed or intended, or for which either land or structures are, or may be, occupied or maintained. Use includes construction, establishment, maintenance, alteration, moving onto, enlargement, operation or occupancy. 
C.  Use, Accessory. See "Accessory Use." 
D.  Use, Conditional means a use for which a Conditional Use Permit is required, pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter. 
E.  Use, Principal, Primary means the main or primary purpose for which a structure or lot is designed, arranged or intended, or for which either may be used, occupied or maintained under the provisions of this Chapter. 
F.  Use, Temporary means a use of land or structures not intended to be of permanent duration.  
30.04.210 - "V" Words and Phrases Defined. 
A.  Variance means a modification of the specific regulations of this Chapter, granted by resolution by the Planning Commission or City Council in accordance with the terms of this Chapter.  
30.04.214 - "W" Words and Phrases Defined. 
A.  Wall means any structure or element of a structure or any member or group of members which defines the vertical exterior boundaries of a building or a court of a building.  
30.04.220 - "Y" Words and Phrases Defined. 
A.  Yard means an open space on a lot, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, and located on the same lot with the building or use which it serves. 
B.  Yard, Front means a yard extending between the side lot lines across the full width of the lot and lying between the front lot line and its extension and a line parallel thereto, and having a horizontal distance between them equal to the required front yard depth as prescribed in each zone. When a lot lies partially within a planned street indicated on a precise plan for such a street, the depth of the front yard shall be measured from the contiguous edge of such planned street in the manner prescribed in this Chapter. 
C.  Yard, Rear means a yard extending between the side lot lines across the full width of a lot and lying between the rear lot line and a line parallel thereto, and having a horizontal distance between them equal to the required rear yard depth as prescribed in each zone. 
D.  Yard, Interior Side means a yard extending from the required front yard to the required rear yard, or extending to property lines where no front nor rear yards are required, and lying between the interior side lot line and a line parallel thereto, and having a horizontal distance between them equal to the required interior side yard width as prescribed in each zone. 
E.  Yard, Street Side means a yard extending from the required front yard, or the front property line where no front yard is required, to the rear property line and laying between the street side lot line and a line parallel thereto, and having a horizontal distance between them equal to the required street side yard width as prescribed in each zone.  
30.04.230 - "Z" Words and Phrases Defined. 
A.  Zoning Map means the designated official map or maps which show the location and boundaries of the districts established by this Chapter which are referred to as the "Zoning Map" and incorporated as part of this Chapter. The said "Zoning Map" together with everything shown thereon and all amendments thereto, are as much a part of this Chapter as if fully set forth and described in context.  
Chapter 30.10 - VERY LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL (R1-40) 
 
30.10.010 - Purpose. 
The R1-40 Zone is designed to provide for an area of one-family residential development at a density level consistent with the City Community Plan. The standards of the zone are intended to preserve an open and uncrowded character and protect the unique residential environment of Del Mar. The standards are intended to promote and protect those special amenities associated with a district of single-family homes. Factors of topography and environmental sensitivities, the character of existing, low-density residential areas, and the need to identify Del Mar as a distinct and separate community shall be taken into account in administering the standards contained herein.  
30.10.020 - Boundaries. 
Property within the R1-40 Zone shall be designated by ordinance to be depicted upon the City zone map.  
30.10.030 - Allowable Uses. 
The allowable uses in the R1-40 Zone are: 
A.  A single dwelling unit on each building site; and 
B.  An Accessory Dwelling Unit that meets the requirements in Section 30.91.040, or a Junior Accessory Dwelling Unit that meets the requirements in Section 30.91.050. 
C.  A Small Community Care Facility on each building site. 
(Ord. No. 711; Ord. No. 725; Ord. No. 758; Ord. No. 760; Ord. No. 900; Ord. No. 932 , § 8, 10-2-2017)  
30.10.040 - Accessory Uses. 
The following accessory uses may be established in the R1-40 Zone: 
A.  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to a single dwelling unit. An Accessory Building shall not be rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling unit, unless an Accessory Dwelling Unit permit is obtained and the unit is operated in compliance with Sections 30.91.040 or 30.91.050. 
B.  On lots which do not meet the minimum lot size specified for the underlying zone, garage(s) to accommodate not more than [a total] of three vehicles. 
C.  On lots which meet or exceed the minimum lot size specified for the underlying zone, a garage(s) to accommodate not more than [a total of] four vehicles. 
D.  A carport to accommodate not more than one vehicle, so long as the lot does not contain the maximum number of garage parking spaces allowed for the property pursuant to the provisions of Chapter. 
E.  The renting of not more than one room to not more than one person, or the providing of table board to one person, or both. This limitation shall not apply to an Accessory Dwelling Unit or Junior Accessory Dwelling Unit where a permit has been issued pursuant to Chapter 30.91. 
F.  Off-street parking for a permitted use. 
G.  Recreational facilities intended for the use of on-site residents, including swimming pools, saunas, tennis courts, and exercise rooms. 
H.  The keeping of not more than one horse for each acre of land held in contiguous, single ownership. 
I.  The keeping of dogs, cats, and other household pets normally kept within the house. 
J.  The keeping of other domestic animals, providing however, that no such animal or any pen, coop, stable, or barn shall be located, kept or maintained within 75 feet of any window or door of any building used for human habitation, nor within 40 feet of any adjacent property line; and 
K.  Home occupation as authorized by this Code. 
L.  A licensed Family Child Care Home within an occupied single dwelling unit per California Health and Safety Code Section 1596.70. 
(Ord. No. 692; Ord. No. 932 , § 9, 10-2-2017)  
30.10.050 - Parking Requirement. 
See Chapter 30.80 for parking requirements.  
30.10.060 - Design Review. 
All development in the R1-40 Zone shall be subject to design review by the Design Review Board pursuant to the provisions of this Code. In reviewing said development, the Design Review Board shall, in addition to the criteria specified elsewhere in this Code, consider siting alternatives, building size and bulk constraints, landscaping requirements, and other design improvements as may be reasonably required to preserve and enhance the integrity, public use, enjoyment, and public visibility to and from public open spaces, the beach, and the beach bluffs.  
30.10.070 - Development Standards. 
A.  Density. One building site for each 43,560 square feet of net land area. 
B.  Lot Dimensions. 
1.  Minimum lot size: 40,000 square feet. 
2.  Minimum street frontage: 20 feet. 
3.  Minimum lot width: 75 feet. 
4.  Minimum lot depth: 100 feet. 
C.  Construction Standards. 
1.  Setbacks: 
a.  Front yard: 20 feet. 
b.  Rear yard: 25 feet. 
c.  Interior side yard: Ten feet. 
d.  Street side: Ten feet. 
2.  Height: 26 feet. 
3.  Floor area ratio: Twelve and one-half percent or 2,000 square feet, whichever is greater. 
4.  Maximum lot coverage: 20 percent or 3,000 square feet, whichever is greater.  
30.10.080 - Special Regulations. 
Building height limit for properties located within the Bluff, Slope, and Canyon Overlay Zone shall be 14 feet unless the applicant can demonstrate that a greater height is consistent with the standards set forth in that overlay zone. However, in no case shall the allowed height exceed the maximum height specified in this Chapter.  
30.10.090 - Housing Reduction Mitigation Fee. 
A.  Where implementation of a development project would result in a net reduction in the number of dwelling units on a property, the project shall be conditioned for payment of the City of Del Mar's Housing Reduction Mitigation Fee, with payment made based upon the net reduction in dwelling units. 
B.  The requirement for payment of a Housing Reduction Mitigation Fee(s) required in this Section shall not apply where: 1) a property is nonconforming in that it contains a number of dwelling units in excess of that allowed per the Density Development Standards of this Chapter; and 2) the development project's net reduction of dwelling units will bring the property into conformance with the Density Development Standard. 
1.  The exemption for payment of a Housing Reduction Mitigation Fee(s) provided in this Subsection B. shall not apply where the number of dwelling units to be reduced exceeds the requirement to achieve conformance with the Density Development Standards. In such cases, payment of a Housing Reduction Mitigation Fee(s) shall be required, on a unit-for-unit basis, for each dwelling unit reduction in excess of the minimum required to achieve conformance with the Density Development Standards. 
(Ord. No. 889)  
Chapter 30.11 - MODIFIED LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL (R1-14) 
 
30.11.010 - Purpose. 
The R1-14 Zone is designed to provide for an area of one-family residential development at a density level consistent with the City Community Plan. The standards of the zone are intended to preserve an open and uncrowded character and protect the unique residential environment of Del Mar. The standards are intended to promote and protect those special amenities associated with a district of single-family homes. Factors of topography and environmental sensitivities, the character of existing, low-density residential areas, and the need to identify Del Mar as a distinct and separate community shall be taken into account in administering the standards contained herein.  
30.11.020 - Boundaries. 
Property within the R1-14 Zone shall be designated by ordinance to be depicted upon the City zone map.  
30.11.030 - Allowable Uses. 
The allowable uses in the R1-14 Zone are: 
A.  A single dwelling unit on each building site; and 
B.  An Accessory Dwelling Unit that meets the requirements in Section 30.91.040, or a Junior Accessory Dwelling Unit that meets the requirements in Section 30.91.050. 
C.  A Small Community Care Facility on each building site. 
(Ord. No. 711; Ord. No. 725; Ord. No. 758; Ord. No. 760; Ord. No. 900; Ord. No. 932 , § 10, 10-2-2017)  
30.11.040 - Accessory Uses. 
The following accessory uses may be established in the R1-14 Zone: 
A.  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to a single dwelling unit, including a private garage or carport to accommodate not more than three vehicles. An Accessory Building shall not be rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling unit, unless an Accessory Dwelling Unit permit is obtained and the unit is operated in compliance with Sections 30.91.040 or 30.91.050. 
B.  The renting of not more than one room to not more than one person, or the providing of table board to one person, or both. This limitation shall not apply to an Accessory Dwelling Unit or Junior Accessory Dwelling Unit where a permit has been issued pursuant to Chapter 30.91. 
C.  Off-street parking for a permitted use. 
D.  Recreational facilities intended for the use of on-site residents, including swimming pools, saunas, tennis courts, and exercise rooms. 
E.  The keeping of not more than one horse for each acre of land held in contiguous, single ownership. 
F.  The keeping of dogs, cats, and other household pets normally kept within the house. 
G.  The keeping of other domestic animals, providing however, that no such animal or any pen, coop, stable, or barn shall be located, kept or maintained within 75 feet of any window or door of any building used for human habitation, nor within 40 feet of any adjacent property line; and 
H.  Home occupation as authorized by this Code. 
I.  A licensed Family Child Care Home within an occupied single dwelling unit per California Health and Safety Code Section 1596.70. 
(Ord. No. 932 , § 11, 10-2-2017)  
30.11.050 - Parking Requirement. 
See Chapter 30.80 for parking requirements.  
30.11.060 - Reserved.  
30.11.070 - Development Standards. 
A.  Density. One building site for each 14,000 square feet of net land area. 
B.  Lot Dimensions. 
1.  Minimum lot size: 14,000 square feet. 
2.  Minimum street frontage: 20 feet. 
3.  Minimum lot width: 75 feet. 
4.  Minimum lot depth: 100 feet. 
C.  Construction Standards. 
1.  Setbacks: 
a.  Front yard: 20 feet. 
b.  Rear yard: 25 feet. 
c.  Interior side yard: Seven and one-half feet. 
d.  Street side: Ten feet. 
2.  Height: 26 feet. 
3.  Floor area ratio: 25 percent or 2,000 square feet, whichever is greater. 
4.  Maximum lot coverage: 35 percent or 3,000 square feet, whichever is greater.  
30.11.080 - Special Regulations. 
Building height limit for properties located within the Bluff, Slope, and Canyon Overlay Zone shall be 14 feet unless the applicant can demonstrate that a greater height is consistent with the standards set forth in that overlay zone. However, in no case shall the allowed height exceed the maximum height specified in this Chapter.  
30.11.090 - Housing Reduction Mitigation Fee. 
A.  Where implementation of a development project would result in a net reduction in the number of dwelling units on a property, the project shall be conditioned for payment of the City of Del Mar's Housing Reduction Mitigation Fee, with payment made based upon the net reduction in dwelling units. 
B.  The requirement for payment of a Housing Reduction Mitigation Fee(s) required in this Section shall not apply where: 1) a property is nonconforming in that it contains a number of dwelling units in excess of that allowed per the Density Development Standards of this Chapter; and 2) the development project's net reduction of dwelling units will bring the property into conformance with the Density Development Standard. 
1.  The exemption for payment of a Housing Reduction Mitigation Fee(s) provided in this Subsection B. shall not apply where the number of dwelling units to be reduced exceeds the requirement to achieve conformance with the Density Development Standards. In such cases, payment of a Housing Reduction Mitigation Fee(s) shall be required, on a unit-for-unit basis, for each dwelling unit reduction in excess of the minimum required to achieve conformance with the Density Development Standards. 
(Ord. No. 889)  
Chapter 30.12 - LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL (R1-10) 
 
30.12.010 - Purpose. 
The R1-10 Zone is designed to provide for an area of one-family residential development at a density level consistent with the City Community Plan. The standards of the zone are intended to preserve an open and uncrowded character and protect the unique residential environment of Del Mar. The standards are intended to promote and protect those special amenities associated with a district of single-family homes. Factors of topography and environmental sensitivities, the character of existing, low-density residential areas, and the need to identify Del Mar as a distinct and separate community shall be taken into account in administering the standards contained herein.  
30.12.020 - Boundaries. 
Property within the R1-10 Zone shall be designated by ordinance to be depicted upon the City zone map.  
30.12.030 - Allowable Uses. 
The allowable uses in the R1-10 Zone are: 
A.  A single dwelling unit on each building site; and 
B.  An Accessory Dwelling Unit that meets the requirements in Section 30.91.040, or a Junior Accessory Dwelling Unit that meets the requirements in Section 30.91.050. 
C.  A Small Community Care Facility on each building site. 
(Ord. No. 711; Ord. No. 725; Ord. No. 758; Ord. No. 760; Ord. No. 900; Ord. No. 932 , § 12, 10-2-2017)  
30.12.040 - Accessory Uses. 
The following accessory uses may be established in the R1-10 Zone: 
A.  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to a one-family dwelling, including a private garage or carport to accommodate not more than three vehicles. An Accessory Building shall not be rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling unit, unless an Accessory Dwelling Unit permit is obtained and the unit is operated in compliance with Sections 30.91.040 or 30.91.050. 
B.  The renting of not more than one room to not more than one person, or the providing of table board to one person, or both. This limitation shall not apply to an Accessory Dwelling Unit or Junior Accessory Dwelling Unit where a permit has been issued pursuant to Chapter 30.91. 
C.  Off-street parking for a permitted use. 
D.  Recreational facilities intended for the use of on-site residents, including swimming pools, saunas, tennis courts, and exercise rooms. 
E.  The keeping of not more than one horse for each acre of land held in contiguous, single ownership. 
F.  The keeping of dogs, cats, and other household pets normally kept within the house. 
G.  The keeping of other domestic animals, providing however, that no such animal or any pen, coop, stable, or barn shall be located, kept or maintained within 75 feet of any window or door of any building used for human habitation, nor within 40 feet of any adjacent property line; and 
H.  Home occupation as authorized by this Code. 
I.  A licensed Family Child Care Home within an occupied single dwelling unit per California Health and Safety Code Section 1596.70. 
(Ord. No. 932 , § 13, 10-2-2017)  
30.12.050 - Parking Requirement. 
See Chapter 30.80 for parking requirements.  
30.12.060 - Reserved.  
30.12.070 - Development Standards. 
A.  Density. One building site for each 10,000 square feet of net land area. 
B.  Lot Dimensions. 
1.  Minimum lot size: 10,000 square feet. 
2.  Minimum street frontage: 20 feet. 
3.  Minimum lot width: 75 feet. 
4.  Minimum lot depth: 100 feet. 
C.  Construction Standards. 
1.  Setbacks: 
a.  Front yard: 20 feet. 
b.  Rear yard: 25 feet. 
c.  Interior side yard: Seven and one-half feet. 
d.  Street side: Ten feet. 
2.  Height: 26 feet. 
3.  Floor area ratio: 25 percent or 2,000 square feet, whichever is greater. 
4.  Maximum lot coverage: 40 percent or 3,000 square feet, whichever is greater.  
30.12.080 - Special Regulations. 
Building height limit for properties located within the Bluff, Slope, and Canyon Overlay Zone shall be 14 feet unless the applicant can demonstrate that a greater height is consistent with the standards set forth in that overlay zone. However, in no case shall the allowed height exceed the maximum height specified in this Chapter.  
30.12.090 - Housing Reduction Mitigation Fee. 
A.  Where implementation of a development project would result in a net reduction in the number of dwelling units on a property, the project shall be conditioned for payment of the City of Del Mar's Housing Reduction Mitigation Fee, with payment made based upon the net reduction in dwelling units. 
B.  The requirement for payment of a Housing Reduction Mitigation Fee(s) required in this Section shall not apply where: 1) a property is nonconforming in that it contains a number of dwelling units in excess of that allowed per the Density Development Standards of this Chapter; and 2) the development project's net reduction of dwelling units will bring the property into conformance with the Density Development Standard. 
1.  The exemption for payment of a Housing Reduction Mitigation Fee(s) provided in this Subsection B. shall not apply where the number of dwelling units to be reduced exceeds the requirement to achieve conformance with the Density Development Standards. In such cases, payment of a Housing Reduction Mitigation Fee(s) shall be required, on a unit-for-unit basis, for each dwelling unit reduction in excess of the minimum required to achieve conformance with the Density Development Standards. 
(Ord. No. 889)  
Chapter 30.13 - LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL-BEACH (R1-10B) 
 
30.13.010 - Purpose. 
The R1-10B Zone is designed to provide for an area of one-family residential development at a density level consistent with the City Community Plan. The standards of the zone are intended to preserve an open and uncrowded character and protect the unique residential environment of Del Mar. The standards are intended to promote and protect those special amenities associated with a district of single-family homes. Factors of topography and environmental sensitivities, the character of existing, low-density residential areas, and the need to identify Del Mar as a distinct and separate community shall be taken into account in administering the standards contained herein.  
30.13.020 - Boundaries. 
Property within the R1-10B Zone shall be designated by ordinance to be depicted upon the City zone map.  
30.13.030 - Allowable Uses. 
The allowable uses in the R1-10B Zone are: 
A.  A single dwelling unit on each building site; and 
B.  An Accessory Dwelling Unit that meets the requirements in Section 30.91.040, or a Junior Accessory Dwelling Unit that meets the requirements in Section 30.91.050. 
C.  A Small Community Care Facility on each building site. 
(Ord. No. 711; Ord. No. 725; Ord. No. 758; Ord. No. 760; Ord. No. 900; Ord. No. 932 , § 14, 10-2-2017)  
30.13.040 - Accessory Uses. 
The following accessory uses may be established in the R1-10B Zone: 
A.  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to a single dwelling unit, including a private garage or carport to accommodate not more than three vehicles. An Accessory Building shall not be rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling unit, unless an Accessory Dwelling Unit permit is obtained and the unit is operated in compliance with Sections 30.91.040 or 30.91.050. 
B.  The renting of not more than one room to not more than one person, or the providing of table board to one person, or both. This limitation shall not apply to an Accessory Dwelling Unit or Junior Accessory Dwelling Unit where a permit has been issued pursuant to Chapter 30.91. 
C.  Off-street parking for a permitted use. 
D.  Recreational facilities intended for the use of on-site residents, including swimming pools, saunas, tennis courts, and exercise rooms. 
E.  The keeping of not more than one horse for each acre of land held in contiguous, single ownership. 
F.  The keeping of dogs, cats, and other household pets normally kept within the house. 
G.  The keeping of other domestic animals, providing however, that no such animal or any pen, coop, stable, or barn shall be located, kept or maintained within 75 feet of any window or door of any building used for human habitation, nor within 40 feet of any adjacent property line; and 
H.  Home occupation as authorized by this Code. 
I.  A licensed Family Child Care Home within an occupied single dwelling unit per California Health and Safety Code Section 1596.70. 
(Ord. No. 932 , § 15, 10-2-2017)  
30.13.050 - Parking Requirement. 
See Chapter 30.80 for parking requirements.  
30.13.060 - Design Review. 
All development in the R1-10B Zone shall be subject to design review by the Design Review Board pursuant to the provisions of this Code. In reviewing said development, the Design Review Board shall, in addition to the criteria specified elsewhere in this Code, consider siting alternatives, building size and bulk constraints, landscaping requirements, and other design improvements as may be reasonably required to preserve and enhance the integrity, public use, enjoyment, and public visibility to and from public open spaces, the beach, and the beach bluffs.  
30.13.070 - Development Standards. 
A.  Density. One building site for each 10,000 square feet of net land area. 
B.  Lot Dimensions. 
1.  Minimum lot size: 10,000 square feet. 
2.  Minimum street frontage: 20 feet. 
3.  Minimum lot width: 35 feet. 
4.  Minimum lot depth: 100 feet. 
C.  Construction Standards: 
1.  Setbacks: 
a.  Front yard: Ten feet. 
b.  Rear yard: Ten feet. 
c.  Interior side yard: Five feet. 
d.  Street side: Ten feet. 
2.  Height: 26 feet. 
3.  Floor area ratio: 30 percent or 2,000 square feet, whichever is greater. 
4.  Maximum lot coverage: 45 percent or 3,000 square feet, whichever is greater.  
30.13.080 - Special Regulations. 
A.  Building height limit for properties located within the Bluff, Slope, and Canyon Overlay Zone shall be 14 feet unless the applicant can demonstrate that a greater height is consistent with the standards set forth in that overlay zone. However, in no case shall the allowed height exceed the maximum height specified in this Chapter. 
B.  A lot line building shall be permitted within the side yards when jointly and cooperatively requested by adjacent property owners, providing that the orientation of the dwellings to each other and the adjoining properties permits full and open access to light and air. When such a side yard lot line building is permitted, it will be restricted to one side yard of any one building site and the other opposite side yard shall have twice the normally required side yard dimension. A lot line building shall be permitted only for the first story portion of a one- or two-story building. A joint agreement between property owners requesting a lot line building shall be filed with the City Clerk and recorded with the County Recorder prior to the construction of said lot line building.  
30.13.090 - Housing Reduction Mitigation Fee. 
A.  Where implementation of a development project would result in a net reduction in the number of dwelling units on a property, the project shall be conditioned for payment of the City of Del Mar's Housing Reduction Mitigation Fee, with payment made based upon the net reduction in dwelling units. 
B.  The requirement for payment of a Housing Reduction Mitigation Fee(s) required in this Section shall not apply where: 1) a property is nonconforming in that it contains a number of dwelling units in excess of that allowed per the Density Development Standards of this Chapter; and 2) the development project's net reduction of dwelling units will bring the property into conformance with the Density Development Standard. 
1.  The exemption for payment of a Housing Reduction Mitigation Fee(s) provided in this Subsection B. shall not apply where the number of dwelling units to be reduced exceeds the requirement to achieve conformance with the Density Development Standards. In such cases, payment of a Housing Reduction Mitigation Fee(s) shall be required, on a unit-for-unit basis, for each dwelling unit reduction in excess of the minimum required to achieve conformance with the Density Development Standards. 
(Ord. No. 889)  
Chapter 30.14 - MEDIUM DENSITY SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL (R1-5) 
 
30.14.010 - Purpose. 
The R1-5 Zone is designed to provide for an area of one-family residential develop-ment at a density level consistent with the City Community Plan. The standards of the zone are intended to preserve an open and uncrowded character and protect the unique residential environment of Del Mar. The standards are intended to promote and protect those special amenities associated with a district of single-family homes. Factors of topography and environmental sensitivities, the character of existing, low-density residential areas, and the need to identify Del Mar as a distinct and separate community shall be taken into account in administering the standards contained herein.  
30.14.020 - Boundaries. 
Property within the R1-5 Zone shall be designated by ordinance to be depicted upon the City zone map.  
30.14.030 - Allowable Uses. 
The allowable uses in the R1-5 Zone are: 
A.  A single dwelling unit on each building site. 
B.  An Accessory Dwelling Unit that meets the requirements in Section 30.91.040, or a Junior Accessory Dwelling Unit that meets the requirements in Section 30.91.050. 
C.  A Small Community Care Facility on each building site. 
(Ord. No. 725; Ord No. 758; Ord. No. 932 , § 16, 10-2-2017)  
30.14.040 - Accessory Uses. 
The following accessory uses may be established in the R1-5 Zone: 
A.  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to a single dwelling unit, including a private garage or carport to accommodate not more than three vehicles. An Accessory Building shall not be rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling unit, unless an Accessory Dwelling Unit permit is obtained and the unit is operated in compliance with Sections 30.91.040 or 30.91.050. 
B.  The renting of not more than one room to not more than one person, or the providing of table board to one person, or both. This limitation shall not apply to an Accessory Dwelling Unit or Junior Accessory Dwelling Unit where a permit has been issued pursuant to Chapter 30.91. 
C.  Off-street parking for a permitted use. 
D.  Recreational facilities intended for the use of on-site residents, including swimming pools, saunas, tennis courts, and exercise rooms. 
E.  The keeping of not more than one horse for each acre of land held in contiguous, single ownership. 
F.  The keeping of dogs, cats, and other household pets normally kept within the house. 
G.  The keeping of other domestic animals, providing however, that no such animal or any pen, coop, stable, or barn shall be located, kept or maintained within 75 feet of any window or door of any building used for human habitation, nor within 40 feet of any adjacent property line; and 
H.  Home occupation as authorized by this Code. 
I.  A licensed Family Child Care Home within an occupied single dwelling unit per California Health and Safety Code Section 1596.70. 
(Ord. No. 932 , § 17, 10-2-2017)  
30.14.050 - Parking Requirement. 
See Chapter 30.80 for parking requirements.  
30.14.060 - Reserved.  
30.14.070 - Development Standards. 
A.  Density. One building site for each 5,000 square feet of net land area. 
B.  Lot Dimensions. 
1.  Minimum lot size: 5,000 square feet. 
2.  Minimum street frontage: 20 feet. 
3.  Minimum lot width: 50 feet. 
4.  Minimum lot depth: 90 feet. 
C.  Construction Standards. 
1.  Setbacks: 
a.  Front yard: 20 feet. 
b.  Rear yard: 20 feet. 
c.  Interior side yard: Five feet. 
d.  Street side: Ten feet. 
2.  Height: 22 feet. 
3.  Floor area ratio: 30 percent or 2,000 square feet, whichever is greater. 
4.  Maximum lot coverage: 45 percent or 3,000 square feet, whichever is greater.  
30.14.080 - Special Regulations. 
Building height limit for properties located within the Bluff, Slope, and Canyon Overlay Zone shall be 14 feet unless the applicant can demonstrate that a greater height is consistent with the standards set forth in that overlay zone. However, in no case shall the allowed height exceed the maximum height specified in this Chapter.  
30.14.090 - Housing Reduction Mitigation Fee. 
A.  Where implementation of a development project would result in a net reduction in the number of dwelling units on a property, the project shall be conditioned for payment of the City of Del Mar's Housing Reduction Mitigation Fee, with payment made based upon the net reduction in dwelling units. 
B.  The requirement for payment of a Housing Reduction Mitigation Fee(s) required in this Section shall not apply where: 1) a property is nonconforming in that it contains a number of dwelling units in excess of that allowed per the Density Development Standards of this Chapter; and 2) the development project's net reduction of dwelling units will bring the property into conformance with the Density Development Standard. 
1.  The exemption for payment of a Housing Reduction Mitigation Fee(s) provided in this Subsection B. shall not apply where the number of dwelling units to be reduced exceeds the requirement to achieve conformance with the Density Development Standards. In such cases, payment of a Housing Reduction Mitigation Fee(s) shall be required, on a unit-for-unit basis, for each dwelling unit reduction in excess of the minimum required to achieve conformance with the Density Development Standards. 
(Ord. No. 889)  
Chapter 30.15 - MEDIUM DENSITY SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL-BEACH (R1-5B) 
 
30.15.010 - Purpose. 
The R1-5B Zone is designed to provide for an area of one-family residential development at a density level consistent with the City Community Plan. The standards of the zone are intended to preserve an open and uncrowded character and protect the unique residential environment of Del Mar. The standards are intended to promote and protect those special amenities associated with a district of single-family homes. Factors of topography and environmental sensitivities, the character of existing, low-density residential areas, and the need to identify Del Mar as a distinct and separate community shall be taken into account in administering the standards contained herein.  
30.15.020 - Boundaries. 
Property within the R1-5B Zone shall be designated by ordinance to be depicted upon the City zone map.  
30.15.030 - Allowable Uses. 
The allowable uses in the R1-5B Zone are: 
A.  A single dwelling unit on each building site. 
B.  An Accessory Dwelling Unit that meets the requirements in Section 30.91.040, or a Junior Accessory Dwelling Unit that meets the requirements in Section 30.91.050. 
C.  A Small Community Care Facility on each building site. 
(Ord. No. 725; Ord. No. 758; Ord. No. 932 , § 18, 10-2-2017)  
30.15.040 - Accessory Uses. 
The following accessory uses may be established in the R1-5B Zone: 
A.  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to a single dwelling unit, including a private garage or carport to accommodate not more than three vehicles. An Accessory Building shall not be rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling unit, unless an Accessory Dwelling Unit permit is obtained and the unit is operated in compliance with Sections 30.91.040 or 30.91.050. 
B.  The renting of not more than one room to not more than one person, or the providing of table board to one person, or both. This limitation shall not apply to an Accessory Dwelling Unit or Junior Accessory Dwelling Unit where a permit has been issued pursuant to Chapter 30.91. 
C.  Off-street parking for a permitted use. 
D.  Recreational facilities intended for the use of on-site residents, including swimming pools, saunas, tennis courts, and exercise rooms. 
E.  The keeping of not more than one horse for each acre of land held in contiguous, single ownership. 
F.  The keeping of dogs, cats, and other household pets normally kept within the house. 
G.  The keeping of other domestic animals, providing however, that no such animal or any pen, coop, stable, or barn shall be located, kept or maintained within 75 feet of any window or door of any building used for human habitation, nor within 40 feet of any adjacent property line. 
H.  Home occupation as authorized by this Code. 
I.  A licensed Family Child Care Home within an occupied single dwelling unit per California Health and Safety Code Section 1596.70. 
(Ord. No. 932 , § 19, 10-2-2017)  
30.15.050 - Parking Requirement. 
See Chapter 30.80 for parking requirements.  
30.15.060 - Design Review. 
All development in the R1-5B Zone shall be subject to design review by the Design Review Board pursuant to the provisions of this Code. In reviewing said development, the Design Review Board shall, in addition to the criteria specified elsewhere in this Code, consider siting alternatives, building size and bulk constraints, landscaping requirements, and other design improvements as may be reasonably required to preserve and enhance the integrity, public use, enjoyment, and public visibility to and from public open spaces, the beach, and the beach bluffs.  
30.15.070 - Development Standards. 
A.  Density. One building site for each 5,000 square feet of net land area. 
B.  Lot Dimensions. 
1.  Minimum lot size: 5,000 square feet. 
2.  Minimum street frontage: 20 feet. 
3.  Minimum lot width: 50 feet. 
4.  Minimum lot depth: 80 feet. 
C.  Construction Standards. 
1.  Setbacks: 
a.  Front yard: Ten feet. 
b.  Rear yard: Ten feet. 
c.  Interior side yard: Five feet. 
d.  Street side: Ten feet. 
2.  Height: 26 feet. 
3.  Floor area ratio: 55 percent. 
4.  Maximum lot coverage: 80 percent.  
30.15.080 - Special Regulations. 
A.  Building height limit for properties located within the Bluff, Slope, and Canyon Overlay Zone shall be 14 feet unless the applicant can demonstrate that a greater height is consistent with the standards set forth in that overlay zone. However, in no case shall the allowed height exceed the maximum height specified in this Chapter. 
B.  In the R1-5B Zone, properties under common ownership and separated by a street or alley, when one or more such properties are of substandard lot size, shall jointly be considered as one building site for purposes of determining (allowable floor area and) lot coverage. 
C.  The minimum required front yard for properties located along the west side of Ocean Front in the R1-5B Zone shall be five feet. 
D.  A lot line building shall be permitted within the side yards when jointly and cooperatively requested by adjacent property owners, providing that the orien-tation of the dwellings to each other and the adjoining properties permits full and open access to light and air. When such a side yard lot line building is permitted, it will be restricted to one side yard of any one building site and normally required side yard dimension. A lot line building shall be permitted only for the first-story portion of a one- or two-story building. A joint agreement between property owners requesting a lot line building shall be filed with the City Clerk and recorded with the County Recorder prior to the construction of said lot line building.  
30.15.090 - Housing Reduction Mitigation Fee. 
A.  Where implementation of a development project would result in a net reduction in the number of dwelling units on a property, the project shall be conditioned for payment of the City of Del Mar's Housing Reduction Mitigation Fee, with payment made based upon the net reduction in dwelling units. 
B.  The requirement for payment of a Housing Reduction Mitigation Fee(s) required in this Section shall not apply where: 1) a property is nonconforming in that it contains a number of dwelling units in excess of that allowed per the Density Development Standards of this Chapter; and 2) the development project's net reduction of dwelling units will bring the property into conformance with the Density Development Standard. 
1.  The exemption for payment of a Housing Reduction Mitigation Fee(s) provided in this Subsection B. shall not apply where the number of dwelling units to be reduced exceeds the requirement to achieve conformance with the Density Development Standards. In such cases, payment of a Housing Reduction Mitigation Fee(s) shall be required, on a unit-for-unit basis, for each dwelling unit reduction in excess of the minimum required to achieve conformance with the Density Development Standards. 
(Ord. No. 889)  
Chapter 30.16 - MEDIUM DENSITY SINGLE-MIXED RESIDENTIAL-EAST (RM-EAST) 
 
30.16.010 - Purpose. 
The RM-East Zone is designed to allow for an area of single-family and duplex development on individual lots of 5,000 square feet or greater in those areas where a substantial number of two-family dwellings already exist. 
(Ord. No. 898)  
30.16.020 - Boundaries. 
Property within the RM-East Zone shall be designated by ordinance to be depicted upon the City zone map.  
30.16.030 - Allowable Uses. 
The allowable uses in the RM-East Zone are: 
A.  A single dwelling unit on each building site. 
B.  An Accessory Dwelling Unit that meets the requirements in Section 30.91.040. A Junior Accessory Dwelling Unit is not permitted. 
C.  A duplex with attached dwelling units, or with two unattached dwelling units in instances where design constraints make attachment impractical on each building site having 5,000 square feet or more of lot area. 
D.  Clustered dwelling units not exceeding the residential density set forth in Section 30.16.070, held in common ownership of record on October 1, 1980. For purposes of this Section, "contiguous" and "common ownership" shall have the meaning as per statutes and interpretations of these phrases in the merger context. 
E.  Churches or similar structures used exclusively for religious purposes, providing a conditional use permit for such use has been obtained and is in full force and effect. 
F.  A Small Community Care Facility on each building site. 
(Ord. No. 725; Ord. No. 758; Ord. No. 898; Ord. No. 932 , § 20, 10-2-2017)  
30.16.040 - Accessory Uses. 
A.  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the allowable uses, including private garages and carports. An Accessory Building shall not be rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling unit, unless an Accessory Dwelling Unit permit is obtained in compliance with Section 30.91.040. 
B.  For each dwelling unit, the renting of not more than one room to not more than one person, or the providing of table board to one person, or both. This limitation shall not apply to an Accessory Dwelling Unit where a permit has been issued pursuant to Chapter 30.91. 
C.  Off-street parking for a permitted use. 
D.  Recreational facilities intended for the use of on-site residents, including swimming pools, saunas, tennis courts, and exercise rooms. 
E.  Home occupation as authorized by this Code. 
F.  A licensed Family Child Care Home within an occupied single dwelling unit per California Health and Safety Code Section 1596.70. 
(Ord. No. 932 , § 21, 10-2-2017)  
30.16.045. - Conditionally Allowed Uses: Conditional Use Permit. 
Provided a conditional use permit for any such use has first been obtained and is in full force and effect, the following uses are allowable in the RM-East Zone: 
A.  Large Family Day Care Facility; provided all of the following requirements are met: 
1.  A fenced and screened play lot not less than 600 square feet in area on the lot or adjacent to the premises. 
2.  Where the closest distance from any one large family day care facility to another large family day care facility shall be no less than 1,000 linear feet from the closest property lines on each site. 
3.  Parking shall be provided on-site for the operator and employee(s). 
4.  A circulation and parking plan shall be submitted for review and approval of the City of Del Mar Traffic Engineer and Planning and Community Development Director. 
B.  Large Community Care Facility, provided all of the following requirements are met: 
1.  Parking shall be provided on-site for the operators and employee(s) of the Facility in accordance with the provisions of the DMMC; 
2.  A Circulation and Parking Plan shall be submitted for the review and written approval of the City of Del Mar Traffic Engineer and Director of Planning and Community Development; and 
3.  The closest distance from any Large Community Care Facility to another Large Community Care Facility shall be no less than 300 linear feet, measured from the closest property lines of the sites on which such Facilities are located. 
(Ord. No. 725; Ord. No. 758; Ord. No. 896)  
30.16.050 - Parking Requirement. 
See Chapter 30.80 for parking requirements.  
30.16.060 - Design Review. 
All development in the RM-East Zone shall be subject to design review by the Design Review Board pursuant to the Municipal Code. In reviewing development in the RM-East Zone, the Design Review Board shall implement the following criteria in addition to the criteria contained in this Code: 
A.  That all developments shall reflect imaginative design in keeping with the village-like character of Del Mar. 
B.  That all developments shall maximize the amount of park-like, unobstructed, non-vehicular open space. 
C.  That the design of any development, the land-scaping, scale, height, length, width, bulk, coverage, and exterior appearance of any structures shall be in harmony with neighborhood character and with developments on nearby lots. 
D.  That the shape and size of any developments, and especially any portion of any development which exceeds one story in height, shall minimize the blockage of views and direct sunlight from nearby lots and public rights-of-way. 
E.  That identical building facades on adjacent parcels shall be avoided. 
(Ord. No. 898)  
30.16.070 - Development Standards. 
A.  Density. Up to, but not exceeding 17.6 dwelling units per net acre. 
B.  Lot Dimensions. 
1.  Minimum lot size: 5,000 square feet. 
2.  Minimum street frontage: 35 feet. 
3.  Minimum lot width: 50 feet. 
4.  Minimum lot depth: 80 feet. 
C.  Construction Standards. 
1.  Setbacks: 
a.  Front yard: 20 feet. 
b.  Rear yard: 20 feet. 
c.  Interior side yard: Five feet. 
d.  Street side: Ten feet. 
2.  Height: 26 feet. 
3.  Floor area ratio: 40 percent. 
4.  Maximum lot coverage: 55 percent. 
(Ord. No. 898)  
30.16.080 - Reserved.  
30.16.090 - Housing Reduction Mitigation Fee. 
A.  Where implementation of a development project would result in a net reduction in the number of dwelling units on a property, the project shall be conditioned for payment of the City of Del Mar's Housing Reduction Mitigation Fee, with payment made based upon the net reduction in dwelling units. 
B.  The requirement for payment of a Housing Reduction Mitigation Fee(s) required in this Section shall not apply where: 1) a property is nonconforming in that it contains a number of dwelling units in excess of that allowed per the Density Development Standards of this Chapter; and 2) the development project's net reduction of dwelling units will bring the property into conformance with the Density Development Standard. 
1.  The exemption for payment of a Housing Reduction Mitigation Fee(s) provided in this Subsection B. shall not apply where the number of dwelling units to be reduced exceeds the requirement to achieve conformance with the Density Development Standards. In such cases, payment of a Housing Reduction Mitigation Fee(s) shall be required, on a unit-for-unit basis, for each dwelling unit reduction in excess of the minimum required to achieve conformance with the Density Development Standards. 
(Ord. No. 889)  
Chapter 30.17 - MEDIUM DENSITY MIXED RESIDENTIAL-WEST (RM-WEST) 
 
30.17.010 - Purpose. 
The RM-West Zone is designed to allow for an area of single-family and duplex development on individual lots of 5,000 square feet or greater in those areas where a substantial number of two-family dwellings already exist. 
(Ord. No. 898)  
30.17.020 - Boundaries. 
Property within the RM-West Zone shall be designated by ordinance to be depicted upon the City zone map.  
30.17.030 - Allowable Uses. 
The allowable uses in the RM-West Zone are: 
A.  A single dwelling unit on each building site. 
B.  An Accessory Dwelling Unit that meets the requirements in Section 30.91.040. A Junior Accessory Dwelling Unit is not permitted. 
C.  A duplex with attached dwelling units, or with two unattached dwelling units in instances where design constraints make attachment impractical on each building site having 5,000 square feet or more of lot area. 
D.  Clustered dwelling units not exceeding the residential density set forth in Section 30.17.070, held in common ownership of record on October 1, 1980. For purposes of this Section, "contiguous" and "common ownership" shall have the meaning as per statutes and interpretations of these phrases in the merger context. 
E.  Churches or similar structures used exclusively for religious purposes, providing a conditional use permit for such use has been obtained and is in full force and effect. 
F.  A Small Community Care Facility on each building site. 
(Ord. No. 725; Ord. No. 758; Ord. No. 898; Ord. No. 932 , § 22, 10-2-2017)  
30.17.040 - Accessory Uses. 
A.  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the allowable uses, including private garages and carports. An Accessory Building shall not be rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling unit, unless an Accessory Dwelling Unit permit is obtained and the unit is operated in compliance with Section 30.91.040. 
B.  For each dwelling unit, the renting of not more than one room to not more than one person, or the providing of table board to one person, or both. This limitation shall not apply to an Accessory Dwelling Unit where a permit has been issued pursuant to Chapter 30.91. 
C.  Off-street parking for a permitted use. 
D.  Recreational facilities intended for the use of on-site residents, including swimming pools, saunas, tennis courts, and exercise rooms. 
E.  Home occupation as authorized by this Code. 
F.  A licensed Family Child Care Home within an occupied single dwelling unit per California Health and Safety Code Section 1596.70. 
(Ord. No. 932 , § 23, 10-2-2017)  
30.17.045 - Conditionally Allowed Uses: Conditional Use Permit. 
Provided a conditional use permit for any such use has first been obtained and is in full force and effect, the following uses are allowable in the RM-West Zone: 
A.  Large Family Day Care Facility; provided all of the following requirements are met: 
1.  A fenced and screened play lot not less than 600 square feet in area on the lot or adjacent to the premises; 
2.  Where the closest distance from any one large family day care facility to another large family day care facility shall be no less than 1,000 linear feet from the closest property lines on each site. 
3.  Parking shall be provided on-site for the operator and employee(s). 
4.  A circulation and parking plan shall be submitted for review and approval of the City of Del Mar Traffic Engineer and Planning and Community Development Director. 
B.  Large Community Care Facility, provided all of the following requirements are met: 
1.  Parking shall be provided on-site for the operators and employee(s) of the Facility in accordance with the provisions of the DMMC; 
2.  A Circulation and Parking Plan shall be submitted for the review and written approval of the City of Del Mar Traffic Engineer and Director of Planning and Community Development; and 
3.  The closest distance from any Large Community Care Facility to another Large Community Care Facility shall be no less than 300 linear feet, measured from the closest property lines of the sites on which such Facilities are located. 
(Ord. No. 725; Ord. No. 758; Ord. No. 896)  
30.17.050 - Parking Requirement. 
See Chapter 30.80 for parking requirements.  
30.17.060 - Design Review. 
All development in the RM-West Zone shall be subject to design review by the Design Review Board pursuant to the Municipal Code. In reviewing development in the RM-West Zone, the Design Review Board shall implement the following criteria in addition to the criteria contained in this Code: 
A.  That all developments shall reflect imaginative design in keeping with the village-like character of Del Mar. 
B.  That all developments shall maximize the amount of park-like, unobstructed, non-vehicular open space. 
C.  That the design of any development, the landscaping, scale, height, length, width, bulk, coverage, and exterior appearance of any structures shall be in harmony with neighborhood character and with developments on nearby lots. 
D.  That the shape and size of any developments, and especially any portion of any development which exceeds one story in height, shall minimize the blockage of views and direct sunlight from nearby lots and public rights-of-way. 
E.  That identical building facades on adjacent parcels shall be avoided. 
F.  The Design Review Board shall consider siting alternatives, building size and bulk constraints, landscaping requirements, and other design improvements as may be reasonably required to preserve and enhance the integrity, public use, enjoyment, and public visibility to and from public open spaces, the beach, and the beach bluffs.  
30.17.070 - Development Standards. 
A.  Density. Up to, but not exceeding 17.6 dwelling units per net acre. 
B.  Lot Dimensions. 
1.  Minimum lot size: 5,000 square feet. 
2.  Minimum street frontage: 35 feet. 
3.  Minimum lot width: 35 feet. 
4.  Minimum lot depth: 80 feet. 
C.  Construction Standards. 
1.  Setbacks: 
a.  Front yard: Ten feet. 
b.  Rear yard: Ten feet. 
c.  Interior side yard: Five feet. 
d.  Street side: Ten feet. 
2.  Height: 26 feet. 
3.  Floor area ratio: 45 percent. 
4.  Maximum lot coverage: 60 percent. 
(Ord. No. 898)  
30.17.080 - Special Regulations. 
A.  In the RM-West Zone, properties under common ownership and separated by a street or alley, when one or more such properties are of substandard lot size, shall jointly be considered as one building site for purposes of determining lot coverage. 
B.  The minimum required front yard for properties located along the west side of Ocean Front in the RM-West Zone shall be five feet. 
C.  In the RM-West Zone, a lot line building shall be permitted within the side yards when jointly and cooperatively requested by adjacent property owners, providing that the orientation of the dwellings to each other and the adjoining properties permits full and open access to light and air. When such a side yard lot line building is permitted, it will be restricted to one side yard of any one building site and the other opposite side yard shall have twice the normally required side yard dimension. A lot line building shall be permitted only for the first-story portion of a one- or two-story building. A joint agreement between property owners requesting a lot line building shall be filed with the City Clerk and recorded with the Office of the County Recorder prior to construction of said lot line building.  
30.17.090 - Housing Reduction Mitigation Fee. 
A.  Where implementation of a development project would result in a net reduction in the number of dwelling units on a property, the project shall be conditioned for payment of the City of Del Mar's Housing Reduction Mitigation Fee, with payment made based upon the net reduction in dwelling units. 
B.  The requirement for payment of a Housing Reduction Mitigation Fee(s) required in this Section shall not apply where: 1) a property is nonconforming in that it contains a number of dwelling units in excess of that allowed per the Density Development Standards of this Chapter; and 2) the development project's net reduction of dwelling units will bring the property into conformance with the Density Development Standard. 
1.  The exemption for payment of a Housing Reduction Mitigation Fee(s) provided in this Subsection B. shall not apply where the number of dwelling units to be reduced exceeds the requirement to achieve conformance with the Density Development Standards. In such cases, payment of a Housing Reduction Mitigation Fee(s) shall be required, on a unit-for-unit basis, for each dwelling unit reduction in excess of the minimum required to achieve conformance with the Density Development Standards. 
(Ord. No. 889)  
Chapter 30.18 - MEDIUM DENSITY MIXED RESIDENTIAL-CENTRAL (RM-CENTRAL) 
 
30.18.010 - Purpose. 
The RM-Central Zone is designed to allow for an area of single-family and duplex development on individual lots of 5,000 square feet or greater in those areas where a substantial number of two-family dwellings already exist. The RM-Central Zone is intended to permit the same as the RM-East and -West, but under development standards as applied in the R2 Zone. 
(Ord. No. 898)  
30.18.020 - Boundaries. 
Property within the RM-Central Zone shall be designated by ordinance to be depicted upon the City zone map.  
30.18.030 - Allowable Uses. 
The allowable uses in the RM-Central Zone are: 
A.  A single dwelling unit on each building site. 
B.  An Accessory Dwelling Unit that meets the requirements in Section 30.91.040. A Junior Accessory Dwelling Unit is not permitted. 
C.  A duplex with attached dwelling units, or with two unattached dwelling units in instances where design constraints make attachment impractical on each building site having 5,000 square feet or more of lot area. 
D.  Clustered dwelling units not exceeding the residential density set forth in Section 30.17.070, held in common ownership of record on October 1, 1980. For purposes of this Section, "contiguous" and "common ownership" shall have the meaning as per statutes and interpretations of these phrases in the merger context. 
E.  Churches or similar structures used exclusively for religious purposes, providing a conditional use permit for such use has been obtained and is in full force and effect. 
F.  A Small Community Care Facility on each building site. 
(Ord. No. 725; Ord. No. 758; Ord. No. 898; Ord. No. 932 , § 24, 10-2-2017)  
30.18.040 - Accessory Uses. 
A.  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the allowable uses, including private garages and carports. An Accessory Building shall not be rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling unit, unless an Accessory Dwelling Unit permit is obtained and the unit is operated in compliance with Section 30.91.040. 
B.  For each dwelling unit, the renting of not more than one room to not more than one person, or the providing of table board to one person, or both. This limitation shall not apply to an Accessory Dwelling Unit where a permit has been issued pursuant to Chapter 30.91. 
C.  Off-street parking for a permitted use. 
D.  Recreational facilities intended for the use of on-site residents, including swimming pools, saunas, tennis courts, and exercise rooms. 
E.  Home occupation as authorized by this Code. 
F.  A licensed Family Child Care Home within an occupied single dwelling unit per California Health and Safety Code Section 1596.70. 
(Ord. No. 932 , § 25, 10-2-2017)  
30.18.045 - Conditionally Allowed Uses: Conditional Use Permit. 
Provided a conditional use permit for any such use has first been obtained and is in full force and effect, the following uses are allowable in the RM-Central Zone: 
A.  Large Family Day Care Facility, provided all of the following requirements are met: 
1.  A fenced and screened play lot not less than 600 square feet in area on the lot or adjacent to the premises; 
2.  Where the closest distance from any one large family day care facility to another large family day care facility shall be no less than 1,000 linear feet from the closest property lines on each site. 
3.  Parking shall be provided on-site for the operator and employee(s). 
4.  A circulation and parking plan shall be submitted for review and approval of the City of Del Mar Traffic Engineer and Planning and Community Development Director. 
B.  Large Community Care Facility, provided all of the following requirements are met: 
1.  Parking shall be provided on-site for the operators and employee(s) of the Facility in accordance with the provisions of the DMMC; 
2.  A Circulation and Parking Plan shall be submitted for the review and written approval of the City of Del Mar Traffic Engineer and Director of Planning and Community Development; and 
3.  The closest distance from any Large Community Care Facility to another Large Community Care Facility shall be no less than 300 linear feet, measured from the closest property lines of the sites on which such Facilities are located. 
(Ord. No. 725; Ord. No. 758; Ord. No. 896)  
30.18.050 - Parking Requirement. 
See Chapter 30.80 for parking requirements.  
30.18.060 - Design Review. 
All development in the RM-Central Zone shall be subject to design review by the Design Review Board pursuant to the Municipal Code. In reviewing development in the RM-Central Zone, the Design Review Board shall implement the following criteria in addition to the criteria contained in this Code: 
A.  That all developments shall reflect imagina-tive design in keeping with the village-like character of Del Mar. 
B.  That all developments shall maximize the amount of park-like, unobstructed, non-vehicular open space. 
C.  That the design of any development, the landscaping, scale, height, length, width, bulk, coverage, and exterior appearance of any structures shall be in harmony with neighborhood character and with developments on nearby lots. 
D.  That the shape and size of any developments, and especially any portion of any development which exceeds one story in height, shall minimize the blockage of views and direct sunlight from nearby lots and public rights-of-way. 
E.  That identical building facades on adjacent parcels shall be avoided.  
30.18.070 - Development Standards. 
A.  Density. Up to, but not exceeding 12.5 dwelling units per net acre. 
B.  Lot Dimensions. 
1.  Minimum lot size: 7,000 square feet. 
2.  Minimum street frontage: 35 feet. 
3.  Minimum lot width: 50 feet. 
4.  Minimum lot depth: 90 feet. 
C.  Construction Standards. 
1.  Setbacks: 
a.  Front yard: 20 feet. 
b.  Rear yard: 20 feet. 
c.  Interior side yard: Five feet. 
d.  Street side: Ten feet. 
2.  Height: 26 feet. 
3.  Floor area ratio: 30 percent. 
4.  Maximum lot coverage: 45 percent. 
(Ord. No. 898)  
30.18.080 - Reserved.  
30.18.090 - Housing Reduction Mitigation Fee. 
A.  Where implementation of a development project would result in a net reduction in the number of dwelling units on a property, the project shall be conditioned for payment of the City of Del Mar's Housing Reduction Mitigation Fee, with payment made based upon the net reduction in dwelling units. 
B.  The requirement for payment of a Housing Reduction Mitigation Fee(s) required in this Section shall not apply where: 1) a property is nonconforming in that it contains a number of dwelling units in excess of that allowed per the Density Development Standards of this Chapter; and 2) the development project's net reduction of dwelling units will bring the property into conformance with the Density Development Standard. 
1.  The exemption for payment of a Housing Reduction Mitigation Fee(s) provided in this Subsection B. shall not apply where the number of dwelling units to be reduced exceeds the requirement to achieve conformance with the Density Development Standards. In such cases, payment of a Housing Reduction Mitigation Fee(s) shall be required, on a unit-for-unit basis, for each dwelling unit reduction in excess of the minimum required to achieve conformance with the Density Development Standards. 
(Ord. No. 889)  
Chapter 30.19 - MEDIUM DENSITY MIXED RES.-SOUTH (RM-SOUTH) 
 
30.19.010 - Purpose. 
The RM-South Zone is designed to allow single, duplex, and multi-family residential development, and to preserve, insofar as possible, a village-like character in areas where predominantly multi-family development already exists and is interspersed with vacant land.  
30.19.020 - Boundaries. 
Property within the RM-South Zone shall be designated by ordinance to be depicted upon the City zone map.  
30.19.030 - Allowable Uses. 
The allowable uses in the RM-South Zone are: 
A.  In conformity with density area and other development standards required by the RM-South Zone, and use that is allowed in the RM-East, RM-West or RM-Central Zones, except that Accessory Dwelling Units and Junior Accessory Dwelling Units are not permitted. 
B.  A duplex with attached dwelling units, or with two unattached dwelling units where design constraints make attachment impractical. 
C.  Multiple dwelling units. 
D.  Boardinghouses and lodginghouses. 
E.  Licensed rest homes. 
F.  Fraternity and sorority houses, except those where the chief activity is a service customarily carried on as a business. 
G.  A Small Community Care Facility on each building site. 
(Ord. No. 725; Ord. No. 758; Ord. No. 932 , § 26, 10-2-2017)  
30.19.040 - Accessory Uses. 
Accessory uses that are lawful in the RM-East, RM-West or RM-Central Zones may be established in the RM-South Zone, except that Accessory Dwelling Units are not permitted. 
(Ord. No. 932 , § 27, 10-2-2017)  
30.19.045 - Conditionally Allowed Uses: Conditional Use Permit. 
Provided a conditional use permit for any such use has first been obtained and is in full force and effect, the following uses are allowable in the RM-South Zone: 
A.  Large Family Day Care Facility, provided all of the following requirements are met: 
1.  A fenced and screened play lot not less than 600 square feet in area on the lot or adjacent to the premises; 
2.  Where the closest distance from any one large family day care facility to another large family day care facility shall be no less than 1,000 linear feet from the closest property lines on each site. 
3.  Parking shall be provided on-site for the operator and employee(s). 
4.  A circulation and parking plan shall be submitted for review and approval of the City of Del Mar Traffic Engineer and Planning and Community Development Director. 
B.  Large Community Care Facility, provided all of the following requirements are met: 
1.  Parking shall be provided on-site for the operators and employee(s) of the Facility in accordance with the provisions of the DMMC; 
2.  A Circulation and Parking Plan shall be submitted for the review and written approval of the City of Del Mar Traffic Engineer and Director of Planning and Community Development; and 
3.  The closest distance from any Large Community Care Facility to another Large Community Care Facility shall be no less than 300 linear feet, measured from the closest property lines of the sites on which such Facilities are located. 
(Ord. No. 725; Ord. No. 758; Ord. No. 896)  
30.19.050 - Parking Requirement. 
See Chapter 30.80 for parking requirements.  
30.19.060 - Design Review. 
All development in the RM-South Zone shall be subject to design review by the Design Review Board pursuant to the Municipal Code. In reviewing development in the RM-South Zone, the Design Review Board shall implement the following criteria in addition to the criteria contained in this Code: 
A.  That all developments shall reflect imaginative design in keeping with the village-like character of Del Mar. 
B.  That all developments shall maximize the amount of park-like, unobstructed, non-vehicular open space. 
C.  That the design of any development, the landscaping, scale, height, length, width, bulk, coverage, and exterior appearance of any structures shall be in harmony with neighborhood character and with developments on nearby lots. 
D.  That the shape and size of any developments, and especially any portion of any development which exceeds one story in height, shall minimize the blockage of views and direct sunlight from nearby lots and public rights-of-way. 
E.  That identical building facades on adjacent parcels shall be avoided. 
F.  The Design Review Board shall consider siting alternatives, building size and bulk constraints, landscaping requirements, and other design improvements as may be reasonably required to preserve and enhance the integrity, public use, enjoyment, and public visibility to and from public open spaces, the beach, and the beach bluffs.  
30.19.070 - Development Standards. 
A.  Density. Up to, but not exceeding 12.5 dwelling units per net acre. 
B.  Lot Dimensions. 
1.  Minimum lot size: 8,000 square feet. 
2.  Minimum street frontage: 50 feet. 
3.  Minimum lot width: 60 feet. 
4.  Minimum lot depth: 100 feet. 
C.  Construction Standards. 
1.  Setbacks: 
a.  Front yard: 20 feet. 
b.  Rear yard: 20 feet. 
c.  Interior side yard: Ten feet. 
d.  Street side: Ten feet. 
2.  Height: 26 feet. 
3.  Floor area ratio: 35 percent. 
4.  Maximum lot coverage: 50 percent. 
(Ord. No. 898)  
30.19.080 - Special Regulations. 
In the RM-South Zone, the interior side yard may be reduced to seven and one-half feet for single-family and duplex development.  
30.19.090 - Housing Reduction Mitigation Fee. 
A.  Where implementation of a development project would result in a net reduction in the number of dwelling units on a property, the project shall be conditioned for payment of the City of Del Mar's Housing Reduction Mitigation Fee, with payment made based upon the net reduction in dwelling units. 
B.  The requirement for payment of a Housing Reduction Mitigation Fee(s) required in this Section shall not apply where: 1) a property is nonconforming in that it contains a number of dwelling units in excess of that allowed per the Density Development Standards of this Chapter; and 2) the development project's net reduction of dwelling units will bring the property into conformance with the Density Development Standard. 
1.  The exemption for payment of a Housing Reduction Mitigation Fee(s) provided in this Subsection B. shall not apply where the number of dwelling units to be reduced exceeds the requirement to achieve conformance with the Density Development Standards. In such cases, payment of a Housing Reduction Mitigation Fee(s) shall be required, on a unit-for-unit basis, for each dwelling unit reduction in excess of the minimum required to achieve conformance with the Density Development Standards. 
(Ord. No. 889)  
Chapter 30.20 - HIGH DENSITY MIXED RESIDENTIAL (R2) 
 
30.20.010 - Purpose. 
The R2 Zone is designed to allow for one- and two-family dwellings on individual lots greater than 7,000 square feet that are within easy walking distance of the village center. The provisions of the R2 Zone are further intended to carry out the objectives of the community plan consistent with the high-density residential land use category set forth in that plan.  
30.20.020 - Boundaries. 
Property within the R2 Zone shall be designated by ordinance to be depicted upon the City zone map.  
30.20.030 - Allowable Uses. 
The allowable uses in the R2 Zone are: 
A.  A single dwelling unit on each building site. 
B.  An Accessory Dwelling Unit that meets the requirements in Section 30.91.040. A Junior Accessory Dwelling Unit is not permitted. 
C.  A duplex with attached dwelling units, or with two unattached dwelling units where design constraints make attachment impractical on each building site having 7,000 square feet or more of lot area. 
D.  Clustered dwelling units, subject to an approved conditional use permit and not exceeding the residential density set forth in Section 30.17.070, held in common ownership of record on October 1, 1980. For purposes of this Section, "contiguous" and "common ownership" shall have the meaning as per statutes and interpretations of these phrases in the merger context. 
E.  Churches or similar structures used exclusively for religious purposes, providing a conditional use permit for such use has been obtained and is in full force and effect. 
F.  A Small Community Care Facility on each building site. 
(Ord. No. 725; Ord. No. 758; Ord. No. 932 , § 28, 10-2-2017)  
30.20.040 - Accessory Uses. 
A.  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the allowable uses, including private garages and carports. An Accessory Building shall not be rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling unit, unless an Accessory Dwelling Unit permit is obtained and the unit is operated in compliance with Section 30.91.040. 
B.  For each dwelling unit, the renting of not more than one room to not more than one person, or the providing of table board to one person, or both. This limitation shall not apply to an Accessory Dwelling Unit where a permit has been issued pursuant to Chapter 30.91. 
C.  Off-street parking for a permitted use. 
D.  Recreational facilities intended for the use of on-site residents, including swimming pools, saunas, tennis courts, and exercise rooms. 
E.  Home occupation as authorized by this Code. 
F.  A licensed Family Child Care Home within an occupied single dwelling unit per California Health and Safety Code Section 1596.70. 
(Ord. No. 932 , § 29, 10-2-2017)  
30.20.045. - Conditionally Allowed Uses: Conditional Use Permit. 
Provided a conditional use permit for any such use has first been obtained and is in full force and effect, the following uses are allowable in the R-2 Zone: 
A.  Large Family Day Care Facility, provided all of the following requirements are met: 
1.  A fenced and screened play lot not less than 600 square feet in area on the lot or adjacent to the premises. 
2.  Where the closest distance from any one large family day care facility to another large family day care facility shall be no less than 1,000 linear feet from the closest property lines on each site. 
3.  Parking shall be provided on-site for the operator and employee(s). 
4.  A circulation and parking plan shall be submitted for review and approval of the City of Del Mar Traffic Engineer and Planning and Community Development Director. 
B.  Large Community Care Facility, provided all of the following requirements are met: 
1.  Parking shall be provided on-site for the operators and employee(s) of the Facility in accordance with the provisions of the DMMC; 
2.  A Circulation and Parking Plan shall be submitted for the review and written approval of the City of Del Mar Traffic Engineer and Director of Planning and Community Development; and 
3.  The closest distance from any Large Community Care Facility to another Large Community Care Facility shall be no less than 300 linear feet, measured from the closest property lines of the sites on which such Facilities are located. 
(Ord. No. 725; Ord. No. 758; Ord. No. 896)  
30.20.050 - Parking Requirement. 
See Chapter 30.80 for parking requirements.  
30.20.060 - Design Review. 
All development in the R2 Zone shall be subject to design review by the Design Review Board pursuant to the Municipal Code. In reviewing development in the R2 Zone, the Design Review Board shall implement the following criteria in addition to the criteria contained in this Code: 
A.  The design of all development and the landscaping, scale, height, length, width, bulk, coverage, and exterior appearance of all structures shall be in harmony with neighborhood character and with development on nearby lots. Between Eighth and Fourteenth Streets, any development shall not result in the diminution of the historic values of the older, existing residences of the area. 
B.  That the shape and size of any development, especially any portion of any development which exceeds one story in height, shall minimize the blockage of views and direct sunlight from nearby lots and public rights-of-way. 
C.  That similar or identical building facades on the same or adjacent parcels shall be avoided. 
D.  The Design Review Board shall consider siting alternatives, building size and bulk constraints, landscaping requirements, and other design improvements as may be reasonably required to preserve and enhance the integrity, public use, enjoyment, and public visibility to and from public open spaces, the beach, and the beach bluffs.  
30.20.070 - Development Standards. 
In the R2 Zone, the following development standards shall apply: 
A.  Density. In the R2 Zone, the permitted density shall not exceed 12.5 dwelling units per net acre. 
B.  Lot Dimensions. 
1.  Minimum lot size: 7,000 square feet. 
2.  Minimum street frontage: 35 feet. 
3.  Minimum lot width: 50 feet. 
4.  Minimum lot depth: 90 feet. 
C.  Construction Standards. 
1.  Setbacks: 
a.  Front yard: 20 feet. 
b.  Rear yard: 20 feet. 
c.  Interior side yard: Five feet. 
d.  Street side: Ten feet. 
2.  Height: 26 feet. 
3.  Floor area ratio: 35 percent. 
4.  Maximum lot coverage: 50 percent.  
30.20.080 - Reserved.  
30.20.090 - Housing Reduction Mitigation Fee. 
A.  Where implementation of a development project would result in a net reduction in the number of dwelling units on a property, the project shall be conditioned for payment of the City of Del Mar's Housing Reduction Mitigation Fee, with payment made based upon the net reduction in dwelling units. 
B.  The requirement for payment of a Housing Reduction Mitigation Fee(s) required in this Section shall not apply where: 1) a property is nonconforming in that it contains a number of dwelling units in excess of that allowed per the Density Development Standards of this Chapter; and 2) the development project's net reduction of dwelling units will bring the property into conformance with the Density Development Standard. 
1.  The exemption for payment of a Housing Reduction Mitigation Fee(s) provided in this Subsection B. shall not apply where the number of dwelling units to be reduced exceeds the requirement to achieve conformance with the Density Development Standards. In such cases, payment of a Housing Reduction Mitigation Fee(s) shall be required, on a unit-for-unit basis, for each dwelling unit reduction in excess of the minimum required to achieve conformance with the Density Development Standards. 
(Ord. No. 889)  
Chapter 30.21 - RESIDENTIAL-COMMERCIAL ZONE (RC) 
 
30.21.010 - Purpose. 
The RC Zone is designed to be used as a transition between commercial and residential activities. Allowed uses include a mixture of residential and retail office activities conforming to the adjacent R2 residential floor area ratio, and with the percentage of commercial floor area not to exceed 40 percent of the total floor area.  
30.21.020 - Boundaries. 
Property within the RC Zone shall be designated by ordinance to be depicted upon the City zone map.  
30.21.030 - Allowable Uses. 
The following uses are allowable in the RC Zone: 
A.  Any use allowable in the R2 Zone; provided, however, that at least 60 percent of the floor area, exclusive of parking, shall be for such R2 zoned use. Accessory Dwelling Units are permitted on a lot with an existing single dwelling unit. 
B.  Any primary use (not requiring a conditional use permit) allowed in the CC Zone; provided, however, that not more than 40 percent of the floor area, exclusive of parking, shall be for such CC zoned use. 
(Ord. No. 932 , § 30, 10-2-2017)  
30.21.040 - Accessory Uses. 
A.  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the allowable uses, including private garages and carports. 
B.  Off-street parking for a permitted use. 
C.  A licensed Family Child Care Home within an occupied single dwelling unit per California Health and Safety Code Section 1596.70. 
(Ord. No. 932 , § 31, 10-2-2017)  
30.21.050 - Parking Requirements. 
See Chapter 30.80 for parking requirements.  
30.21.060 - Design Review. 
All development in the RC Zone shall be subject to design review by the Design Review Board pursuant to the provisions of this Code. Design consideration shall be given to the harmonious blend of commercial and residential land uses consistent with the village character of the City of Del Mar.  
30.21.070 - Development Standards. 
A.  Density. The residential density in the RC Zone shall not exceed 12.5 dwelling units per net acre. 
B.  Lot Dimensions. 
1.  Minimum lot size: 7,000 square feet. 
2.  Minimum street frontage: 35 feet. 
3.  Minimum lot width: 50 feet. 
4.  Minimum lot depth: 90 feet. 
C.  Construction Standards. 
1.  Setbacks: 
a.  Front yard: 20 feet. 
b.  Rear yard: Zero feet. 
c.  Interior side yard: Five feet. 
d.  Street side yard: Ten feet. 
2.  Height: 26 feet. 
3.  Floor area ratio: 30 percent. 
4.  Maximum lot coverage: 55 percent.  
30.21.080 - Reserved.  
30.21.090 - Housing Reduction Mitigation Fee. 
A.  Where implementation of a development project would result in a net reduction in the number of dwelling units on a property, the project shall be conditioned for payment of the City of Del Mar's Housing Reduction Mitigation Fee, with payment made based upon the net reduction in dwelling units. 
B.  The requirement for payment of a Housing Reduction Mitigation Fee(s) required in this Section shall not apply where: 1) a property is nonconforming in that it contains a number of dwelling units in excess of that allowed per the Density Development Standards of this Chapter; and 2) the development project's net reduction of dwelling units will bring the property into conformance with the Density Development Standard. 
1.  The exemption for payment of a Housing Reduction Mitigation Fee(s) provided in this Subsection B. shall not apply where the number of dwelling units to be reduced exceeds the requirement to achieve conformance with the Density Development Standards. In such cases, payment of a Housing Reduction Mitigation Fee(s) shall be required, on a unit-for-unit basis, for each dwelling unit reduction in excess of the minimum required to achieve conformance with the Density Development Standards. 
(Ord. No. 889)  
Chapter 30.22 - CENTRAL COMMERCIAL ZONE 
 
30.22.010 - Purpose. 
The Central Commercial Zone (CC Zone) allows activities that preserve and enhance the style and quality of the village center district of Del Mar. The CC Zone is the City's principal location for retail, restaurant, personal service and office uses serving the needs of both residents and visitors. Development in the CC Zone shall be compatible with the intellectual, social and material needs of the community. Development shall emphasize pedestrian orientation. 
(Ord. No. 824; Ord. No. 863)  
30.22.020 - Boundaries. 
Property within the CC Zone shall be designated by ordinance to be depicted upon the City zone map.  
30.22.025 - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this Chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage. 
A.  Community Services/Cultural Uses means any use where the provision of information from a recognized visitor-information organization or providing cultural and/or entertainment opportunities constitutes 51 percent or more of the establishment's activity. 
B.  Horizontal Zoning Requirements means the requirements of this Chapter that regulate the allowable uses in Street-Frontage Building Spaces. 
C.  Legal Nonconforming Use means an existing use that was legally permitted prior to the effective date of an ordinance amending this Chapter to establish Horizontal Zoning Regulations but which, by virtue of such amendment, is no longer deemed to be an allowable use in the location in which it is being operated. 
D.  Personal Service Uses mean commercial establishments where the face-to-face provision of services to individual customers constitutes 51 percent or more of the establishment's activity. 
E.  Retail Uses mean commercial establishments where the sale of goods and/or commodities stored and sold on site in face-to-face transactions constitutes 51 percent or more of the establishment's activity. 
F.  Restaurant/Bar Uses means commercial establishments where the preparation and sale of food and/or beverages for on-site consumption constitutes 51% or more of the establishment's activity. 
G.  Street-Frontage Building Space means that portion of a building having frontage along either Camino Del Mar or 15th Street and which is closest in elevation and alignment to the frontage street. 
(Ord. No. 824)  
30.22.030 - Allowable Uses in Street-Frontage Building Spaces. 
The following uses are allowed in Street Frontage Building Spaces, as defined in this Chapter: 
A.  Community Services/Cultural Uses. 
- Art Galleries and studios 
- Photo galleries and studios 
- City of Del Mar information centers 
- Museums 
- Theaters 
B.  Personal Service Uses. 
- Barber Shops and Beauty Parlors 
- Custom printing or Duplicating shop 
- Day Spas 
- Health Studios 
- Instructional arts studios 
- Dry Cleaning or Clothes Cleaning Services 
- Paper Reproduction and Copy Shops 
- Pet Grooming Providers (excluding overnight boarding) 
- Postal Services (non-governmental administered) 
- Photographic Reproduction Services 
- Photography studios 
- Shoe Repair Shops 
- Travel Agencies 
- Any other establishment which is found by the Director of Planning and Community Development to be unambiguously consistent with the definition of Personal Services, as provided in this Chapter 
C.  Restaurant Use. 
- Bars, Cocktail Lounges, Wine Bars 
- Coffee Houses/Cafés 
- Delicatessens 
- Ice Cream/Yogurt/Smoothie Shops 
- Restaurants 
- Sandwich Shops (with on-site consumption) 
- Tea Rooms 
Note: Any activity listed as an allowable use in the CC Zone and which involves the sale of alcohol for on-site consumption between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. shall be subject to the receipt of a Conditional Use Permit. 
D.  Retail Uses. 
- Antique Shops 
- Apparel/Clothing Shops 
- Appliance Sales 
- Bakeries (retail, with no on-site consumption) 
- Book and Stationery Stores 
- Camera Shops 
- Candy and Confectionary Stores 
- Dressmaking or Millinery Shops 
- Drug Store/Pharmacy 
- Florist Shops 
- Furniture and Home Furnishing Stores 
- Garden Shops 
- Gift Shops 
- Grocery and Food Stores 
- Hardware Stores 
- Hobby and Art Supply Stores 
- Jewelry Stores 
- Leather Goods and Luggage Shops 
- Liquor Stores 
- Meat and Poultry Shops 
- Music Shops 
- Newspaper and Periodical Shops 
- Stamp or Coin Collecting Stores 
- Pet Shops 
- Shoe Stores 
- Plant nurseries 
- Smoke Shops 
- Sporting Goods Stores 
- Take-Out Sandwich Shops (Take out only, no on-site consumption. Where on-site consumption occurs, the use shall be considered to be a restaurant.) 
- Television, Radio, and Electronic Equipment Sales 
- Video/DVD sales and Rental Shops 
- Yardage Shops 
(Ord. No. 662; Ord. No. 718; Ord. No. 824)  
30.22.031 - Reserved. 
Note— See Ord. No. 596.  
30.22.032 - Allowable Uses in Non Street-Frontage Building Spaces. 
The following are, pursuant to existing zoning regulations, permitted uses in non-street frontage building spaces but do not qualify as Street-Frontage Building Spaces: 
- Any use allowed in Street-Frontage Building Spaces, as identified in this Chapter 
- Offices, including Professional, Medical, Real Estate and Financial Institutions. 
(Ord. No. 824)  
30.22.033 - Procedures and Standards of Review for Receipt of an Exception Permit from Horizontal Zoning Requirements and Determination of Abandonment. 
The owner of a Street-Frontage Building Space regulated by the Horizontal Zoning Requirements of this Chapter may seek relief from such requirements in accordance with the following: 
A.  The property owner shall submit an application for an Exception Permit, on a form provided by the City, stating the rationale for the request and the manner in which the unique circumstances associated with the property support a finding of compliance with the Standards of Review for Exception Permits contained in this Section; 
B.  The property owner shall pay a fee, as established by resolution of the City Council, for processing of the application; 
C.  The application shall be reviewed by the City Council at a noticed public hearing conducted in accordance with the provisions of the DMMC; 
D.  The City Council's grant of an Exception Permit pursuant to this Section shall be subject to such conditions as deemed necessary to implement the City's expressed goal for encouragement of retail-oriented commercial uses and to create a pedestrian-oriented downtown. 
E.  The application shall be approved if the City Council makes all of the following findings of fact: 
Standards of Review for Grant of an Exception Permit: 
1.  The Street-Frontage Building Space for which the Permit is sought is, by virtue of existing unique circumstances such as topography, building alignment or building design, constrained from being successful for one of the uses listed in Section 30.22.030. For purposes of this Section, examples of existing unique circumstances shall include, but not be limited to, the following situations wherein: a) the floor level of the Street-Frontage Building Space is at an elevation differential of 36 inches or more from the level of adjacent street-frontage sidewalk measured at the entry to the building space; b) the building face of the Street-Frontage Building Space is set back from the adjacent street-frontage sidewalk by a distance of 25 feet or more; or c) the building face of the Street-Frontage Building Space contains a minimal number of windows that would otherwise allow passersby on the frontage sidewalk to observe goods and commodities for sale or to observe services available in the interior of the building space; 
2.  The constraints identified in Subsection E.1. of this Section cannot be feasibly overcome by building or grading alterations. For purposes of this Section, the term "feasibly overcome" shall mean: Capable of being accomplished without an undue financial hardship; and 
3.  The proposed use is listed as an allowable use in the Central Commercial Zone. 
F.  A property owner may apply for an Exception Permit to be relieved from a determination of abandonment. An application seeking relief under this Subsection F. shall be filed no later than 30 days prior to the end of the abandonment period and shall include sufficient documentation establishing: 1) the property owner has been unable to rent (or sell if the property is currently or was within the preceding 12 months marketed for sale) the property; and, 2) the property owner has made commercially reasonable efforts to rent or sell the property. An Exception Permit under this Subsection F. may only be granted if the City Council finds that: 1) the property owner has made commercially reasonable efforts to rent or sell the property; and, 2) the property has been unoccupied for no more than 12 consecutive months prior to the date the application for an Exception Permit was received by the City. 
(Ord. No. 824)  
30.22.034 - Continuation and Abatement of Non-Conforming Use of Street-Frontage Building Spaces. 
A.  Notwithstanding other provisions of the Del Mar Municipal Code, a nonconforming use in a Street-Frontage Building Space may continue unless or until the occurrence of any of the following events: 
1.  The use is abandoned; 
2.  The use is extended or enlarged; 
3.  There is a substantial change in the intensity of use or character of the activity conducted within the building space; or 
4.  The building space in which the nonconformity is located is destructed, deemed by the City to be uninhabitable or declared a public nuisance. 
B.  Where one of the events identified in Subsection A. of this Section occurs, the legal nonconforming use shall cease and any and all future uses shall conform with the provisions of this Chapter. 
C.  For purposes of this Chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning described below: 
Abandoned shall mean the discontinuance of operation, for any reason, for a period of 12 consecutive months. 
Destructed shall mean the physical impairment, by any cause, of 50% or more of the structural premises in which the use is located, such that the use can no longer be maintained or operated in that portion of the premises. Such destruction shall be measured either by the occupied square footage of the premises or by the estimated cost of repairs to the premises compared against the structural value of the premises. 
Enlargement shall refer to the nonconforming use and shall include the addition of any employees, workers or agents operating within or from the premises, or the addition of any services, lines of business, or other activities operated by the nonconforming use. 
Uninhabitable shall mean not fit for occupancy due to non-compliance with the Uniform Building Code, as determined by the City's Building Official. 
(Ord. No. 824)  
30.22.035 - Use of Required Accessory Parking Spaces for General Public Parking. 
A.  This Section shall apply only to those properties located within the Central Commercial Zone that contain permitted development(s) and off-street parking spaces accessory to the permitted development. 
B.  Off-street parking spaces accessory to permitted development may be made available by the property owner for use as general public parking during the period(s) when such spaces are not reserved, encumbered, or designated to satisfy the off-street parking of a business or activity. 
C.  For purposes of this Section, the term "permitted development" shall mean structures and/or the operation of uses or activities that, at the time of their construction or establishment, were in compliance with all applicable local laws. 
D.  For purposes of this Section, the term "general public parking" shall mean the use of off-street parking spaces by members of the public, as distinguished from parking spaces reserved, encumbered or designated specifically for use by the patrons, operators or employees of a business or activity at the property. For purposes of this Chapter "general public parking" is also distinct from parking spaces developed and/or maintained by the City of Del Mar. 
E.  The use of off-street parking spaces for general public parking shall be subject to the prior receipt of written authorization from the Director of Planning and Community Development ("Director"), or designee, in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. 
F.  A fee may be charged for the use of the general public parking, subject to the prior receipt of written authorization by the Director, in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 863)  
30.22.036 - Review Process for Requests to Make Parking Spaces Available for General Public Parking. 
A.  A request for Authorization for general public parking shall be submitted on a form provided by the City, along with such information and drawings as required by the Director. 
B.  The Request shall include: 
1.  The statement that the property owner consents to the filing of the request; 
2.  A statement that each of the operators of the businesses or activities being conducted at the property has been made aware of the filing of the request; 
3.  A statement that there will be no substantial overlap in the operating hours of the businesses or activities conducted at the property and the hours of the requested general public parking; 
4.  A description of the proposed operation of general public parking; and 
5.  A plan for all amenities to be installed in association with the Request for Authorization. 
C.  Public Notice of the Planning Director's review of a Request for Authorization shall be provided as follows: 
1.  Published once in a newspaper of general circulation within the City; 
2.  Mailed to all owners of real property within 300 feet of the location of the property for which the Request for Authorization has been submitted, with ownership as identified on County Tax Assessors' rolls; and 
3.  Posting at City Hall and on the City of Del Mar Web-site by staff and posting at the property by the property owner on a form provided by the City. 
D.  The notice required herein shall contain the date, place, and time set for the Director's review of the submitted Request for Authorization, along with a brief description of the proposal and explanation of the review process. 
E.  The Director may impose such conditions to the Request for Authorization as deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this Chapter. 
F.  The Director's authorization granted pursuant to this Section may be revoked upon a written finding by the Director that the general public parking is being used or operated in a manner inconsistent with the terms and conditions of an approved Request for Authorization or in a manner that would be inconsistent with the provisions of the Del Mar Municipal Code or that the general public parking is being operated in a manner that constitutes a nuisance. 
G.  The Director's decision on a Request for Authorization pursuant to this Section shall be appealable to the City Council in accordance with the provisions of the Del Mar Municipal Code. 
H.  The Director's approval of a Request for Authorization shall be valid for a period of two years from the date of approval. Not more than six months prior to the expiration of an approved Request for Authorization, a property owner may make a written submittal for Renewal of a Request for Authorization. The Renewal shall be approved unless the Director makes written findings that there have been changed circumstances since the time of approval of the Request for Authorization that would render the Renewal of a Request for Authorization inconsistent with one or more of the provisions of this Chapter. 
I.  The Director's approval of a Request for Authorization shall not constitute authorization of other, separate city permits, as may be required per the Del Mar Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 863)  
30.22.040 - Allowable Uses: Conditional Use Permit. 
A.  Provided a conditional use permit for any such use has first been obtained and is in full force and effect, the following uses are allowable in the CC Zone: 
Commercial Mobile Radio Service Facilities—Minor 
Child Day Care Facilities 
Gasoline Service Stations 
Hotels, Motels or Auto Courts 
Motion Picture and Legitimate Theaters 
Newspapers, Printers 
Outdoor sales 
Public Utility Buildings 
Veterinary Clinics 
Private Clubs, Fraternal Organizations 
Parking Lots and Parking Garages, not accessory to a permitted use 
B.  Any allowed or conditionally allowed use that involves the sale of alcohol for on-site consumption between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
C.  Any similar enterprise, business or use which, in the opinion of the City Planning Commission, or the City Council on appeal, is functionally equivalent to one of the other conditionally allowed uses within the CC Zone. 
(Ord. No. 662; Ord. No. 669; Ord. No. 718)  
30.22.050 - Accessory Uses. 
A.  One dwelling unit as accessory to and on the same site as that of a permitted use, and conforming to the parking requirements of the R2 Zone. 
B.  Accessory uses customarily incidental to the above, including accessory storage of commodities sold on the premises. 
C.  Off-street automobile parking as an accessory use to any permitted use.  
30.22.060 - Lot Area. 
A.  No lot shall be less than 6,000 square feet in area. 
B.  No lot shall have a width of less than 50 feet. 
C.  No lot shall have a depth of less than 90 feet. 
D.  No lot shall have a street frontage of less than 35 feet.  
30.22.070 - Construction Standards. 
A.  Setback. Every lot having a common boundary with property zoned R1, RM, R2 shall have a minimum ten-foot wide landscaped setback from such common boundary. 
B.  Height. 
1.  No structure shall exceed a height of 26 feet. Except, structures fronting the west side of Camino del Mar shall not exceed a height of 14 feet measured from the elevation of the curb level adjacent to the structure on Camino del Mar. 
2.  No Commercial Mobile Radio Service Facility antennas, and any antenna support structures, shall be erected to a height exceeding ten feet above the roof, or ten feet above the maximum permitted height, whichever is less. 
C.  Floor Area. No development shall exceed a floor area-to-lot area ratio of 45 percent or 2,000 square feet, whichever is greater. 
D.  Lot Coverage. No development shall exceed a lot coverage of more than 60 percent or 2,500 square feet, whichever is greater. 
(Ord. No. 635, Ord. No. 669)  
30.22.080 - Building Design Standards. 
A.  All development within the CC Zone shall be subject to design review pursuant to the provisions of the Code. 
B.  Development for the zone shall be designed to maintain a pedestrian-oriented, predominantly retail village character, with attractive walkways and courts which encourage social interaction and taking advantage of ocean vistas. 
C.  All Commercial Mobile Radio Service Facility antennas, any antenna support structures, and any associated exterior support equipment shall be located, designed, and screened so as to minimize their visual impacts when viewed from surrounding properties and public areas. No antennas shall be mounted so as to extend above the building roof at any point unless the Design Review Board finds that there is no other location on site for the proposed antennas and any antenna support structures that would result in a less conspicuous and/or more aesthetically appealing installation while still providing reasonable signal access. 
If the applicant claims that an imposed regulation or condition will have the effect of prohibiting the provision of commercial mobile radio services, the applicant shall deposit with the City a sum in an amount determined by the Director of Planning and Community Development to be sufficient to pay the City's cost in obtaining an expert evaluation and opinion on the proposed antenna heights, location, and design. Any unused portion of the deposit shall be refunded to the applicant upon a final determination on the application. 
All facade-mounted antennas, and associated antenna support structures, shall be screened, textured, and/or painted to match the materials and color of the structure to which the antennas are attached. All roof-mounted antennas, antenna support structures, and any associated exterior support equipment shall be painted to match the color of the background against which they are most commonly viewed, as determined by the Design Review Board. 
(Ord. No. 635; Ord. No. 669)  
30.22.090 - Reserved.  
30.22.095 - Special Regulations. 
In reviewing a conditional use permit for a Commercial Mobile Radio Service Facility, the Planning Commission shall review the application under the following standards: 
A.  No Commercial Mobile Radio Service antenna shall be located within 100 feet of the exterior wall of a residential dwelling. For purposes of this Section, the distance shall be measured as a straight line between the closest point of the antenna and the closest exterior surface of the habitable space of the dwelling. 
B.  No floor area shall be designed, constructed or used for Commercial Mobile Radio Service support equipment where the floor area: 
1.  Is within a structure which has an exterior wall located on Camino del Mar; and 
2.  Is located on the floor of the structure which is nearest in elevation to the elevation of Camino del Mar, measured at the point adjacent to the site on Camino del Mar. 
C.  All support equipment associated with a proposed Commercial Mobile Radio Service Facility shall be placed within the interior of a structure unless the Planning Commission, in its review of the required CUP application, finds that support equipment placed exterior to a structure has been sited and screened so as not to interfere with pedestrian circulation or required vehicular parking and circulation; and that exterior support equipment will not create noise or other adverse impacts to adjacent rights-of-way or properties. 
D.  Prior to approval of the CUP, the owner and/or operator of a Commercial Mobile Radio Service Facility shall submit a comprehensive project proposal report which provides levels of radio frequency (RF) power densities of all antennas intended to be installed at the subject site. The report shall quantify the RF emissions and compare the results with the standard accepted by the Director of Planning and Community Development. The project proposal report shall also include all shielding and notification measures necessary to protect the public health, safety, general welfare. Said proposal report shall be subject to review by the Planning Commission, and shall include any conditions as imposed by the Planning Commission. 
E.  Within six months after the issuance of an occupancy permit, the owner/operator of a Commercial Mobile Radio Service Facility shall submit to the City a project implementation report which provides cumulative field measurements of radio frequency (RF) power densities of all antennas installed at the subject site. The report shall quantify the RF emissions and compare the results with the accepted standard. Said report shall be subject to review and approval by the Director of Planning and Community Development for consistency with the project proposal report and the accepted standard. Any measurements in excess of the accepted standard shall render all previous projects approvals null and void. 
F.  Any proposals for modification of plans authorized pursuant to the original approval of a Commercial Mobile Radio Service Facility shall require subsequent review and authorization from appropriate entities of the City of Del Mar. 
G.  The continued use of Commercial Mobile Radio Service Facilities shall comply with all applicable current and future regulations of the Federal Communications Commission and the California Public Utilities Commission. 
H.  A Commercial Mobile Radio Service Facility which is inactive for 180 consecutive days for mobile radio service purposes shall be removed by the owner and/or operator of the Commercial Mobile Radio Service Facility. 
(Ord. No. 635; Ord. No. 669; Ord. No. 774)  
Chapter 30.23 - BEACH COMMERCIAL ZONE (BC) 
 
30.23.010 - Purpose. 
The BC Zone is designed for areas having high scenic value and/or fragile environmental characteristics, and is designed to allow commercial activities that are in harmony with, rather than in domination of the special character of the coastal environment. Development shall provide for maximum open space and public access and usage of beach areas, without encroaching on the fragile coastal bluffs. Beach-oriented commercial/recreational activities are encouraged in this zone, as well as single-story structures, in order to preserve the scenic vistas from adjacent public rights-of-way.  
30.23.020 - Boundaries. 
Property within the BC Zone shall be designated by ordinance to be depicted upon the City zone map.  
30.23.030 - Allowable Uses. 
The following uses are allowable in the BC Zone, provided that the use does not involve the sale of alcohol for on-site consumption between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. and further provided that the use does not involve the provision of goods, food or beverages, or services in a drive-in or drive-thru manner: 
A.  The retailing, renting, or dispensing of services, from the following: 
Bars and Cocktail Lounges 
Bicycle rentals 
Non-auto-oriented open air theaters 
Outdoor cafes 
Outdoor recreation facilities 
Private parks and playgrounds 
Restaurants 
Surfboard, surfmat, fishing and diving, and other sales and rentals of beach equipment 
Swimming pools, commercial or public 
Tennis and volleyball courts, commercial or public 
B.  Any similar enterprise or business which conforms to the description and purpose of the BC Zone, and is not detrimental to the welfare of the community. 
(Ord. No. 662; Ord. No. 718)  
30.23.040 - Accessory Uses. 
The following accessory uses may be established in the BC Zone: 
A.  Accessory uses customarily incidental to the above, including accessory storage of commodities sold on the premises. 
B.  Off-street automobile parking as an accessory use to any permitted use.  
30.23.045 - Conditionally Allowed Uses: Conditional Use Permit. 
Provided a conditional use permit for any such use has first been obtained and is in full force and effect, the following uses are allowable in the BC Zone: 
A.  Any principal use permitted in the CC Zone (exclusive of those uses which, under the CC Zone provisions, would require a conditional use permit). 
B.  Any allowed or conditionally allowed use that involves the sale of alcohol for on-site consumption between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 662)  
30.23.050 - Parking Requirement. 
In the BC Zone, off-street parking shall be provided for each use as set forth in this Code.  
30.23.060 - Design Review. 
All development in the BC Zone shall be subject to design review by the Design Review Board pursuant to the provisions of this Code. All structures and parking shall be designed, located, and arranged in such a manner so as to prevent the loss of usable beach area, fragile coastal bluffs, or access thereto, as well as to minimize the diminution of coastal views. The Design Review Board shall consider siting alternative, building size and bulk constraints, landscaping requirements, and other design improvements as may be reasonably required to preserve and enhance the integrity, public use, enjoyment and public visibility to and from public parks, the beach, and the beach bluffs.  
30.23.070 - Development Standards. 
A.  Reserved. 
B.  Lot Dimensions. 
1.  Minimum lot size: 6,000 square feet. 
2.  Minimum street frontage: 35 feet. 
3.  Minimum lot width: 50 feet. 
4.  Minimum lot depth: 90 feet. 
C.  Construction Standards. 
1.  Setbacks: 
a.  Front yard: Ten feet. 
b.  Rear yard: Ten feet. 
c.  Interior side yard: Ten feet. 
d.  Street side: Ten feet. 
2.  Height: 14 feet, except that south of Carmel Valley Road, the building height may be extended to 26 feet, providing the structure(s) and appurtenances do not exceed four feet above the highest natural grade elevation of the lot. 
3.  Floor area ratio: Ten percent, except that the lot coverage may be increased up to 20 percent subject to an approved conditional use permit.  
Chapter 30.24 - NORTH COMMERCIAL ZONE (NC) 
 
30.24.010 - Purpose. 
The NC Zone is designed to allow commercial activities that provide a service to the community. Development in the NC Zone shall be of low intensity and profile, offering a lively open air commercial environment with substantial open space. 
(Ord. No. 662; Ord. No. 718; Ord. No. 888)  
30.24.020 - Boundaries. 
Property within the NC Zone shall be designated by ordinance to be depicted upon the City zone map.  
30.24.030 - Allowable Uses. 
The following uses are allowable in the NC Zone provided that the use does not involve the sale of alcohol for on-site consumption between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. and further provided that the use does not involve the provision of goods, food or beverages, or services in a drive-in or drive-thru manner: 
A.  The retailing of goods, foods and beverages, the dispensing of services and light manufacturing from the following: 
Adult Entertainment Establishments as provided in the Municipal Code 
Appliance repair shops 
Arts and crafts studios 
Automobile repair shop—provided any repair activity be screened from public view 
Bars and Cocktail Lounges 
Blacksmith shops 
Blueprinting and Photostatting 
Boat building 
Bookbinding, printing, lithography 
Building materials retail sales—provided the storage and sales yard be completely screened from public view 
Cabinet or mill work shops 
Carpet cleaning 
Cartography 
Electrical repair shops 
Equipment and tool rental 
Frozen food lockers 
Furniture manufacturing and repair 
Furniture upholstering 
Garment manufacturing 
Machine repair shops 
Manufacturing of pottery, jewelry, glassware, and leather goods 
Metalworking shops 
Parcel delivery service 
Physical recreation facilities 
Plant nurseries 
Plumbing shops 
Print shops 
Repair shops 
Restaurants 
Stables 
Studio, or office or quarters for industrial designing, model making, sculpture, architecture, engineering, planning, drafting, editorial and general designing, and ceramic arts 
Warehouses 
Wholesale establishments 
B.  Outdoor display areas located on the exterior of a structure housing a retail sales operation, where goods or commodities otherwise available for sale in the associated retail sales operation are displayed but not sold; provided all of the following requirements are met: 
1.  The outdoor display area is located entirely on the same lot as the associated retail sales operation; 
2.  The area devoted to outdoor display does not encroach upon required parking or access areas; 
3.  The outdoor display area is contiguous and not more than four feet in width measured from a point perpendicular to the exterior wall of the adjacent structure housing the associated retail sale operation and not more than ten feet in length measured along the exterior wall of the adjacent structure housing the associated retail sale operation; and 
4.  The display of goods or commodities and placement of display structures is limited to the hours of operation of the associated retail sales operation. 
C.  Any principal use permitted in the CC Zone (excludes those uses which, under CC Zone provisions, would require a conditional use permit). 
D.  One dwelling unit as accessory to and on the same site as that of a permitted use, and conforming to the parking requirements of the R2 Zone. 
E.  Any similar enterprise or business which conforms to the description and purpose of the NC Zone, and is not detrimental to the welfare of the community. 
(Ord. No. 662; Ord. No. 718)  
30.24.035 - Standards for Emergency Shelters. 
A.  For purposes of this Section, the term "Emergency Shelter" shall have the same meaning as defined in California Health and Safety Code § 50801(e), as amended, as being: "housing with minimal supportive services for homeless persons that is limited to occupancy of six months or less by a homeless person. No individual or household may be denied emergency shelter in this facility because of an inability to pay." 
B.  Emergency shelters are permitted in the North Commercial (NC) Zone subject to compliance with the development standards of the NC zone and compliance with each of the following: 
1.  An emergency shelter shall be located a minimum distance of 300 feet from the closest property line of any site containing a residential use building or a public or private K-12 school. 
2.  An emergency shelter shall be located 300 feet from the closest property line of any site containing another emergency shelter. 
3.  The maximum number of beds or persons permitted to be served nightly by an emergency shelter shall not exceed ten. 
4.  The maximum length of stay by an individual in an emergency shelter shall not exceed six months in any consecutive 12-month period. A period of not less than 60 days shall elapse before an individual may return for a subsequent stay(s) at the emergency shelter at which they last stayed. 
5.  Notwithstanding the provisions of DMMC Chapter 30.80, off-street vehicle parking for an emergency shelter shall be provided at a ratio of: one vehicle space for every three beds in the emergency shelter, plus one vehicle parking space for each staff member on the operational shift requiring the largest number of employees or volunteers in a typical 24-hour cycle. 
6.  Bicycle parking shall be provided at a rate of one bicycle rack space per each three beds of the emergency shelter. 
7.  Each emergency shelter facility shall include an on-site interior client intake and waiting area at least 200 square feet in size. A client intake and waiting area less than 200 square feet in size may be allowed, subject to a written determination by the Director of Planning and Community Development (Director) that the size of the intake and waiting area is sufficient to accommodate the facility's demand. 
8.  The emergency shelter shall include indoor laundry facilities for use by clients. 
9.  The emergency shelter shall include storage areas for clients' belongings. 
10.  The emergency shelter shall include an exterior, enclosed and covered refuse area. 
11.  Outdoor activity organized by the operator of the emergency shelter shall be allowed only during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. daily. 
12.  The development of property for an emergency shelter shall be consistent with the Del Mar Community Plan; the Del Mar Municipal Code including, but not limited to, the requirement for Design Review, as applicable; and all other state and federal codes, laws and regulations. 
C.  Any person or entity proposing to develop, install, establish or operate an emergency shelter shall submit a non-discretionary Emergency Shelter Permit application to the Director indicating how the proposed emergency shelter will comply with all of the provisions of this Section and all other applicable local, state and federal laws, regulations and codes. 
D.  The Emergency Shelter Permit application shall be submitted on a form prepared by the City and shall include the written consent of the owner of the property on which the emergency shelter is to be located. 
E.  The Emergency Shelter Permit application material shall include all information necessary for the Director to make a determination of compliance with the pertinent sections of this Chapter. 
F.  The Emergency Shelter Permit application shall be accompanied by a fee set by resolution of the City Council to offset the administrative costs incurred by the City to process the application. 
G.  Once an Emergency Shelter Permit application has been accepted as complete, the Director, or designee, shall take action to approve, conditionally approve or deny the application within 30 days. 
H.  The processing of the Emergency Shelter Permit application shall be not be deemed to be a discretionary act within the meaning of the California Environmental Quality Act (Division 13 (commencing with Section 21000) of the Public Resources Code). 
I.  Upon a determination by the Director that the proposed emergency shelter will comply with all applicable regulations, an Emergency Shelter Permit shall be issued to the applicant, with such terms and conditions attached as deemed necessary to ensure continued compliance with the submitted application and with all provisions of this Chapter. 
J.  The Director's approval of an Emergency Shelter Permit shall be specific to a single location and shall not be transferable to any other location. The conditions and terms of the Emergency Shelter Permit shall be recorded against the property and shall run with the land. 
K.  Prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy or commencement of use of an emergency shelter, a written plan for operation of the facility shall be submitted for the review and written approval of the Director. The required plan shall include measures to address all of the following: 
1.  Provisions for 24-hour on-site management/security. 
2.  A set of facility rules, and procedures for maintaining a safe environment within and outside the emergency shelter. 
3.  A list of activities prohibited at the emergency shelter to include: the consumption or use of alcohol, narcotics, illegal drugs, and all smoking (including but not limited to tobacco and marijuana). 
4.  Procedures for addressing circumstances where a client is socially disruptive or is responsible for creating any type of nuisance to the emergency shelter or the surrounding neighborhood, including measures to notify law enforcement personnel and to discharge the client. 
5.  The posting of signage regarding prohibited activities. 
6.  The procedures for admittance and discharge of clients, and measures aimed at minimizing the congregation of clients or loitering in the area immediately outside the emergency shelter. 
7.  Staff training programs to be used to provide staff with the knowledge and skills to assist clients in obtaining permanent shelter. 
8.  Referral services and distribution of information on other programs available to clients for obtaining permanent shelter, mental and health counseling, job placement, educational, legal, and other supportive services. 
9.  Provisions for public and/or private transportation services to assist clients. 
10.  The manner in which clients' pets will be accommodated and controlled to avoid injury to others or to the surrounding neighborhood. 
L.  An approved Emergency Shelter Permit may be suspended or revoked in accordance with the procedures and standards of the DMMC. 
(Ord. No. 888)  
30.24.040 - Accessory Uses. 
The following accessory uses may be established in the NC Zone: 
A.  Accessory uses customarily incidental to the above, including accessory storage of commodities sold on the premises. 
B.  Off-street automobile parking as an accessory use to any permitted use.  
30.24.045 - Conditionally Allowed Uses: Conditional Use Permit. 
Provided a conditional use permit for any such use has first been obtained and is in full force and effect, the following uses are allowable in the NC Zone: 
A.  Gasoline service stations 
Hotels, motels or auto courts 
Kennels 
Motion picture and legitimate theaters 
Outdoor sales 
Private clubs, fraternal organizations 
Public utility buildings 
Refuse recycling centers 
Veterinary clinics 
B.  Any allowed or conditionally allowed use that involves the sale of alcohol for on-site consumption between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 662; Ord. No. 718)  
30.24.050 - Parking Requirement. 
In the NC Zone, off-street parking shall be provided for each use as set forth in this Code.  
30.24.060 - Design Review. 
All development in the NC Zone shall be subject to design review by the Design Review Board pursuant to the provisions of this Code. The design of all such development shall avoid significant adverse visual or environmental impacts on the lagoon and residential hillside areas.  
30.24.070 - Development Standards. 
In the NC Zone, the following development standards shall apply: 
A.  Reserved. 
B.  Lot Dimensions. 
1.  Minimum lot size: 6,000 square feet. 
2.  Minimum street frontage: 35 feet. 
3.  Minimum lot width: 50 feet. 
4.  Minimum lot depth: 90 feet. 
C.  Construction Standards. 
1.  Setbacks: None, except that no development shall be located closer than 25 feet from a floodway zone, and that a minimum ten-foot wide landscaped setback shall be required on any NC zoned property along any common boundary or residentially zoned property. 
2.  Height: 26 feet. 
3.  Floor area ratio: 30 percent. 
4.  Maximum lot coverage: 40 percent.  
Chapter 30.25 - PROFESSIONAL COMMERCIAL ZONE (PC) 
 
30.25.010 - Purpose. 
The PC Zone is designed to allow office use within the village center in a manner that will not detract from the area's predominantly retail character. Office and professional uses should be geographically concentrated so as to minimize retail parking problems, disruption of pedestrian-oriented shops, and to soften the transition from retail to residential at the south end of the village center.  
30.25.020 - Boundaries. 
Property within the PC Zone shall be designated by ordinance to be depicted upon the City zone map.  
30.25.030 - Allowable Uses. 
The following uses are allowable in the PC Zone: 
A.  Offices, professional, medical, and dental. 
B.  Banks and financial institutions, exclusive of drive-thru facilities. 
C.  Parking lots and parking garages. 
D.  One dwelling unit as accessory to and on the same site as that of a permitted use, and conforming to the parking requirements of the R2 Zone. 
E.  Any similar enterprise or business which conforms to the description and purpose of the PC Zone, and is not detrimental to the welfare of the community.  
30.25.040 - Accessory Uses. 
The following accessory uses may be established in the PC Zone: 
A.  Accessory uses customarily incidental to the above. 
B.  Off-street automobile parking as an accessory use to any permitted use.  
30.25.050 - Parking Requirements. 
In the PC Zone, off-street parking shall be provided for each use as set forth in this Code.  
30.25.060 - Design Review. 
All development in the PC Zone shall be subject to design review by the Design Review Board pursuant to the provisions of this Code.  
30.25.070 - Development Standards. 
A.  Reserved. 
B.  Lot Dimensions. 
1.  Minimum lot size: 6,000 square feet. 
2.  Minimum street frontage: 35 feet. 
3.  Minimum lot width: 50 feet. 
4.  Minimum lot depth: 90 feet. 
C.  Construction Standards. 
1.  Setbacks: None, except that a minimum ten-foot wide landscape setback shall be required on PC zoned property along any common boundary of residentially zoned property. 
2.  Height: 26 feet, except all structures fronting on the west side of Camino del Mar shall not exceed fourteen feet in height above the curb level adjacent to the site on Camino del Mar. 
3.  Floor area ratio: 60 percent. 
4.  Maximum lot coverage: 75 percent.  
Chapter 30.26 - VISITOR COMMERCIAL ZONE (VC) 
 
30.26.010 - Purpose. 
The VC Zone is designed to allow activities such as hotels and motels which enable visitors to enjoy the coastal environment. Development shall be of low intensity in keeping with the village-like character of the community while preserving coastal vistas. Development criteria shall include controls to insure low to medium density, and an informal, predominantly low rise type of development with a two-story limitation.  
30.26.020 - Boundaries. 
Property within the VC Zone shall be designated by ordinance to be depicted upon the City zone map.  
30.26.030 - Allowable Uses. 
The following uses are allowable in the VC Zone: 
A.  Hotels, motels, and tourist auto courts. 
B.  Boardinghouses and lodginghouses. 
C.  Kitchen facilities in connection with the manager's unit. 
D.  Kitchen facilities for the individual guest units, providing not more than 50 percent of the individual guest units contain such kitchen facilities. 
E.  Any similar enterprise or business which conforms to the description and purpose of the VC Zone, and is not detrimental to the welfare of the community.  
30.26.040 - Accessory Uses. 
The following accessory uses may be established in the VC Zone: 
A.  Accessory uses customarily incidental to the allowable uses, including recreation facilities and required off-street parking. 
B.  A public dining room and coffee shop/restaurant as accessory uses to an allowable use, provided that not more than one-third of the total floor area is devoted to such accessory use.  
30.26.045 - Allowable Uses: Conditional Use Permit. 
The following uses are allowed, provided a conditional use permit for any such use has first been obtained and is in full force and effect: 
A.  Commercial Mobile Radio Service Facilities—Minor 
(Ord. No. 723)  
30.26.050 - Parking Requirements. 
In the VC Zone, off-street parking shall be provided for each use as set forth in this Code.  
30.26.060 - Design Review. 
All development in the VC Zone shall be subject to design review by the Design Review Board pursuant to the provisions of this Code. Design consideration shall be given to maintaining the village character of the community and scenic coastal vistas from adjacent properties and public rights-of-way.  
30.26.070 - Development Standards. 
In the VC Zone, the following development standards shall apply: 
A.  Reserved. 
B.  Lot Dimensions. 
1.  Minimum lot size: 6,000 square feet. 
2.  Minimum street frontage: 35 feet. 
3.  Minimum lot width: 50 feet. 
4.  Minimum lot depth: 90 feet. 
C.  Construction Standards. 
1.  Setbacks: 
a.  Front yard: Ten feet, and a minimum ten-foot wide landscape setback shall be required on VC zoned property along any common boundary of residentially zoned property. 
b.  Rear yard: Same as above. 
c.  Interior side yard: Same as above. 
d.  Street side yard: Same as above. 
2.  Height: 
a.  Twenty-six feet except that all structures fronting the west side of Camino del Mar shall not exceed 14 feet in height above the curb level adjacent to the site on Camino del Mar. 
b.  No Commercial Mobile Radio Service Facility Antennas, or any associated support structures, may be erected to a height exceeding ten feet above the roof of an existing structure, or ten feet above the maximum permitted height, whichever is less. 
3.  Floor area ratio: 40 percent. 
4.  Maximum lot coverage: 55 percent. 
(Ord. No. 723)  
30.26.075 - Building Design Standards. 
A.  All Commercial Mobile Radio Service Facility antennas, any antenna support structures, and any associated exterior support equipment shall be located, designed, and screened so as to minimize their visual impacts when viewed from surrounding properties and public areas. No antennas shall be mounted so as to extend above the building roof at any point unless the Design Review Board finds that there is no other location on site for the proposed antennas and any antenna support structures that would result in a less conspicuous and/or more aesthetically appealing installation while still providing reasonable signal access. 
If the applicant claims that an imposed regulation or condition will have the effect of prohibiting the provision of Commercial Mobile Radio Services, the applicant shall deposit with the City a sum in an amount determined by the Director of Planning and Community Development to be sufficient to pay the City's cost in obtaining an expert evaluation and opinion on the proposed antenna heights, location, and design. Any unused portion of the deposit shall be refunded to the applicant upon a final determination on the application. 
All facade-mounted antennas, and associated antenna support structures, shall be screened, textured, and/or painted to match the materials and color of the structure to which the antennas are attached. All roof-mounted antennas, antenna support structures, and any associated exterior support equipment shall be painted to match the color of the background against which they are most commonly viewed, as determined by the Design Review Board. 
(Ord. No. 723)  
30.26.080 - Special Regulations. 
In reviewing a conditional use permit for a Commercial Mobile Radio Service Facility, the Planning Commission shall review the application under the following standards: 
A.  No Commercial Mobile Radio Service antenna shall be located within 100 feet of the exterior wall of a residential dwelling. For purposes of this Section, the distance shall be measured as a straight line between the closest point of the antenna and the closest exterior surface of the habitable space of the dwelling. 
B.  No floor area shall be designed, constructed or used for Commercial Mobile Radio Service support equipment where the floor area: 
1.  Is within a structure which has an exterior wall located on Camino del Mar; and 
2.  Is located on the floor of the structure which is nearest in elevation to the elevation of Camino del Mar, measured at the point adjacent to the site on Camino del Mar. 
C.  All support equipment associated with a proposed Commercial Mobile Radio Service Facility shall be placed within the interior of a structure unless the Planning Commission, in its review of the required CUP application, finds that support equipment placed exterior to a structure has been sited and screened so as not to interfere with pedestrian circulation or required vehicular parking and circulation; and that exterior support equipment will not create noise or other adverse impacts to adjacent rights-of-way or properties. 
D.  Prior to approval of the CUP, the owner and/or operator of a Commercial Mobile Radio Service Facility shall submit a comprehensive project proposal report which provides levels of radio frequency (RF) power densities of all antennas intended to be installed at the subject site. The report shall quantify the RF emissions and compare the results with the standard accepted by the Director of Planning and Community Development. The project proposal report shall also include all shielding and notification measures necessary to protect the public health, safety, general welfare. Said proposal report shall be subject to review by the Planning Commission, and shall include any conditions as imposed by the Planning Commission. 
E.  Within six months after the issuance of an occupancy permit, the owner/operator of a Commercial Mobile Radio Service Facility shall submit to the City a project implementation report which provides cumulative field measurements of radio frequency (RF) power densities of all antennas installed at the subject site. The report shall quantify the RF emissions and compare the results with the accepted standard. Said report shall be subject to review and approval by the Director of Planning and Community Development for consistency with the project proposal report and the accepted standard. Any measurements in excess of the accepted standard shall render all previous projects approvals null and void. 
F.  Any proposals for modification of plans authorized pursuant to the original approval of a Commercial Mobile Radio Service Facility shall require subsequent review and authorization from appropriate entities of the City of Del Mar. 
G.  The continued use of Commercial Mobile Radio Service Facilities shall comply with all applicable current and future regulations of the Federal Communications Commission and the California Public Utilities Commission. 
H.  A Commercial Mobile Radio Service Facility which is inactive for 180 consecutive days for mobile radio service purposes shall be removed by the owner and/or operator of the Commercial Mobile Radio Service Facility. 
(Ord. No. 635; Ord. No. 669; Ord. No. 723; Ord. No. 774)  
Chapter 30.27 - FAIRGROUNDS-RACETRACK ZONE (FR) 
 
30.27.010 - Purpose. 
The FR Zone is designed for that portion of land located near the northern City limits and under the ownership of the 22nd Agricultural District Association, a subdivision of the State of California.  
30.27.020 - Boundaries. 
Property within the FR Zone shall be designated by ordinance to be depicted upon the City zone map.  
30.27.030 - Allowable Uses. 
Allowable uses shall be regulated by the 22nd Agricultural District Association.  
30.27.040 - Accessory Uses. 
Accessory uses shall be regulated by the 22nd Agricultural District Association.  
Chapter 30.28 - RAILROAD RIGHT-OF-WAY ZONE (RR) 
 
30.28.010 - Purpose. 
The RR Zone is designed for that portion of land within railroad rights-of-way, including related structures and uses. The RR Zone allows a continuance of railroad transportation facilities and open space uses above or adjacent to railroad rights-of-way.  
30.28.020 - Boundaries. 
Property within the RR Zone shall be designated by ordinance to be depicted upon the City zone map.  
30.28.030 - Allowable Uses. 
Allowable uses in the RR Zone shall include all railroad transportation facilities and related structures and uses, providing a conditional use permit for such facilities and uses has first been obtained and is in full force and effect.  
30.28.040 - Reserved.  
30.28.050 - Reserved.  
30.28.060 - Design Review. 
All development in the RR Zone shall be subject to design review by the Design Review Board pursuant to the provisions of the Municipal Code. In reviewing development proposals in the RR Zone, the Design Review Board shall consider the proposed project's impact on the open space character of the area and the preservation of views to the ocean from both public and private lands. 
(Ord. No. 639)  
Chapter 30.29 - FLOODWAY ZONE (FW)[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Note— This Chapter of the Municipal Code forms a portion of the City of Del Mar Local Coastal Program Implementing Ordinances. The regulations found within this Chapter are not subject to "relief" through the Del Mar Variance process. Exceptions to, or relief from, the requirements found within this Chapter are limited to those specified within the language of this Chapter or found within other Chapters of the Implementing Ordinances. Where there is a conflict between the language of this Chapter and other portions of the Del Mar Municipal Code, the language of this Chapter shall take precedence. 
 
30.29.010 - Zone Established. 
Real property subject to the provisions of this Chapter shall be designated by ordinance on the City zone map as being within the Floodway Zone ("FW"). 
(Ord. No. 516; Ord. No. 722)  
30.29.020 - Purpose. 
A.  The purpose of the FW Zone is to preserve areas subject to relatively deep and high velocity floodwater by prohibiting uses which would constitute an unreasonable, unnecessary, undesirable or dangerous impediment to the flow of floodwaters, or cause a cumulative increase in the water surface elevation of the base flood of more than one foot at any point. 
B.  It is also the purpose of the FW Zone to reduce the need for construction of flood control facilities made necessary by inadequately controlled development in the floodplain. 
C.  It is also the purpose of the FW Zone to protect the health, safety, and general welfare of persons and of property located within and adjacent to the floodway by prohibiting the construction of permanent structures in the floodway and allowing only those uses which will not constitute an undesirable, unnecessary or dangerous impediment to the flow of floodwaters.  
30.29.030 - Allowed Uses. 
The following uses are allowed in the FW Zone provided that a Floodplain Development Permit, Conditional Use Permit and Coastal Development Permit have first been obtained. 
A.  Field and seed crops (open field). 
B.  Aquaculture and mariculture operations. 
C.  Open recreational uses (such as public parks) in accordance with the San Dieguito Lagoon Enhancement Plan. 
D.  Any similar use which conforms to the description and purpose of the FW Zone. 
(Ord. No. 670)  
30.29.040 - Specified Disallowed Uses. 
The following uses are specifically disallowed, without limitation: 
A.  Permanent Structures. 
B.  Placement of Mobile Homes. 
C.  Parking that does not serve one of the allowed uses. 
D.  Placement of fill.  
Chapter 30.30 - PUBLIC PARKLAND ZONE (PP) 
 
30.30.010 - Purpose. 
The PP Zone is designed for publicly owned land designated for use as a public park or open space preserve, and to land which is subject to the public trust.  
30.30.020 - Boundaries. 
Property within the PP Zone shall be designated by ordinance to be depicted upon the City zone map.  
30.30.030 - Allowable Uses. 
The following uses are allowable in the PP Zone: 
A.  Public parks and playgrounds, public open spaces and ecological preserves. 
B.  The Planning Commission shall review and recommend to the City Council on all proposed allowable uses and development of public parkland.  
30.30.040 - Accessory Uses. 
The following accessory uses may be established in the PP Zone: 
A.  Related accessory structures and use. 
B.  Public off-street parking as accessory to such uses.  
30.30.050 - Reserved.  
30.30.060 - Design Review. 
All development in the PP Zone shall be subject to design review by the Design Review Board pursuant to the revisions of this Code. Design considerations shall include concern for the privacy of neighboring residential properties, and the use of parkland best befitting the physical character of the site and the citizens of Del Mar.  
Chapter 30.31 - PUBLIC FACILITIES ZONE (PF) 
 
30.31.010 - Purpose. 
The PF Zone is designed for publicly owned land set aside, or in use, to support public schools and governmental offices and facilities. 
(Ord. No. 690)  
30.31.020 - Allowable Uses. 
The following uses are allowable in the PF Zone: 
A.  Public schools. 
B.  Private schools that are open to the public and whose primary function is providing educational programs for pre-school students and students in grades K through 12. 
C.  City, county, state and federal buildings and uses, including: 
Administrative offices 
Fire and police stations 
Public works buildings 
Public meeting rooms or chambers 
Libraries 
Postal offices 
Public parking facilities 
Public parks and playgrounds 
D.  Utility structures, such as: 
Pump stations and water tanks  
30.31.040 - Accessory Uses. 
The following accessory uses may be established in the PF Zone: 
A.  Accessory uses and structures incidental to the Allowable Uses prescribed in this Chapter.  
30.31.050 - Parking Requirement. 
See Chapter 30.80 for parking requirements.  
30.31.060 - Design Review. 
All development in the PF Zone shall be subject to design review by the Design Review Board pursuant to the provisions of this Code. The design, scale, height, bulk, coverage, and exterior appearance of all structures shall be in harmony with neighborhood character and development on nearby lots. Design considerations shall include the preservation of privacy on neighboring residential properties. In reviewing development proposals in the PF Zone, the Design Review Board shall also consider a project's potential impact on the preservation of views to the ocean from both public and private lands.  
30.31.070 - Development Standards. 
A.  Reserved. 
B.  Reserved. 
C.  Construction Standards. 
1.  Setbacks: None, except that a minimum ten-foot wide setback shall be provided on those portions of PF-Zoned properties located along the common boundary of any adjacent residentially-zoned property. 
2.  Height: 26 feet. Additionally, structures on property located on property fronting on the west side of Camino del Mar shall not exceed a height of 14 feet above the curb level(s) adjacent to the site along Camino del Mar.  
Chapter 30.50 - BEACH OVERLAY ZONE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Note— Adopted as an Initiative on April 12, 1988.  This Chapter of the Municipal Code forms a portion of the City of Del Mar Local Coastal Program Implementing Ordinances. The regulations found within this Chapter are not subject to "relief" through the Del Mar Variance process. Exceptions to, or relief from, the requirements found within this Chapter are limited to those specified within the language of this Chapter or found within other Chapters of the Implementing Ordinances. Where there is a conflict between the language of this Chapter and other portions of the Del Mar Municipal Code, the language of this Chapter shall take precedence. 
 
30.50.010 - Purpose. 
The Beach Overlay Zone created by this initiative is established to regulate the uses of the Del Mar beach area, a distinct and valuable natural resource, for the benefit of present and future generations. The regulations contained herein shall be administered so as to protect public access to and along the shoreline, while promoting public safety, health and welfare, and providing for the protection of private property. 
(Ord. No. 722)  
30.50.020 - Zone Boundaries. 
The boundaries of the Beach Overlay Zone are as described in Exhibit A, incorporated herein by reference.  
30.50.030 - Permitted Uses. 
Permitted uses within the Beach Overlay Zone shall be those allowed in the underlying zone, subject to the regulations contained in the Beach Overlay Zone which shall prevail in the event of conflict with any other provisions of the City Code.  
30.50.040 - Definitions. 
A.  Shoreline Protection Area shall mean that area which is within the Beach Overlay Zone and is located from south to north along the shoreline of the City being more particularly described as follows: All lands located westerly of the line as described in Exhibit B, incorporated herein by reference. 
B.  Development shall mean the placement or construction of any solid material or structure on land, to include without limitation, any human directed alteration of the land and the planting, cultivation or maintenance of any vegetation. 
C.  Protective Structure shall mean any privately or publicly owned development designed to protect property inland from such structure from ocean flooding or wave damage.  
30.50.050 - Development Within The Shoreline Protection Area. 
No development shall occur within the shoreline area except such privately owned protective structures, publicly owned protective structures, and publicly owned development authorized, constructed, and maintained in accordance with the regulations set forth in the City Code.  
30.50.060 - Authorized Protection Structures. 
The construction of a protective structure located within the Shoreline Protection Area may be authorized by the issuance of a Shoreline Protection Permit, if the City Council finds following notice and public hearing that the proposed protective structure: 
A.  Is required to serve coastal dependent uses or to protect existing structures or public beaches in danger from erosion, and when designed to eliminate or mitigate adverse impacts to local shoreline sand supply; 
B.  Will minimize risks to life and property in areas of flood hazards; 
C.  Will assure stability and structural integrity and neither create nor contribute significantly to erosion, geologic instability, or destruction of the site or surrounding area, nor in any way substantially alter natural landforms along bluffs and cliffs; 
D.  Is in conformity with the certified Coastal Program after certification of the Local Coastal Program; 
E.  Is in conformity with the public access and public recreation policies of Chapter 3 of the Coastal Act; 
F.  Has material and design which are consistent with good engineering practices; 
G.  Will, if there is a vertical wall element in the proposed protective structure, have the seaward face of the vertical wall located within the Shoreline Protective Area only if there is no other feasible location for effectively protecting a principle structure; there is no feasible, less environmentally damaging alternative; and feasible mitigation measures have been provided to minimize adverse environmental effects; but in no event have the seaward face of the vertical wall more than five feet westward of the Shoreline Protection Area line; 
H.  Will, if other than a vertical wall, meet all the conditions of Subsection G. above; 
I.  Will, if there is a riprap element in the proposed structure: 
1.  Have the riprap extending no more than 20 feet westward from the Shoreline Protection Area line. 
2.  Have a westward slope beginning no higher than a 5.7-foot elevation (NGVD) at the Shoreline Protection Area Line, decreasing in height at a minimum rate of one vertical foot for every one and one-half feet of lateral distance, the riprap extends westerly of the SPA line.  
30.50.070 - Permit Application Procedure. 
A.  An application for a Shoreline Protection Permit shall be made to the City Manager on forms provided by the City. The applicant shall pay a fee determined by the City Manager to be sufficient to pay for the costs of notice and the processing of the application for City Council consideration to include prehearing CEQA processing and any consulting costs incurred by the City. 
B.  The application shall include the full description of the development and the applicant's proposal, together with supporting evidence on each issue raised by the application. Where deemed necessary by the City Manager, the application will include information as prepared by either a registered engineer or a land surveyor and an environmental consultant. 
C.  Following the required CEQA processing, the City Manager shall cause the application to be set for a noticed administrative hearing before the City Council. The City Manager shall cause to be published, at least ten days before the date set for the administrative hearing, a notice of application. The notice of application shall also be concurrently posted on the site of the subject development and mailed to each person who has filed a written request for such notice, giving their name and mailing address. The notice of application shall contain: 
1.  A description of the subject development; 
2.  The purpose of the application; 
3.  The date and time of the meeting at which the administrative hearing will be conducted; 
4.  A statement that the hearing will be open to the public and to public discussion.  
30.50.080 - Issuance Shoreline Protection Permit. 
A.  It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain a privately owned protective structure or maintain privately owned development within the Shoreline Protection Area without first having obtained a Shoreline Protection Permit from the City Council. 
B.  The City Council may issue a Shoreline Protection Permit authorizing the following: 
1.  The construction and maintenance of a privately owned protective structure in accordance with the regulations of this Chapter. 
2.  The maintenance of a privately owned protective structure or privately owned development constructed prior to and in nonconformance with the Beach Overlay Zone regulations for the duration of the amortization term established for such privately owned protective structure or privately owned development. 
3.  The private financing, construction and/or maintenance of a publicly owned protective structure authorized by the Beach Overlay Zone regulations. 
C.  A Shoreline Protection Permit shall: 
1.  Contain waivers, indemnification and hold harmless provisions as required by the City Council at the time of approval. 
2.  Contain such conditions as the City Council determines to be necessary to accomplish the purposes of the Beach Overlay Zone. 
3.  Shall require a reasonable user fee to be determined by the City Council. 
4.  Be recorded in a manner to bind successors in interest.  
30.50.090 - Emergency Reinforcement. 
A.  Where property inland from a protective structure is being immediately threatened by ocean flooding or wave damage, a shoreline protection permittee may temporarily increase the height and bulk of the protective structure. The permittee shall, within fifteen days from the end of the emergency condition, remove the temporary protection from the Shoreline Protection Area. Said emergency reinforcement shall be subject to other requirements contained in the California Coastal Act. 
B.  In the event such added temporary protection remains beyond April 15 in any year, the City shall remove such added structure within ten days and shall charge the owner the cost of removal, placing a lien on the property for such cost.  
30.50.100 - Shoreline Protection Area: Removal of Noncomplying Development. 
A.  Privately owned development within the Shoreline Protection Area constructed before the effective date of and in nonconformity to the Beach Overlay Zone regulations shall be abated immediately by the person or persons who constructed, now use and/or maintain such development; unless a Shoreline Protection Permit has been obtained establishing an amortization period of such development. 
B.  The following privately owned development within the Shoreline Protection Area shall constitute a public nuisance. In addition to other remedies provided by law, all direct and indirect costs, including legal expenses, incurred by the City of Del Mar in abating such nuisance shall become a lien on the property and a personal obligation of the person or persons who constructed, now use and/or now maintain such development, and shall be a special assessment against said property to be collected as ordinary municipal taxes. 
1.  Privately-owned development which was constructed before the effective date of and in noncompliance with the regulations of the Beach Overlay Zone and thereafter is maintained either without or contrary to the terms of a Shoreline Protection Permit. 
2.  Privately-owned development which is constructed and maintained after the effective date of and in noncompliance with the regulations of the Beach Overlay Zone.  
30.50.110 - Shoreline Protection Area: Determination of Noncomplying Developments, Amortization Term. 
A.  The City Manager shall investigate and identify within a period of no later than six months following the date of the enactment of the ordinance from which this Chapter derives the existence of any development within the Shoreline Protection Area that is not in compliance with the requirements of the Beach Overlay Zone. 
B.  The City Manager shall prepare a preliminary recommendation identifying the noncomplying development, and designating an abatement procedure to include an amortization period calculated as follows: 
For every $5,000.00 of initial construction costs on each individual lot, the noncomplying development may remain for one year following its initial construction, not to exceed ten years. The City Manager shall determine the initial cost of construction based upon the best information available. 
C.  The City Manager shall cause a Notice of Preliminary Recommendation to be sent by certified mail, return receipt request, and by first class postage prepaid mail to the address of record listed in the County Recorder's office, and to such other address of which the City Manager has actual knowledge of the person or persons who constructed, now use, and/or now maintain the privately owned development. In addition, the Notice of Preliminary Recommendation shall be concurrently posted in a conspicuous location at the development site and shall be mailed to persons who have registered their names and addresses with the City indicating an interest in obtaining such notice. Further, the notice shall be published in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter at least 15 days prior to the administrative hearing thereon.  
30.50.120 - Notice of Preliminary Recommendation. 
The Notice of Preliminary Recommendation shall contain the following: 
A.  The preliminary recommendation. 
B.  The date and time of the City Council meeting at which an administrative hearing will be conducted. 
C.  A statement that the City Council, following the completion of the administrative hearing, will make a final determination of the foregoing matter and may record a Notice of Abatement against the property of persons found to be responsible for removing the development. 
D.  A statement that the hearing will be open to the public and to public discussion.  
30.50.130 - Determination of Noncompliance and Abatement. 
A.  Following the administrative hearing, the City Council shall reach a final determination as to whether the development is noncomplying, whether it constitutes a nuisance, and the final determination of an abatement procedure consistent with the terms of this Chapter. The City Council shall base its determination on any information presented during the administrative hearing that may be constitutionally considered. 
B.  After such final determination, the City shall give the notice, provided for in Subsection 30.50.120.C, notifying the noncomplying owner, notifying such persons that they have 30 days from the date of the notice to remove the noncomplying development; that upon a showing of good cause, this period may be extended for a longer period but not to exceed 90 days. 
C.  If the owner of the noncomplying development does not remove it within the required period, the City Council shall direct the City Attorney to take immediate action to abate the nuisance created by the development, including the taking of any necessary legal action to abate the same. The City will recover the expense of such actions as provided in Subsection 30.50.110.B.  
30.50.140 - New Construction or Reconstruction. 
No reconstruction or remodeling of a structure when 50 percent or more of the lot's permitted floor area is involved and no new construction shall be located within 15 feet east of the Shoreline Protection Area line. Patio and landscaping improvements not to exceed six feet in height, and which provide adequate drainage of excess water resulting from storm and/or wave conditions shall be exempt from this Section. Said drainage capabilities shall be reviewed and subject to approval of the City Engineer at the time of application.  
30.50.150 - Shoreline Protection Area: Publicly-Owned Development. 
Within the Shoreline Protection Area, the City Council may authorize the construction and maintenance of lifeguard facilities.  
30.50.160 - Development of Shoreline Protective Structures Landward of the Shoreline Protection Area Line. 
Protective structures as defined in this Chapter may be developed on private property landward of the Shoreline Protection Area line, irrespective of any otherwise applicable setback requirements imposed by the Municipal Code. No variance shall be required for the same. 
(Ord. No. 543)  
30.50.170 - Application Procedure and Processing. 
The application procedure for such an application shall be the same as specified in this Chapter for shoreline protective structures on or seaward of the Shoreline Protection Area line, except that the application shall note that the project is to be constructed landward of said line, and such applications shall be processed in the same manner, provided that such applications shall go to the Planning Commission rather than the City Council for final approval. The decision of the Planning Commission shall be subject to appeal to the City Council in conformance with 1.12 of the Del Mar Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 543)  
30.50.180 - Criteria for Approval. 
Property owners shall have a right to construct protective structures on their private property landward of the Shoreline Protection Area line provided that the Planning Commission makes the findings specified herein in Section 30.50.060, provided that no portion of the structure or riprap, if any, may extend beyond the Shoreline Protection Area line. Such permits shall be subject to such conditions as the Planning Commission may reasonably impose, including conditions [Subsections] C.1., 2., and 4. of Section 30.50.080 of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 543)  
30.50.190 - Emergency Reinforcement. 
Emergency protective structures may be installed landward of the Shoreline Protection Area line in conformance with the same procedures and criteria specified in Section 30.50.090 of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 543)  
30.50.200 - Shoreline Protection Area: Removal of Noncomplying Development. 
Protective structures approved landward of the Shoreline Protection Area line shall not be deemed to be nonconforming for any purpose under any other provision of the City's General Plan, Zoning Ordinance, or Design Review Ordinance. The provisions of this Chapter 30.50 with respect to such projects shall prevail and supercede any other provisions of the Municipal Code which would otherwise apply to such applications. 
(Ord. No. 543)  
Exhibit A 
All land lying westerly of a line extending southerly from the northern City boundary along the westerly right-of-way line of Camino del Mar, then turning westerly along the northerly right-of-way line of 29th Street, then turning southerly along the westerly right-of-way of Ocean Front, then turning easterly along the southerly right-of-way line of 17th Street, then turning southerly along the westerly right-of-way line of Coast Boulevard, and then following southerly along the easterly right-of-way line of the AT&SF Railway to the southern City boundary.  
Exhibit B 
FOLLOWING IS THE DESCRIPTION OF A LINE KNOWN AS THE "SHORELINE PROTECTION LINE" AS IS DEFINED IN THE CITY OF DEL MAR ZONING ORDINANCE, BEACH OVERLAY ZONE, D.M.M.C. CHAPTER 30; SAID LINE EXTENDING FROM THE NORTHERLY CORPORATE BOUNDARY TO THE SOUTHERLY CORPORATE BOUNDARY OF THE CITY OF DEL MAR IN THE COUNTY OF SAN DIEGO, STATE OF CALIFORNIA, AND MORE PARTICULARLY DESCRIBED AS FOLLOWS: 
BEGINNING AT THE SOUTHEAST CORNER OF LOT 1 OF MAP 6838, SAID POINT BEING LOCATED ON THE SOUTHERLY EXTENSION OF THE CENTERLINE OF SIERRA AVENUE AND ON THE NORTHERLY CORPORATE BOUNDARY LINE OF THE CITY OF DEL MAR: 
1.  THENCE WESTERLY ALONG SAID NORTHERLY BOUNDARY LINE NORTH 89 DEGREES 35'36" WEST, 458.98 FEET (RECORD - NORTH 89 DEGREES 49'32" EAST) TO THE "TRUE POINT OF BEGINNING;" 
2.  THENCE LEAVING SAID NORTHERLY CORPORATE BOUNDARY LINE DUE SOUTH A DISTANCE OF 362.08 FEET; 
3.  THENCE SOUTH 12 DEGREES 58'16.0" EAST, 182.66 FEET; 
4.  THENCE SOUTH 54 DEGREES 11'22.8" EAST, 60.01 FEET; 
5.  THENCE SOUTH 23 DEGREES 58'07.5" EAST, 90.00 FEET TO A POINT COINCIDENT WITH THE NORTHEASTERLY CORNER OF THE CITY OF DEL MAR SEA BLUFF PRESERVE; 
6.  THENCE SOUTHERLY ALONG THE EASTERLY BOUNDARY LINE OF SAID SEA BLUFF PRESERVE, SOUTH 23 DEGREES 58'07.5" EAST, 428.26 FEET; 
7.  THENCE LEAVING SAID EASTERLY BOUNDARY LINE OF SAID SEA BLUFF PRESERVE, SOUTH 13 DEGREES 50'16.1" EAST, 987.41 FEET TO A POINT ON THE EAST FACE OF A SEAWALL AS IT EXISTED ON JANUARY 11, 1986, SAID SEAWALL LOCATED SOUTHERLY OF THE SAN DIEGUITO RIVER; 
8.  THENCE SOUTHERLY SOUTH 8 DEGREES 26'48.8" EAST, 273.20 FEET TO A POINT ON THE EASTERLY FACE OF SAID SEAWALL AS IT EXISTED ON JANUARY 11, 1986; 
9.  THENCE SOUTH 9 DEGREES 04'07.8" EAST, 269.57 FEET TO A POINT ON THE EASTERLY FACE OF SAID SEAWALL AS IT EXISTED ON JANUARY 11, 1986; 
10.  THENCE SOUTH 8 DEGREES 59'16.2" EAST, 449.91 FEET TO A POINT ON THE EASTERLY FACE OF SAID SEAWALL AS IT EXISTED ON JANUARY 11, 1986; SAID POINT BEING LOCATED ON THE SOUTHERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF 29TH STREET AS SHOWN ON RECORD OF SURVEY 679,9056 & 9551; 
11.  THENCE WESTERLY ALONG SAID SOUTHERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF 29TH STREET, SOUTH 81 DEGREES 01'01" WEST, 0.89 FEET (RECORD - SOUTH 80 DEGREES 48' WEST); 
12.  THENCE LEAVING SAID SOUTHERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF 29TH STREET, FOLLOWING A LINE PARALLEL TO AND 120.00 FEET WESTERLY OF THE CENTERLINE OF THE ALLEY KNOWN AS OCEANFRONT AS SHOWN ON RECORD OF SURVEY 9551, SOUTH 8 DEGREES 59'56.2" EAST, 440.00 FEET (RECORD SOUTH 9 DEGREES 10' EAST) TO A POINT LOCATED ON THE NORTH RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF 27TH STREET AS SHOWN ON RECORD OF SURVEY 9551; 
13.  THENCE EASTERLY ALONG SAID NORTHERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF 27TH STREET NORTH 81 DEGREES 20'36.7" EAST, 10.21 FEET (RECORD - SOUTH 80 DEGREES 50' WEST); 
14.  THENCE LEAVING SAID NORTHERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF 27TH STREET AND CONTINUING ALONG A LINE COINCIDENT WITH THE EASTERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF A 20.00 FOOT WIDE ALLEY AS SHOWN ON MAP 1737, SOUTH 9 DEGREES 00'34.3" EAST, 480.02 FEET (RECORD - SOUTH 9 DEGREES 10' EAST) TO A POINT ON THE NORTHERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF 25TH STREET, SAID POINT COINCIDENT WITH THE SOUTHWEST CORNER OF LOT 26, MAP 1737; 
15.  THENCE CONTINUING ALONG THE EASTERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF A 15 FOOT WIDE PUBLIC SIDEWALK AS SHOWN ON MAP 1450, SOUTH 9 DEGREES 00'34.3" EAST, 140 FEET (RECORD -SOUTH 80 DEGREES 50' EAST) TO AN ANGLE POINT, SAID ANGLE POINT BEING THE SOUTHWEST CORNER OF LOT 7, BLOCK 127, MAP 1450; 
16.  THENCE CONTINUING ALONG THE EASTERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF SAID PUBLIC SIDEWALK AS SHOWN ON MAP 1450, SOUTH 7 DEGREES 15'27.3" EAST, 102.13 FEET (RECORD - SOUTH 7 DEGREES 07' EAST) TO A POINT ON THE NORTHERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF 24TH STREET, SAID POINT COINCIDENT WITH THE SOUTHWEST CORNER OF LOT 13, BLOCK 127, MAP 1450; 
17.  THENCE CONTINUING ALONG THE EASTERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF SAID 15 FOOT PUBLIC SIDEWALK AS SHOWN ON MAP 1450, SOUTH 6 DEGREES 15'34.1" EAST, 690.00 FEET (RECORD - SOUTH 6 DEGREES 24' EAST) TO A POINT ON THE NORTHERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF 21ST STREET, SAID POINT COINCIDENT WITH THE SOUTHWEST CORNER OF LOT 13, BLOCK 124, MAP 1450; 
18.  THENCE EASTERLY ALONG THE NORTHERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF 21ST STREET, NORTH 83 DEGREES, 39'25.5" EAST, 20.10 FEET (RECORD - SOUTH 83 DEGREES 36' WEST); 
19.  THENCE LEAVING SAID NORTHERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF 21ST STREET AND CONTINUING SOUTHERLY ALONG THE EASTERLY LINE OF LOT 22 AS SHOWN ON MAP 1277, SOUTH 6 DEGREES 15'32.2" EAST, 114.20 FEET (RECORD - SOUTH 56 DEGREES 24 FEET EAST) TO AN ANGLE POINT LOCATED ON THE WESTERLY LINE OF LOT 19, BLOCK 115, MAP 1277, A DISTANCE THEREON SOUTH 6 DEGREES 15'32.2" EAST, 19.00 FEET (RECORD - SOUTH 6 Degrees 24" EAST) FROM THE NORTHWEST CORNER OF SAID LOT 19; 
20.  THENCE CONTINUING ALONG THE EASTERLY LINE OF LOT 22 AS SHOWN ON MAP 1277, SOUTH 3 DEGREES 20' 32.2" EAST, 293.20 FEET (RECORD - SOUTH 3 DEGREES 29' EAST) TO A POINT ON A NORTHERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF 20TH STREET, SAID POINT COINCIDENT WITH THE SOUTHWEST CORNER OF LOT 11, BLOCK 115, MAP 1277; 
21.  THENCE ALONG THE EASTERLY LINE OF SAID LOT 22, SOUTH 3 DEGREES 20' 32.2 EAST, 820.25 FEET (RECORD - SOUTH 3 DEGREES 29' EAST) TO A POINT ON THE NORTHERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF 18TH STREET, SAID POINT COINCIDENT WITH THE SOUTHWEST CORNER OF LOT 11, BLOCK 113, MAP 1277; 
22.  THENCE ALONG THE SOUTHERLY EXTENSION OF THE EASTERLY LINE OF SAID LOT 22, SOUTH 3 DEGREES 20' 32.2" EAST, 60.00 FEET (RECORD - SOUTH 3 DEGREES 29' EAST) TO A POINT ON THE SOUTHERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF 18TH STREET, SAID POINT COINCIDENT WITH THE NORTHWEST CORNER OF LOT 20, BLOCK 112, MAP 1277; 
23.  THENCE WESTERLY ALONG THE SOUTHERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF 18TH STREET, SOUTH 86 DEGREES 39' 27.8" WEST, 7.00 FEET; 
24.  THENCE LEAVING SAID SOUTHERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY OF 18TH STREET SOUTH 3 DEGREES 20' 32.2" EAST, 350.00 FEET, TO THE NORTHERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF 17TH STREET; 
25.  THENCE WESTERLY ALONG THE NORTHERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF 17TH STREET SOUTH 86 DEGREES 39' 27.8" WEST, 11.72 FEET; 
26.  THENCE SOUTH 3 DEGREES 20' 32.2" EAST, 267.46 FEET; 
27.  THENCE SOUTH 7 DEGREES, 59' 14.8" WEST, 100.73 FEET; 
28.  THENCE SOUTH 6 DEGREES 02' 48.2" EAST, 1,133.67 FEET TO A POINT LOCATED ON THE APPROXIMATE CENTERLINE OF THE ATCHISON, TOPEKA, AND SANTA FE RAILWAY COMPANY TRACKS, SAID POINT BEING LOCATED ON AN APPROXIMATE 1,900 FOOT RADIUS CURVE, CONCAVE EASTERLY SAID POINT ALSO BEING ON THE WESTERLY PROLONGATION OF THE NORTHERLY LINE OF LOT 1 OF PARCEL MAP 10422, A DISTANCE THEREON, NORTH 72 DEGREES 34' 48.5" EAST, 256.59 FEET (RECORD - NORTH 72 DEGREES 33' 09" EAST) FROM THE NORTHEASTERLY CORNER OF SAID LOT 1; 
THE FOLLOWING COURSES NUMBERED 29 THROUGH 35 ALL CONTINUE ALONG THE APPROXIMATE CENTERLINE OF THE ATCHISON, TOPEKA, AND SANTA FE RAILWAY COMPANY TRACKS AS IT EXISTED ON JANUARY 11, 1986; 
29.  THENCE CONTINUING ON THE APPROXIMATE CENTERLINE OF THE ATCHISON, TOPEKA, AND SANTA FE RAILWAY COMPANY TRACKS, THROUGH SAID 1,900 FOOT RADIUS CURVE, A CENTRAL ANGLE OF 6 DEGREES 44' 55.2", A DISTANCE OF 223.79 FEET; 
30.  THENCE SOUTH 11 DEGREES 34' 14.3 EAST, 947.56 FEET TO A POINT LOCATED AT THE BEGINNING OF A 5,500 FOOT RADIUS CURVE, CONCAVE EASTERLY; 
31.  THENCE THROUGH SAID CURVE A CENTRAL ANGLE OF 7 DEGREES 02' 53", A DISTANCE OF 676.56 FEET; 
32.  THENCE SOUTH 18 DEGREES 37' 10" EAST, 2,384.90 FEET TO A POINT LOCATED AT THE BEGINNING OF A 9,000 FOOT RADIUS CURVE, CONCAVE WESTERLY; 
33.  THENCE THROUGH SAID CURVE A CENTRAL ANGLE OF 6 DEGREES 20' 32", A DISTANCE OF 996.23 FEET; 
34.  THENCE SOUTH 12 DEGREES 16' 36.9" EAST, 1,767.95 FEET TO A POINT LOCATED AT THE BEGINNING OF A 2,400 FOOT RADIUS CURVE, CONCAVE EASTERLY; 
35.  THENCE THROUGH SAID 2,400 FOOT CURVE A CENTRAL ANGLE OF 8 DEGREES 46' 45.5", A DISTANCE OF 367.75 FEET MORE OR LESS TO A POINT LOCATED ON A LINE BEARING NORTH 46 DEGREES 32' 16" WEST, SAID LINE BEING THE NORTHEASTERLY LINE OF THE PUEBLO LANDS OF SAN DIEGO, AS SHOWN ON MAP THEREOF MADE BY JAMES PASCOE IN THE YEAR 1870, A CERTIFIED COPY OF SAID MAP BEING FILED IN SAN DIEGO COUNTY RECORDER'S OFFICE AS MISCELLANEOUS MAP NO. 36, SAID POINT OF INTERSECTION ALSO BEING STATION 813 AS SHOWN ON SHEET 18 OF THE CITY OF SAN DIEGO ENGINEERING DRAWING 47281 ON FILE IN THE CITY ENGINEER'S OFFICES OF SAID CITY; AND SAID LINE ALSO BEING THE SOUTHWESTERLY CORPORATE BOUNDARY LINE OF THE CITY OF DEL MAR. 
THE BASIS OF BEARINGS FOR THE ABOVE DESCRIBED LINE WAS DEFINED BY ESTABLISHING A LINE BETWEEN UNITED STATES ARMY CORPS SURVEY BENCHMARK NUMBERS DM590 AND DM560, LOCATED IN THE CITY OF DEL MAR, SAID LINE BEARING NORTH 6 DEGREES 15' 54" WEST. 
THE FOLLOWING RECORD MAPS INCLUDED IN THE DESCRIPTION OF THE ABOVE SURVEY LINE ARE RECORDED IN THE COUNTY RECORDER'S OFFICE OF SAN DIEGO COUNTY: 
MAP 6838 DEL MAR BEACH CLUB 
MAP 1737 NORTH STRAND MAP 
MAP 1450 DEL MAR SUBDIVISION NO. 3 
MAP 1277 DEL MAR RESUBDIVISION NO. 2 
MAP 10422 DEL MAR SUBDIVISION 80-02 
RECORD OF SURVEY 679 
RECORD OF SURVEY 9056 
RECORD OF SURVEY 9551  
Chapter 30.51 - SETBACK SEAWALL PERMITS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Note— This Chapter of the Municipal Code forms a portion of the City of Del Mar Local Coastal Program Implementing Ordinances. The regulations found within this Chapter are not subject to "relief" through the Del Mar Variance process. Exceptions to, or relief from, the requirements found within this Chapter are limited to those specified within the language of this Chapter or found within other Chapters of the Implementing Ordinances. Where there is a conflict between the language of this Chapter and other portions of the Del Mar Municipal Code, the language of this Chapter shall take precedence. 
 
30.51.010 - Purpose. 
The Setback Seawall Permit Ordinance is established to regulate beach uses east of the Shoreline Protection Area line. It is the intent to encourage seawalls and other types of protective devices when needed, to be constructed landward (east) of the Shoreline Protection Area (SPA) line. 
(Ord. No. 722)  
30.51.020 - Development of Shoreline Protective Structures Landward of the Shoreline Protection Area Line. 
Protective structures as defined in Chapter 30.50 may be developed on private property landward of the Shoreline Protection Area line, irrespective of any otherwise applicable setback requirements imposed by the Municipal Code. No variance shall be required for the same.  
30.51.030 - Application Procedure and Processing. 
The review procedure for such an application shall be the same as specified in Chapter 30.50 for shoreline protective structures on or seaward of the Shoreline Protection Area line, except that the application shall note that the project is to be constructed landward of said line, and such applications shall be processed in the same manner, provided that such applications shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission.  
30.51.040 - Criteria for Approval. 
Property owners shall have a right to construct protective structures on their private property landward of the Shoreline Protection Area line provided that the Planning Commission or City Council on appeal, finds that the proposed protective device: 
A.  Is required to serve coastal-dependent uses or to protect existing principal structures or public beaches in danger from erosion and when designed to eliminate or mitigate adverse impacts to local shoreline sand supply; 
B.  Will minimize risks to life and property in areas of flood hazards; 
C.  Will assure stability and structural integrity and neither create nor contribute significantly to erosion, geologic instability, or destruction of the site or surrounding area, nor in any way substantially alter natural landforms along bluffs and cliffs; 
D.  Is in conformity with the certified Local Coastal Program; 
E.  Is in conformity with the public access and public recreation policies of Chapter 3 of the Coastal Act; 
F.  Will involve materials and a design that are consistent with good engineering practices; 
Such permits shall be subject to such conditions as the Planning Commission may reasonably impose, including the following: 
1.  Contain waivers, indemnification and hold harmless provisions as required at the time of approval. 
2.  Contain such conditions the Planning Commission determines to be necessary to accomplish the purposes of Setback Seawall Permits. 
3.  Be recorded in a manner to bind successors in interest.  
30.51.050 - Emergency Reinforcement. 
Emergency protective structures may be installed landward of the Shoreline Protection Area line in conformance with the same procedures and criteria specified in Section 30.50 of the Municipal Code.  
30.51.060 - Shoreline Protection Area: Removal of Non-complying Development. 
Protective structures approved landward of the Shoreline Protection Area line shall not be deemed to be nonconforming for any purposes under any other provision of the City's Community Plan, Zoning Ordinance, or Design Review Ordinance. The provisions of Chapter 30.50 with respect to such projects shall prevail and supersede any other provisions of the Municipal Code which would otherwise apply to such application. 
(Ord. No. 571)  
Chapter 30.52 - BLUFF, SLOPE AND CANYON OVERLAY ZONE (BSC-OZ)[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Note— This Chapter of the Municipal Code forms a portion of the City of Del Mar Local Coastal Program Implementing Ordinances. The regulations found within this Chapter are not subject to "relief" through the Del Mar Variance process. Exceptions to, or relief from, the requirements found within this Chapter are limited to those specified within the language of this Chapter or found within other Chapters of the Implementing Ordinances. Where there is a conflict between the language of this Chapter and other portions of the Del Mar Municipal Code, the language of this Chapter shall take precedence. 
 
30.52.010 - Purpose. 
A.  The BSC Overlay Zone is designed to protect the health, safety, and general welfare, and to control the development of properties within the designated zone in order to preserve the scenic sandstone bluffs and related canyons and steep slopes which characterize the area within the zone. The overlay zone is also intended to protect downstream resources from the adverse impacts of erosion and sedimentation. The unique landforms within the zone provide visual relief and diversity within the City, and they define and separate neighborhoods, enhance the overall quality of Del Mar's local coastal environment, and preserve the economic integrity of our visitor-oriented community. 
B.  Bluff, Slope and Canyon (BSC) Overlay Zone is further designed to carry out the applicable goals, objectives, and policies of the Community Plan including, but not limited to, the applicable element of the Del Mar Community Plan's Bluff, Slope and Canyon Precise Plan. 
(Ord. No. 722)  
30.52.020 - Boundaries. 
Property within the BSC Overlay Zone shall be designated by ordinance to be depicted upon the City Zone Map.  
30.52.030 - Allowable Uses. 
Unless specified herein, allowable uses in the BSC Overlay Zone shall be those uses and accessory uses allowed by the underlying zone, subject to the regulations and restrictions of the underlying zone and of this Chapter.  
30.52.040 - Accessory Uses. 
See Underlying Zone.  
30.52.050 - Parking Requirements. 
See Chapter 30.80.  
30.52.060 - Development Review. 
A.  Unless otherwise exempted by this Title no building, improvement, structure, or portion thereof shall be erected, constructed, converted, established, altered or enlarged; nor shall any subdivision occur; nor shall any lot or premises be excavated or graded for any purpose [including, but not limited to, in-ground structures such as swimming pools or spas]; nor shall any lot be cleared of vegetation until a Conditional Use Permit and Coastal Development Permit are first obtained in accordance with the procedures set forth in this Code. Said Conditional Use Permit and Coastal Development Permit shall include, but not be limited to, provisions to ensure conformity with the development criteria applicable to the property as described in the Bluff, Slope and Canyon Element of the adopted Community Plan, as well as the following development criteria: 
1.  Construction, grading, or other encroachment of any kind on substantial steep slopes exceeding 25 percent grade, or within 20 feet of the top or 10 feet of the bottom of substantial steep slopes exceeding 25 percent grade, or the construction of structures which overhang such steep slopes or steep slope setbacks, shall be prohibited except where allowed in accordance with this Chapter. 
a.  Encroachments within the areas specified above shall be allowed only when the Planning Commission finds that there is no feasible alternative siting which eliminates or substantially reduces the need for such construction or grading, and it is found that the amount of encroachment into steep slope areas associated with the proposed development has been minimized to the greatest extent feasible commensurate with preserving the physical characteristics of the site. 
b.  For purposes of this Section, "substantial steep slopes" shall mean: any areas of slopes with a gradient of 25 percent or greater on a site where the total elevation differential within such slope areas themselves is 20 feet or more, or where such slopes on a site adjoin contiguous slopes of 25 percent grade or greater on adjoining property and together involve an elevation differential of 20 feet or more. "Substantial steep slopes" shall include smaller, isolated pockets of area with less than 25 percent grade when surrounded by contiguous "substantial steep slopes" located either entirely or partially on site. 
c.  For purposes of this Section, "encroachment" shall constitute any activity which involves grading, construction, placement of structures or materials, paving, or other operation which would render the area incapable of supporting native vegetation or being used as wildlife habitat. "Encroachment" shall also include the removal of native vegetation. 
d.  Any and all encroachment into substantial steep slope areas, which is permitted pursuant to these findings, shall be limited in extent by the following steep slope encroachment standards. The maximum allowable encroachment into slope areas, as specified below, shall not be considered as a right but shall instead be allowed only when it has been determined, pursuant to these regulations, that there is no feasible alternative to slope encroachment. 
Percentage of Project Site in 
Substantial Steep Slope Area 	Maximum Allowable Encroachment Into Substantial Steep Slope Area 
100% to 96% 	20% 
95% to 91% 	18% 
90% to 86% 	16% 
85% to 81% 	14% 
80% to 76% 	12% 
75% or less 	10% 
 
"Substantial steep slope areas" are those areas composed of slopes of a gradient of 25 percent or greater, as determined through the slope identification process prescribed in this Chapter. 
2.  Projects located within the Bluff, Slope and Canyon Overlay Zone shall be conditioned to ensure that runoff from constructed impervious surfaces shall be discharged directly into publicly-owned discharge and drainage systems. In the event that no public discharge or drainage systems are in the immediate vicinity, the Planning Commission may approve alternate systems upon the recommendation of the City Engineer, if it is found that the proposed alternate system will produce no significant erosion. "Significant erosion" shall mean the likelihood of removal of soil or the cutting, scarring, or rilling of slopes, canyons, or bluff faces, or the silting of lower slopes brought about by runoff from the impervious surfaces during irrigation or from rainfall of an intensity and duration less than or equal to that of the 100-year period design storm. New development shall minimize the discharge of pollutants from urban runoff into surface water drainage, and maintain post-development peak runoff rate and average volume, at levels that are similar to pre-development levels, by implementing structural and non-structural Best Management Practices (BMPs) through an approved polluted runoff control plan. 
3.  In order to minimize the disturbance of natural landforms and habitat, projects involving more than one dwelling unit shall be clustered, if determined practicable and desirable by the Planning Commission. "Clustering" in this context shall mean the siting of dwelling units in proximity to each other to maximize the amount of undeveloped open space. A clustered project within this overlay zone may disregard existing interior lot lines and is not bound to comply with the minimum lot size, width, depth and setback provisions of the underlying zone. 
4.  Encroachment into substantial steep slope areas and slope setbacks shall be permitted for the construction of, or improvement to, public streets, alleys and public access paths upon a finding by the Planning Commission that such public improvement has been designed to preserve major trees, follow the natural contours of hillsides, and minimize the amount of cut and fill grading necessary to construct such roadway or path. 
5.  Encroachment into substantial steep slope areas and steep slope setbacks shall be permitted for the construction of, or improvement to, public utility lines and lateral utility hookups upon a finding by the Planning Commission that such improvements have been designed a the minimum size necessary and that they have designed to follow the natural contours of hillsides so as to minimize the amount of soil disturbance commensurate with preserving the natural topography of the area. 
(Ord. No. 582; Ord. No. 643; Ord. No. 685)  
30.52.070 - Exemption from CUP. 
A.  Unless otherwise required pursuant to the provisions of this Title, the following projects and activities shall not be subject to the receipt of a Conditional Use Permit provided that the Director of Planning and Community Development has issued a determination that project will meet the criteria specified in Subsection 30.52.060.A: 
1.  Construction or grading which maintains a minimum setback of twenty feet of the top and ten feet of the bottom of substantial steep slopes exceeding 25 percent, or the construction of a structure which does not overhang such steep slope or steep slope setback in accordance with development criteria applicable to the property as described in Subsection 30.52.060.A.1. Setback certification from the top and bottom of substantial steep slopes for all new construction and overhangs shall be performed by a licensed surveyor or engineer as part of the development review process for any project located within the Bluff, Slope, and Canyon Overlay Zone. 
2.  The installation of private drainage systems, provided that such systems are designed to discharge runoff from constructed impervious surfaces directly into publicly-owned discharge and drainage systems in accordance with development criteria applicable to the property as described in Subsection 30.52.060.A.2. Such systems shall be subject to review by the City Engineer. 
3.  The construction of a fence or wall which meets applicable fence height requirements as measured pursuant to the provisions of this Code. 
4.  The grading of a fire break or the clearance of vegetation when required, pursuant to an order from the Del Mar Fire Department to protect structures on existing developed legal lots. The Fire Department's order shall require the grading or clearance of no more material than is minimally necessary to provide for protection of public health and safety. Unless specifically stated in the written order, the clearance of vegetation shall be limited to the selective removal of vegetative growth through normal pruning, thinning by hand, and/or cutting operations which do not involve grading, clear-cutting of vegetation to a uniform height, or disturbance of soil or root systems. 
5.  The replacement or removal of vegetative material when such activities are carried out in a manner which does not threaten the preservation of the sandstone bluffs, canyons, and related slopes that characterize properties within the Bluff, Slope and Canyon Overlay Zone and when such activities are carried out in a manner that involves appropriate erosion control measures, including replacement vegetation, to provide soil stability and when conducted so as to not create the potential for adverse erosion to adjacent properties or downstream resources. 
(Ord. No. 582)  
30.52.075 - Exemption from Coastal Development Permit Requirements. 
A.  The following projects and activities shall not be subject to the receipt of a Coastal Development Permit upon a determination by the Director of Planning and Community Development that the criteria specified in Subsection 30.52.060.A have been met: 
1.  The grading of a fire break or the clearance of vegetation when required, pursuant to an order form the Del Mar Fire Department to protect structures on existing developed legal lots. The Fire Department's order shall require the grading or clearance of no more material than is minimally necessary to provide for protection of public health and safety. Unless specifically stated in the written order, the clearance of vegetation shall be limited to the selective removal of vegetative growth through normal pruning, thinning by hand, and/or cutting operations which do not involve grading, clear-cutting of vegetation to a uniform height, or disturbance of soil or root systems. 
2.  The replacement or removal of vegetative material on an existing legal lot with a single-family residence when such activities are carried out in a manner which does not threaten the preservation of the sandstone bluffs, canyons, and related slopes that characterize properties within the Bluff, Slope and Canyon Overlay Zone and when such activities are carried out in a manner that involves appropriate erosion control measures, including replacement vegetation, to provide soil stability and when conducted so as to not create the potential for adverse erosion to adjacent properties or downstream resources.  
30.52.080 - Design Review. 
Unless otherwise exempted by this Chapter, no building, improvement, structure, or portion thereof shall be erected, constructed, converted, established, altered, or enlarged; nor shall any lot or premises be excavated or graded for any purpose including, but not limited to, in-ground structures such as swimming pools or spas, or cleared of vegetation, until a Design Review Permit is first obtained in accordance with the procedures set forth in this Code. In addition to the standards of the Design Review Ordinance (DMMC Chapter 23.08) and of the underlying zone, said Design Review Permit shall be reviewed by the Design Review Board under the following standards: 
A.  In order to preserve view sheds and the open space appearance of the area from a distance, structures shall be designed to be subservient to the natural landforms on the site. In addition, no structure shall exceed a height of 14 feet as measured pursuant to the provisions of this Code, unless the Design Review Board finds that scenic view sheds and open space appearance will be less affected by higher structures. 
B.  Construction, irrigation, and landscaping shall be designed to ensure that they will harmonize with the natural as well as the man-made environment and to ensure that the protection of the natural landforms and vegetation takes precedence over architectural values. 
C.  No primary scenic views or scenic views from public streets, roads or pedestrian trails shall be obstructed, unless the Design Review Board finds that there is no feasible alternative siting which eliminates or significantly reduces the obstruction, and that the bulk and scale of the proposed structure have been minimized to the greatest extent feasible commensurate with preserving the physical characteristics of the site.  
30.52.090 - Reserved.  
30.52.100 - Special Regulations. 
A.  No subdivision of property improved or unimproved, including lot line adjustment, shall be approved unless a finding is made that the proposed design and improvements of the subdivision will be consistent with the criteria of this Code. Specifically, unless proposed as a dedicated open space lot, no subdivision shall be approved which creates a lot or lots that are composed entirely or nearly entirely of substantial steep slopes as defined in this Chapter. Further, no subdivision or boundary adjustment shall be approved for creation or realignment of a lot(s) that would be incapable of supporting subsequent construction with the provision of the steep slope setbacks specified in this Chapter. In making the required finding for approval of the Conditional Use Permit associated with an application for subdivision, the Planning Commission shall take into consideration, the probable impact that the subdivision, including subsequent development on the lot(s), will have on substantial steep slopes. 
(Ord. No. 567; Ord. No. 685; Ord. No. 722)  
30.52.110 - Application Submittals. 
A.  In addition to the application submittal requirements for all other permits/authorizations required by this Code, applications for projects located within the Bluff, Slope and Canyon Overlay Zone shall include, at a minimum: 
1.  A slope analysis prepared by a licensed civil engineer which indicates the existing topography of the site shown in (minimum) two-foot interval contours and an indication, through shading or other visible means, of the areas of the property comprised of slopes of 25 percent grade or greater. Said computation of slope gradient shall be calculated between individual contour lines, rather than by averaging across multiple contour lines. 
2.  A calculation of the areas, expressed in square feet, or acres as appropriate, of each contiguous area of slopes of 25 percent grade or greater and the total area in such slopes as determined through the requirements of the slope analysis per Subsection A.1 above. 
3.  A geological reconnaissance survey and preliminary engineering geology report. Said report shall include the findings of a subsurface investigation of those areas of the site wherein development is proposed and shall be sufficient to identify the nature and magnitude of any unstable conditions in such areas. The report shall address projected soil stability over a 75-year life for proposed structures and shall include any alternatives or mitigation measures necessary to offset unstable conditions or hazards. 
B.  Unless otherwise required by the Planning Director, these submittal requirements shall not apply to new or redevelopment projects which clearly do not involve any potential for new grading, construction, or expansion of the footprint of existing structures into substantial steep slope areas as defined in this Chapter or into the steep slope setback areas required pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter. When waived by the Planning Director, the requirement for provision of this information may be subsequently reinstated by the responsible discretionary agency reviewing the project, at the time of such review.  
30.52.120 - Grading Methodology and Practice. 
A.  In addition to the other provisions of the Del Mar Municipal Code, projects located within the Bluff, Slope and Canyon Overlay Zone shall be subject to the following provisions: 
1.  All projects involving grading shall be subject to the submittal of an erosion and sedimentation control plan. Said plan shall ensure that the project will not result in an increase in peak runoff from the site over the greatest discharge expected during a 10-year, 6-hour frequency storm. Runoff control shall be accomplished by a variety of measures including, but not limited to, on-site catchment basins, detention basins, siltation traps, energy dissipaters and the installation of landscape material. The required erosion and sedimentation control plan, and any proposals to increase flows, shall be subject to review and approval of the City Engineer. 
2.  All erosion control measures shall be subject to detailed maintenance arrangements. Said arrangements shall ensure the on-going repair and maintenance of approved erosion control measures to ensure continued and effective erosion control. The maintenance and repair of such measures shall be the responsibility of the applicant or their successors in interest. The maintenance agreements required herein shall be secured prior to the release of permits and shall be recorded against the deed for the property. 
3.  Cut and fill grading shall be designed to either limit runoff to a level which will be equal to or less than the natural flow expected prior to grading or construction activities, or to direct any increased flows to improved drainage facilities and/or natural drainage courses, provided such facilities or drainage courses are of adequate design and capacity to handle all discharge and anticipated flows. 
4.  For projects involving a total of more than 25 cubic yards of cut and/or fill grading operations, no grading shall occur November 15th to March 31st of any year. 
5.  All permits shall be subject to the submittal of a polluted runoff control plan. The required plan shall incorporate the use of structural and non-structural Best Management Practices (BMPs), to the extent necessary, to minimize the discharge of pollutants carried by runoff from urban development into surface water drainage, and to maintain post-development peak runoff rate and average volume at levels similar to pre-development levels. The plan shall include, but not be limited, to the following Best Management Practices (BMPs), as applicable: silt traps, catch basins, oil/grit separators, street sweeping and cleaning program, low-maintenance landscape and pesticide management plan, solid waste management and public education program. Post-construction structural BMPs (or suites of BMPs) should be designed to treat, infiltrate or filter storm water runoff from each storm, up to and including the 85 th percentile, 24-hour storm event for volume-based BMPs, and/or the 85 th percentile, one-hour storm event, with an appropriate safety factor, for flow-based BMPs. The plan shall include a monitoring component to ensure long-term maintenance of BMPs as relevant, and to allow for continued evaluation of the effectiveness of the polluted runoff control plan in meeting the goals of the LUP regarding the protection and enhancement of sensitive resources. 
(Ord. No. 733)  
30.52.130 - Retained Open Space/Conditions of Development. 
A.  Areas to be retained in their natural state pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter shall be subject to conditions to ensure the protection of the designated area(s) from future encroachment, disturbance or degradation. Said conditions shall include the recordation of an open space deed restriction, conservation easement or open space easement to serve notice to the property owner, subsequent owners, or interested parties of the restrictions in effect on such property. 
B.  The protection of areas or vegetation designated for retention in their natural state shall be accomplished through the installation of protective temporary and/or permanent fencing around such designated areas prior to the commencement of grading and/or development activities on site. Fencing for protection of designated trees/vegetation required herein shall be placed so as to protect the root zones of the trees/vegetation to be protected.  
Chapter 30.53 - LAGOON OVERLAY ZONE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Note— This Chapter of the Municipal Code forms a portion of the City of Del Mar Local Coastal Program Implementing Ordinances. The regulations found within this Chapter are not subject to "relief" through the Del Mar Variance process. Exceptions to, or relief from, the requirements found within this Chapter are limited to those specified within the language of this Chapter or found within other Chapters of the Implementing Ordinances. Where there is a conflict between the language of this Chapter and other portions of the Del Mar Municipal Code, the language of this Chapter shall take precedence. 
 
30.53.010 - Purpose. 
This overlay zone is composed of properties which are located directly in, or in proximity to, the Los Penasquitos and San Dieguito Lagoons. The purpose of this Lagoon Overlay Zone is to protect the wetland resources of these lagoon areas and their sensitive upland habitats by requiring that all development activities taking place in the zone are designed and implemented in a manner that is consistent with wetland habitat protection and enhancement. 
(Ord. No. 722; Ord. No. 845)  
30.53.020 - Boundaries. 
Property within the Lagoon Overlay Zone shall be those designated areas by ordinance and depicted upon the City Zone Map. Additionally, areas which qualify as wetlands, pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, and which are identified subsequent to the adoption of this Chapter shall also be considered to be with the Lagoon Overlay Zone and subject to all regulations herein. The City shall thereafter update the City Zone Map to modify the boundaries of the Lagoon Overlay Zone from time to time to incorporate newly-discovered wetlands.  
30.53.030 - Definitions. 
A.  For purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply. 
1.  Wetlands shall mean all lands which are transitional between terrestrial and aquatic systems where the water table is usually at or near the surface or where the land is periodically covered by water. Wetlands include: saltwater marshes, freshwater marshes, open or closed brackish water, marshes, swamps, mudflats, and fens. All lands having one or more of the following attributes are "wetlands": 
a.  Lands which, at least periodically, support predominantly hydrophytes (plants whose habitat is water or very wet places); 
b.  Lands in which the substratum is predominantly undrained hydric soil; or 
c.  Lands in which the substratum is non-soil and is saturated with water or covered by water at some time during each year. 
2.  Wetland Buffer shall mean lands which provide a buffer between human development activity and wetland areas and which serve to protect the environmental and functional habitat values of the wetland, and/or lands which are integrally important in supporting the full range of the wetland and adjacent upland biological community through their function as upland transitional habitat.  
30.53.040 - Allowable Uses. 
Unless specified herein, allowable uses in the Lagoon Overlay Zone shall be those uses and accessory uses allowed by the underlying zone, subject to the regulations and restrictions of the underlying zone and of this Chapter.  
30.53.050 - Accessory Uses. 
See underlying Zone.  
30.53.060 - Parking Requirements. 
See Chapter 30.80.  
30.53.070 - Development Review. 
Unless otherwise exempted by this Title, no building, improvement, structure, or portion thereof shall be erected, constructed, converted, established, altered or enlarged; nor shall any lot or premises be subject to excavation, grading or clearance of vegetation; nor shall any subdivision occur until both a Conditional Use Permit and Coastal Development Permit are obtained from the Planning Commission. In reviewing the applications for Conditional Use Permits and Coastal Development Permits, the Planning Commission shall apply the standards of review contained in the underlying zone as well as those contained in this Chapter.  
30.53.080 - Permitted Uses in Wetlands. 
A.  Permitted uses in wetlands shall be limited to the uses and activities listed below. These uses shall be allowed only when they are designed and implemented in a manner that will not involve grading, filling, construction, or placement of structures within the boundaries of wetlands as determined pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter. 
1.  Aquaculture, provided that it is carried out in such a manner so as to avoid any adverse impacts to the water quality or the biological productivity of the wetlands. 
2.  Scientific research, passive recreation and/or educational uses, provided that they do not involve adverse impacts to the natural ecosystem. 
3.  Wetland restoration projects where the primary function is restoration of wetland habitat and function. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A. above, restoration projects may include such activities as grading, filling and/or beach replenishment directly associated with the wetland restoration project. 
(Ord. No. 733)  
30.53.090 - Permitted Uses in Wetland Buffer Areas. 
A.  Permitted uses and activities in wetland buffer areas shall be limited to the following: 
1.  Passive recreational access paths and viewpoints when designed to ensure no adverse impacts to adjacent wetland areas, and when designed in conformance with the provisions of the certified Local Coastal Program Land Use Plan. 
2.  The placement of improvements necessary to provide protection, preservation, or enhancement of adjacent wetland areas. Such improvements may include, but are not limited to, construction of fencing, creation of landscape berms, and placement of signage related to scientific, educational, or recreational uses. 
3.  All uses permitted in wetland areas.  
30.53.100 - Provision of Wetland Buffers. 
A.  To protect wetland areas, all new development projects , which are located on property which includes or lies in proximity to wetland habitat, as defined in this Chapter, shall include the provision of a continuous wetland buffer. Unless otherwise specified herein, the wetland buffer shall be a minimum of 100 feet in width. The wetland buffer shall be measured landward from the boundary of wetlands as delineated on plans required pursuant to the application submittal requirements of this Chapter. 
B.  A wetland buffer of less than 100 feet in width shall be allowed only with the concurrence of the California Department of Fish and Game and when the Planning Commission makes the following findings: 
1.  That the physical characteristics of the site, such as the size and dimensions of the property are adequate to protect the resources of the adjacent wetlands, based on site-specific factors. 
a.  When making such a finding, the Planning Commission shall, in consultation with the California Department of Fish and Game, consider site-specific factors such as the type and size of the development proposed; the mitigation measures provided (such as planting of vegetation or construction of fencing); elevation differentials which may exist between the proposed development and wetland areas; the need for upland transitional habitat; or other similar factors which will serve to contribute to the purposes of a wetland buffer area. 
b.  When making a finding regarding the use of a buffer of less than 100 feet in width, the Planning Commission shall consider any recommendations provided by representatives of the California Department of Fish and Game. 
C.  In no event shall a wetland buffer be reduced to a width of less than 50 feet. 
D.  Authorization which has been granted by the Planning Commission to provide a wetland buffer of less than 100 feet for one aspect of a development proposal, shall not be construed as an authorization to provide a buffer of less than 100 feet in width for other aspects of the proposal unless such authorization has been specifically enumerated in the findings required pursuant to this Section. 
(Ord. No. 845)  
30.53.110 - Limitation of Access to Wetland Areas. 
A.  In addition to the wetland buffers required pursuant to this Chapter, new projects shall be reviewed for the appropriateness of providing a physical barrier, which will minimize access to wetland areas and immediate uplands, by humans and domestic animals. The imposition of a condition requiring the installation of fencing, landscape berms or other suitable barriers shall be based on a finding that the uncontrolled access of humans and domestic animals would adversely affect the biological productivity of the wetlands.  
30.53.120 - Application Submittals. 
A.  Applications for development of property within the Lagoon Overlay Zone shall include topographic and vegetative maps, as necessary, to delineate the boundaries of all wetland areas located on-site or off-site in proximity to the development proposal. Maps required by this Section shall be of a scale not less than one inch equals 100 feet and shall delineate the topography of the site in two-foot contour intervals. The determination of the boundary of wetland areas shall be included as an overlay to the required topographic map and shall be prepared by a qualified professional(s) in the fields of biology and hydrology. The Director of Planning and Community Development shall have the discretion to contact representatives of the California Department of Fish and Game and the United States Fish and Wildlife Service to confirm the wetland boundary information and determination provided by an applicant(s). 
B.  Applications involving grading on property, which includes, or lies in proximity to wetland areas as defined in this Chapter shall include a grading plan prepared by a registered civil engineer. The grading plan shall be designed to ensure that there will be no increase in the peak runoff rate from the fully developed site over the greatest discharge that would occur from the existing undeveloped site as a result of the intensity of rainfall expected during the six-hour, ten-year design storm. The grading and erosion control plan shall include: 
1.  Plans for all runoff and erosion control measures to be installed including: catchment basins, detention basins, and siltation traps along with energy dissipating measures at the terminus of storm drains, and other similar measures of equal or greater effectiveness. 
2.  A description of the erosion control procedures to be utilized during all phases of project development. 
3.  Plans prepared by a licensed landscape architect or other qualified professional for the installation of temporary and permanent landscaping for soil retention.  
30.53.130 - Retained Open Space/Conditions of Development. 
A.  Wetland areas and wetland buffer areas to be retained in, or restored to, their natural state pursuant to the application of these Lagoon Overlay Zone regulations shall be subject to conditions to ensure the future protection of the designated area(s) from encroachment, disturbance, or degradation. Said conditions shall include the recordation of an open space deed restriction, conservation easement, or open space easement over the protected wetland and/or wetland buffer area(s) to ensure their protection and to serve notice to the property owner, subsequent owners or interested parties of the restrictions in effect on such property. 
B.  The transfer of fee title of wetland areas to an appropriate public agency shall also serve to satisfy the requirements of this Section.  
30.53.140 - Grading Practices/Drainage and Erosion Control. 
In order to minimize and control runoff and the associated erosion and sedimentation of downstream wetland areas, all development activities on project sites within the Lagoon Overlay Zone shall comply with each the following grading methodology and erosion control practices: 
A.  Projects shall be conditioned to ensure that runoff from impervious surfaces shall either be directed towards existing publicly owned discharge and drainage systems or retained on-site in settling ponds or other drainage/erosion control measures. Where, due to factors of topography, neither direction of runoff into storm drain systems nor retention on site is possible, runoff shall be appropriately discharged at non-erosive flows and velocities through the use of energy dissipation devices. 
B.  Temporary erosion control measures shall include the use of berms, interceptor ditches, sandbagging, hay bales, filtered inlets, debris basins, silt traps, or other similar means of equal or greater effectiveness. All such erosion control measures shall be installed prior to the commencement of grading in the areas for which the erosion control measures are intended and shall be removed within 30 days of project completion. 
C.  For projects involving a total of more than 25 cubic yards of cut and/or fill grading, no grading shall occur during the rainy season, identified for purposes of this Chapter as the period from November 15th to March 31st. This Section shall not apply to approved wetland restoration projects. 
D.  In addition to other erosion control measures required pursuant to this Chapter, all graded slopes shall be stabilized prior to the November 15th onset of the rainy season through the provision of vegetative erosion control. Vegetative erosion control may be achieved through measures such as: landscape planting, seeding, mulching, fertilization, and irrigation. The installation of vegetative erosion control shall occur with sufficient time to achieve landscape coverage prior to the November 15th start of the rainy season. 
E.  All graded areas disturbed but not completed prior to November 15th, including graded pads and stockpiles, shall be suitably prepared to prevent excessive soil loss during the November 15th to March 31st rainy season. 
F.  All permits shall be subject to the submittal of a polluted runoff control plan. The required plan shall incorporate the use of structural and non-structural Best Management Practices (BMPs), to the extent necessary, to minimize the discharge of pollutants carried by runoff from urban development into surface water drainage, and to maintain post-development peak runoff rate and average volume at levels similar to pre-development levels. The plan shall include, but not be limited to the following Best Management Practices (BMPs), as applicable: silt traps, catch basins, oil/grit separators, street sweeping and cleaning program, low-maintenance landscape and pesticide management plan, solid waste management public education program. Post-construction structural BMPs (or suites of BMPs) should be designed to treat, infiltrate or filter storm water runoff from each storm, up to and including the 85 th percentile, 24-hour storm event for volume-based BMPs, and/or the 85 th percentile, one-hour storm event, with an appropriate safety factor, for flow-based BMPs. The plan shall include a monitoring component to ensure long-term maintenance of BMPs as relevant, and to allow for continued evaluation of the effectiveness of the polluted runoff control plan in meeting the goals of the LUP regarding the protection and enhancement of sensitive resources. 
(Ord. No. 733)  
30.53.150 - Maintenance of Drainage and Erosion Control Measures. 
A.  Where the installation of erosion and/or drainage control measures is required pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, the responsibility for maintenance of such measures shall rest with the applicant unless such responsibility is assumed by another agency or party found acceptable by the Planning Director. 
B.  The responsibility for maintenance of drainage and erosion control measures and a detailed maintenance program shall be included in an agreement(s) recorded against the deed for the property. The arrangements shall provide for the ongoing repair and maintenance of approved control measures, complete with security deposits as necessary, to ensure continued effective erosion/drainage control.  
30.53.160 - Retention of Native Vegetation. 
A.  New or redevelopment projects within the Lagoon Overlay Zone shall include the retention of the maximum amount of native vegetation on the site. Revegetation or landscaping of sites within the Lagoon Overlay Zone shall include the use of non-invasive, drought tolerant species native to the San Diego coastal region and which are compatible with adjacent wetland habitat species.  
30.53.170 - Additional Development Standards for Subdivisions. 
A.  No subdivision shall be approved unless the Planning Commission makes a finding that the proposed design of the subdivision and its improvements will be consistent with the criteria of this Chapter. Specifically, no subdivision shall be approved for creation of a lot(s) which would be incapable of either: 1) supporting the construction of a use allowed within the underlying zone; or 2) supporting such construction with provision of the applicable wetland setbacks and other resource protection measures required pursuant to this Chapter. In reviewing the subdivision proposal, the Planning Commission shall take into consideration the probable impacts that the project, including subsequent development on the lot(s), will have on preservation of wetlands resources.  
Chapter 30.55 - COASTAL BLUFF OVERLAY ZONE[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Note— This Chapter of the Municipal Code forms a portion of the City of Del Mar Local Coastal Program Implementing Ordinances. The regulations found within this Chapter are not subject to "relief" through the Del Mar Variance process. Exceptions to, or relief from, the requirements found within this Chapter are limited to those specified within the language of this Chapter or found within other Chapters of the Implementing Ordinances. Where there is a conflict between the language of this Chapter and other portions of the Del Mar Municipal Code, the language of this Chapter shall take precedence. 
 
30.55.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the Coastal Bluff Overlay Zone is to protect Del Mar's fragile coastal bluffs as a visual resource and avoid the risks to life and property associated with bluff failure and shoreline erosion. 
(Ord. No. 722)  
30.55.020 - Boundaries. 
Property within the Coastal Bluff Overlay Zone shall be designated by ordinance to be depicted upon the City Zone Map.  
30.55.030 - Definitions. 
A.  For purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
1.  Coastal Bluff shall mean a steep escarpment with a slope gradient equal to or greater than an average of one foot vertical to one foot horizontal and a vertical rise of 15 feet or more, and which is located in an area that is periodically subject to ocean wave action. 
2.  Coastal Bluff Top shall mean the top edge of a coastal bluff as delineated using the following criteria: 
a.  In cases where the coastal bluff involves a series of stepped vertical and horizontal planes, the bluff top shall be considered to start at the seaward edge of the topmost riser of the vertical plane of the coastal bluff. 
b.  In cases where the coastal bluff edge is composed of a continuous, rather than stepped, downward slope, the bluff top shall be considered to start at that point nearest the bluff, seaward of which the downward gradient of the land surface increases more or less continuously at an angle which is more vertical than horizontal until it reaches the general gradient of the bluff. 
3.  Top Edge of Coastal Bluff shall mean the same as "Coastal Bluff Top." 
4.  Principal Structure shall mean a building or structure in which the primary use of the lot on which the building is located is being conducted. 
5.  Accessory Structure shall mean structures accessory or incidental to the principal structures on lot including, but not limited to, pools, spas, storage sheds, gazebos, and above-grade decks or patios.  
30.55.040 - Allowable Uses. 
Unless specified herein, allowable uses in the Coastal Bluff Overlay Zone shall be those uses and accessory uses allowed by the underlying zone, subject to the regulations and restrictions of the underlying zone and of this Chapter.  
30.55.050 - Accessory Uses. 
See underlying zone.  
30.55.060 - Parking Requirements. 
See Chapter 30.80.  
30.55.070 - Development Review. 
Unless otherwise exempted by this Title, no building, improvement, structure, or portion thereof shall be erected, constructed, converted, established, altered or enlarged; nor shall any lot or premises be excavated or graded for any purpose including, but not limited to, in-ground structures such as swimming pools or spas; nor shall clearance of vegetation occur until both a Conditional Use Permit and a Coastal Development Permit are obtained from the Planning Commission. In reviewing such applications for Conditional Use Permits and Coastal Development Permits, the Planning Commission shall apply the standards of review contained in this Chapter, as well as the applicable provisions of Beach Overlay Zone and the underlying zone for the property.  
30.55.080 - Setbacks from Coastal Bluffs. 
A.  Unless otherwise specified herein, all new or redeveloped principal or accessory structures, including new supporting foundations or supports for existing structures, shall be set back a minimum of 40 feet from the top edge of the coastal bluff as defined in this Chapter. 
B.  All new fences, windscreens, and benches shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from the top edge of the coastal bluff as defined in this Chapter. All such improvements, when providing less than the 40 foot coastal bluff top setback otherwise required in this Chapter, shall be constructed primarily above grade using light-weight materials and without the use of grading and/or continuous foundation components. 
C.  No grading shall be allowed within 40 feet of the top edge of a coastal bluff. 
D.  No grading or construction activities shall be allowed on the face of a coastal bluff unless approved as part of a Shoreline Protection Permit or Setback Seawall Permit issued in accordance with the provisions of this Title and when the Planning Commission or City Council, as the authorized review body for the project, makes a finding that the proposed grading has been minimized to the extent feasible to implement the authorized shoreline protection.  
30.55.090 - Application Submittals. 
A.  Applications for development of property which includes or lies in proximity to coastal bluffs as defined in this Chapter, shall include topographic maps, as necessary, to delineate the location of all coastal bluffs located on site or off site in proximity to the development proposal. Said maps shall indicate the alignment of the top edges of such coastal bluffs as defined in this Chapter. Maps required by this Section shall be of a scale not less than 1" equals 100' and shall delineate the topography of the site in two-foot contour intervals. 
B.  All applications for projects involving new construction on properties containing coastal bluffs shall be accompanied by a geotechnical report addressing: 1) existing conditions; 2) the suitability of the site for the proposed construction; and 3) the potential of the proposed development to affect bluff stability over a 70-year life span of the project; 4) the potential future need for shoreline protection during an expected 70-year life span of the project; 5) an analysis of bluff retreat and coastal stability for the project site, according to accepted professional standards; 6) an analysis of the potential effects on bluff stability of rising sea levels, using latest scientific information; 7) an analysis of the potential effects of past and projected El Nino events on bluff stability; and 8) an analysis of whether the affected section of coastline is under a process of retreat. The report shall also include recommended mitigation measures as they relate to avoidance of risks and preservation of fragile bluff systems. In the event that a submitted report recommends a coastal bluff top setback of a greater distance than otherwise minimally required in this Chapter, the greater distance shall be provided. In addition, for new development, the applicant shall acknowledge a waiver of all rights to future protective devices for the new development through recordation of a deed restriction as a condition of permit approval. 
C.  At the discretion of the Planning Director, the applicant may be required to provide funding for an independent, third party analysis of the information provided by the applicant pursuant to the application submittal requirements of this Section. The purpose of said third-party analysis is to ensure the project's consistency with the standards of review contained in this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 733)  
30.55.100 - Grading Methodology and Practice. 
A.  In addition to the other provisions of the Del Mar Municipal Code, projects located within the Coastal Bluff Overlay Zone shall be subject to the following provisions: 
1.  All projects involving grading shall be subject to the submittal of an erosion and sedimentation control plan. Said plan shall ensure that all drainage from the impervious surfaces of the site will be collected and appropriately discharged in a manner which will prevent drainage and/or erosion related damage to the coastal bluff or any other properties or improvements in the vicinity. In addition, the plan shall include the provision of drainage facilities to convey all drainage away from any coastal bluff face and, where available, into existing developed storm drain systems capable of handling all anticipated drainage flows associated with the proposed project. Where an existing storm drain system is not available, the plan shall provide that drainage will be conveyed to a clearly defined, legal natural drainage course which can be shown to have adequate capacity to handle all required drainage flows without adverse impact to coastal bluffs. All designs and plans for drainage improvements shall be prepared by a licensed civil engineer and shall be subject to the review and approval of the City Engineer. 
2.  All projects requiring a Conditional Use Permit and a Coastal Development Permit pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter shall be subject to the submittal of a detailed landscape plan. Said plan shall ensure that native and other drought-tolerant plant species will be utilized in a manner that will minimize irrigation requirements and reduce the potential of slide hazards due to over watering of the bluffs. Said plan will ensure that no new irrigation systems will be installed within 40 feet of the edge of the coastal bluff top and that any existing irrigation systems located within said 40 foot bluff top setback will be removed as part of project implementation. 
3.  All projects involving grading shall be subject to the submittal of an erosion and sedimentation control plan. Said plan shall ensure that the project will not result in an increase in peak runoff from the site over the greatest discharge expected during a ten-year, six-hour frequency storm. Runoff control shall be accomplished by a variety of measures including, but not limited to, temporary and/or permanent on-site catchment basins, detention basins, siltation traps, energy dissipaters and the installation of landscape material. The required erosion and sedimentation control plan and any proposals to increase flows shall be subject to review and approval of the City Engineer. 
4.  All temporary erosion control measures proposed or required pursuant to the provisions of this Section including berms, interceptor ditches, sandbagging, hay bales, filtered inlets, debris basins, silt traps, or other similar measures shall be installed prior to the commencement of grading in the areas for which the erosion control measures are intended. 
5.  For projects involving a total of more than 25 cubic yards of cut and/or fill grading, no grading shall occur during the rainy season, identified for purposes of this Chapter as the period from November 15th to March 31st. 
6.  In addition to other erosion control measures required pursuant to this Chapter, all graded slopes shall be stabilized prior to the November 15th onset of the rainy season through the provision of vegetative erosion control. Vegetative erosion control may be achieved through measures such as: landscape planting, seeding, mulching, fertilization, and irrigation. The installation of vegetative erosion control shall occur with sufficient time to achieve landscape coverage prior to the November 15th start of the rainy season. 
7.  All permits shall be subject to the submittal of a polluted runoff control plan. The required plan shall incorporate the use of structural and non-structural Best Management Practices (BMPs), to the extent necessary, to minimize the discharge of pollutants carried by runoff from urban development into surface water drainage, and to maintain post-development peak runoff rate and average volume at levels similar to pre-development levels. The plan shall include, but not be limited to the following Best Management Practices (BMPs), as applicable: silt traps, catch basins, oil/grit separators, street sweeping and cleaning program, low-maintenance landscape and pesticide management plan, solid waste management and public education program. Post-construction structural BMPs (or suites of BMPs) should be designed to treat, infiltrate or filter storm water runoff from each storm, up to and including the 85 th percentile, 24-hour storm event for volume-based BMPs, and/or the 85 th percentile, one-hour storm event, with an appropriate safety factor, for flow-based BMPs. The plan shall include a monitoring component to ensure long-term maintenance of BMPs as relevant, and to allow for continued evaluation of the effectiveness of the polluted runoff control plan in meeting the goals of LUP regarding the protection and enhancement of sensitive resources. 
(Ord. No. 733)  
30.55.110 - Maintenance of Drainage and Erosion Control Measures. 
A.  Where the installation of erosion and/or drainage control measures is required pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, the responsibility for maintenance of such measures shall rest with the applicant unless such responsibility is assumed by another agency or party found acceptable by the Planning Director. 
B.  The responsibility for maintenance of drainage and erosion control measures and a detailed maintenance program shall be included in an agreement(s) recorded against the deed for the property. The arrangements shall provide for the on-going repair and maintenance of approved control measures to ensure continued effective erosion/drainage control.  
30.55.120 - Retained Open Space/Conditions of Development. 
A.  Areas to be retained in their natural state pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter shall be subject to conditions to ensure the protection of the designated area(s) from future encroachment, disturbance, or degradation. Said conditions shall include the recordation of an open space deed restriction, conservation easement, or open space easement to ensure protection of the designated area and to serve notice to the property owner, subsequent owners, or interested parties of the restrictions in effect on such property.  
30.55.130 - Additional Development Standards for Subdivisions. 
A.  No subdivision shall be approved unless the Planning Commission makes a finding that the proposed design of the subdivision and its improvements will be consistent with the criteria of this Chapter. Specifically, no subdivision shall be approved for creation of a lot(s) which would be incapable of either: 1) supporting the construction of a use allowed within the underlying zone and of supporting such use without the installation or construction of a shoreline protective device; 2) supporting such construction with provision of the applicable Coastal Bluff Top setbacks and other resource protection measures required pursuant to this Chapter; or 3) supporting such use without the installation or construction of a bluff or shoreline protective device. As a condition of recording the subdivision, a deed restriction shall be placed on all proposed bluff top parcels, which waives all rights to future protective devices for new development. In reviewing the subdivision proposal, the Planning Commission shall take into consideration, the probable impacts that the project, including subsequent development on the lot(s), will have on preservation of coastal bluffs and the avoidance of hazards.  
Chapter 30.56 - FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY ZONE[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— This Chapter of the Municipal Code forms a portion of the City of Del Mar Local Coastal Program Implementing Ordinances. The regulations found within this Chapter are not subject to "relief" through the Del Mar Variance process. Exceptions to, or relief from, the requirements found within this Chapter are limited to those specified within the language of this Chapter or found within other Chapters of the Implementing Ordinances. Where there is a conflict between the language of this Chapter and other portions of the Del Mar Municipal Code, the language of this Chapter shall take precedence. 
 
30.56.010 - Purpose. 
This overlay zone is composed of those properties located within the 100-year floodplains of the San Dieguito River and the Los Penasquitos Lagoon which have been identified by the Federal Insurance Administration as being subject to periodic inundation due to flooding. The purpose of the regulations of this Chapter is to promote the public health, safety and general welfare by ensuring that new development, as defined herein, is appropriately sited and constructed so as to avoid hazards to those who will occupy the development; and to avoid damage or hazards to the surrounding area. These regulations are also intended to ensure that development within the Floodplain Overlay Zone will not obstruct flood flow; will be designed to reduce the need for construction of flood control facilities that would be required if unregulated development were to occur; and to minimize the cost of flood insurance to Del Mar residents. 
In order to accomplish its purposes, this Chapter includes regulations that prohibit development that would result in increases in erosion or flood levels through the inappropriate placement of fill or barriers. The Chapter also includes regulations to prohibit or restrict uses, which would otherwise be incompatible with flood prone areas. 
(Ord. No. 516; Ord. No. 722)  
30.56.020 - Boundaries. 
A.  Property within the Floodplain Overlay Zone shall be designated by ordinance to be depicted upon the City Zone Map. 
B.  Real Property within the Floodplain Overlay (FPO) Zone shall be further designated by ordinance on the City Zone Map as being within: 
1.  A special flood hazard area identified by the Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in the San Diego County and incorporated areas Flood Insurance Study (FIS), dated June 16, 1999, and accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), dated June 16, 1999, and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this Chapter. This FIS and attendant mapping are the minimum area of applicability for this Chapter and may be supplemented by studies for other areas that allow implementation of this Chapter and are recommended to the City Council by the Floodplain Administrator. The FIS and FIRM are on file in the City of Del Mar.  
30.56.030 - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this Chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this Chapter its most reasonable application. 
A.  Area of Shallow Flooding shall mean an area designated as AO Zone on the Flood Insurance Rate Map. Areas of shallow flooding include one or more of the following characteristics: 
1.  The base flood depths range from one to three feet; 
2.  A clearly defined channel does not exist; 
3.  The path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and/or 
4.  A velocity flow may be evident. 
B.  Area of Special Flood Hazard shall mean an area having special flood or flood-related erosion hazards, and which are designated on an FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, AO, A 1-30, AE, A99, AH, V1-30, VE, or V. 
C.  Base Flood shall mean a flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any year. "Base Flood" shall mean the same as "100-year Flood." 
D.  For the purposes of this Chapter, Basement shall mean any area of a building having its floor below ground level on all sides. 
E.  Breakaway Wall shall mean any wall, whether solid or lattice, and whether constructed of concrete, masonry, wood, metal, plastic or any other suitable building material which is not part of the structural support of the building and which is designed to break away under abnormally high tides or wave action without causing damage to the structural integrity of the building on which they are used or any buildings to which they might be carried by flood waters. A breakaway wall shall have a design-safe loading resistance of not less than ten and no more than twenty pounds per square foot. Use of breakaway walls must be certified by a registered engineer or architect and shall meet the following conditions: 
1.  Breakaway wall collapse shall result from a water load less than that which would occur during the base flood; and 
2.  The elevated portion of the building shall not incur any structural damage due to the effects of winds and water loads acting simultaneously during a 100-year event. 
F.  Coastal High Hazard Area shall mean an area of special flood hazard extending from offshore to any area subject to high velocity wave action from storms or seismic forces. Such areas are subject to high velocity waters, including coastal and tidal inundation or tsunamis. Coastal High Hazard Areas are designated on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) as being in Zone V1-30, VE or V. 
G.  Development shall mean any man-made change to real property including, without limitation, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling, mining, dredging, or storage of materials. 
H.  Director shall mean the Director of Planning and Community Development. The Director shall serve as the City's Floodplain Administrator to administer and enforce the Floodplain management regulations of this Chapter. 
I.  Encroachment shall mean the advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain that may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain. 
J.  Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) shall mean the official map prepared for the City of Del Mar by the Federal Insurance Agency and adopted, along with amendments thereto, by resolution of the City Council, delineating the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
K.  Flood Insurance Study shall mean the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes flood profiles, the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), and Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
L.  Floodplain or Flood-prone area shall mean any land susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. 
M.  Floodproofing shall mean any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes or adjustments to nonresidential structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved property and that are designed so that the area of the structure below the base flood level is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water. 
N.  Floodway shall mean the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to accommodate the discharge of the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. "Floodway" shall mean the same as "Regulatory Floodway." 
O.  Hardship shall mean the exceptional hardship that would result from a failure to grant the requested relief from the provisions of this Chapter. To qualify as a hardship, the proposal shall involve factors, which are exceptional, and unique to the property involved. The existence of economic or financial impacts alone shall not constitute a hardship. Inconveniences, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval or preference of neighbors likewise shall not qualify as a hardship in that each of these factors could be resolved through other means, without the granting of relief from the provisions of this Chapter even if such alternatives are more expensive or would require the property owner to pursue a different project. 
P.  Hazard Mitigation Plan shall mean a plan, which incorporates a process whereby the potential of future loss due to flooding can be minimized through planning, and implementation of floodplain management community-wide. 
Q.  Highest Adjacent Grade shall mean the highest natural elevation of the ground surface adjacent to the wall(s) of a structure prior to construction. 
R.  Lowest Floor shall mean the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) of a structure. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this Chapter. 
S.  Manufactured Home shall mean a building, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For floodplain management purposes, the term "manufactured home" also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days but does not include Recreational Vehicles as defined in this Chapter. 
T.  Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision shall mean a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more lots to be used for manufactured homes. 
U.  Mean Sea Level shall mean the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on the City's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced. 
V.  New Construction shall mean structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this Chapter derives. 
W.  Obstruction shall mean and shall include any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material, along, across or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard, or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, which due to its location, may alter its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or alter its likelihood of being carried downstream. 
X.  One-hundred Year Flood. See "Base Flood." 
AA.  Recreational Vehicle shall mean a vehicle, which is: 
1.  Built on a single chassis; 
2.  Four hundred square feet or less in size; 
3.  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light vehicle truck; and 
4.  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as a temporary living quarters for recreational camping or travel. 
BB.  Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA) shall mean an area having special flood, mudslide or flood related erosion hazards and which is shown on an FHMB or FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, A99, AH, AE, M, V1-V-30 or V. 
CC.  Start of Construction shall mean the date on which a valid building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footing, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction shall not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor shall it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units which are not part of the main structure. 
DD.  Structure shall mean a walled and roofed building. The term "structure" shall also include, a manufactured home that is principally above ground and which contains a gas or liquid storage tank. 
EE.  Substantial Damage shall mean damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred, as determined by the Director. 
FF.  Substantial Improvement. 
1.  Substantial Improvement shall mean any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, when, pursuant to a determination by the Director, the cost of the repair, reconstruction or improvement equals or exceeds fifty percent of the market value of the structure either: 
a.  Before the improvement or repair is started, or 
b.  If the structure has been damaged 50 percent or more and is being restored, as it existed before the damage occurred. 
2.  For purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. 
3.  The term "Substantial Improvement" does not however, include either: 
a.  Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, or 
b.  Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places. 
GG.  Variance shall mean a grant of relief from the requirements of this Chapter, which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this Chapter. 
HH.  Water surface elevation shall mean the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, (or other datum, where specified) of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
II.  Watercourse shall mean a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur.  
30.56.040 - Allowed Uses. 
The following uses are allowed within the Floodplain Overlay Zone, subject to the receipt of a Floodplain Development Permit and all other permits required by this Title. 
A.  Any use permitted in the underlying zone or zones, subject to the same conditions and restrictions applicable to such underlying zone or zones. 
B.  Any irrigation, drainage or flood control structure or facility, and/or any public facility or improvement necessary for maintaining a lagoon, waterway or floodway system.  
30.56.045 - Floodplain Development Permit Required. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the implementation of a project that involves new construction or the substantial improvement to an existing structure without first having obtained a Floodplain Development Permit, when such Permit is required pursuant to this Chapter. 
B.  No building permit or other development permits shall be issued relating to a structure for which a Floodplain Development Permit is required until the Floodplain Development Permit is obtained.  
30.56.050 - Floodplain Development Permit Procedure. 
A.  An application for a Floodplain Development Permit shall be submitted to the Director on forms provided by the City together with an application fee set by City Council resolution. 
B.  The application material shall include data and certifications prepared by a registered engineer as necessary to provide supporting calculations and studies for all information required on the application. The application material shall include, but not be limited to: 
1.  The elevation, expressed in relation to NGVD, of all floors (including basements) of all proposed and existing structures of the project site; 
2.  The proposed elevation, expressed in relation to NGVD, of all proposed floodproofing; and 
3.  A description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development. 
C.  Upon submission of a complete application and payment of the application fee, the Director shall provide notice of the filed application, with members of the public given the opportunity to review the application at City Hall, and the opportunity to submit written information to the Director. Notice shall be provided: 
1.  In accordance with the noticing requirements for public hearings stated in this Title, for discretionary permit applications; 
2.  Through notification to adjacent local agencies and the applicable State coordinating agencies, and through submitting evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency and the Federal Insurance Administration. 
D.  A determination on the application shall be made by the Issuing Authority as set forth below: 
1.  For applications, which have been deemed to be in compliance with all of the applicable provisions of this Chapter, the Director of Planning and Community Development shall be the Issuing Authority for the Floodplain Development Permit. 
2.  For applications which do not meet one or more of the applicable provisions of this Chapter and for which relief from such provisions is requested by the applicant, the Planning Commission shall be the Issuing Authority for the Floodplain Development Permit. 
E.  The Issuing Authority for the Floodplain Development Permit shall review the application to ensure that all other required state and federal permits are obtained, and shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny the application based upon the regulations of this Chapter. The Issuing Authority may impose conditions in the permit as necessary and or authorized to ensure the project's continued compliance with the provisions of this Chapter. 
F.  For a period of at least five years following the date of submittal of a Floodplain Development Permit application, the Director shall maintain a record of all information submitted as part of the application, including the certifications of all proposed finished floor elevations and elevations of floodproofing required pursuant to this Chapter. 
G.  Upon a determination on the application by the Issuing Authority, the Director shall post a notice of determination at City Hall. Such Notice shall provide that the determination will be final in ten days unless an appeal to the City Council is filed in accordance with the provisions of this Code.  
30.56.060 - General Grounds for Application Approval/Denial. 
The application for a Floodplain Development Permit shall be approved if the Issuing Authority makes a finding that the proposal meets and is consistent with each of the applicable findings shown below. The failure of the proposal to meet and be consistent with each of the applicable findings shown below shall be grounds for denial of the application. Such denial shall be supported by written findings of fact by the Issuing Authority as to how the application fails to meet one or more of the following findings: 
The proposed new construction or substantial improvement: 
A.  Will not violate the building or zoning regulations of the City. 
B.  Will be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. 
C.  Will be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
D.  Will use methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
E.  Will involve a residential structure in an A, AE or AH Zone, and will have the lowest floor (including basement) of such structure elevated at or above the base flood elevation. 
F.  Will involve a manufactured home that will be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor is at or above the base flood elevation and is securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system. 
G.  Will involve a nonresidential structure and will have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood level or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities will be floodproofed below the base flood level to the extent that the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy, as certified by a registered professional engineer or architect. 
H.  Will be in an area of shallow flooding (Zone AO on the community's FIRM) and will have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated at or above the depth number indicated on the most current FIRM; or if there is no depth number on the most current FIRM, the structure will be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. As an alternative, nonresidential structures, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, may be floodproofed to that level as specified in this Chapter. 
I.  Will be in Zones AO and AH on the FIRM and will have adequate drainage paths around structures situated on sloping ground, to guide floodwaters around and away from said structures. 
J.  Will involve the floodproofing of a nonresidential structure using a design and/or methods of construction that are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for floodproofing or which will extend the floodproofing to an elevation which is required pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter. 
K.  Will have all new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and discharges from the system into flood waters. 
L.  Will have on-site waste disposal systems located to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them, during flooding. 
M.  Will have all electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
N.  Will have all fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters with designs certified by a registered professional engineer or architect; or will have at least two openings no more than one foot above grade with a total net area of at least one square inch per square foot of flooded area. 
O.  Will be located in an area that is reasonably safe from flooding. 
P.  Will not adversely affect the carrying capacity of areas where base flood elevations have been determined but a floodway has not been established. For purposes of this Section, "adversely affects" shall mean that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will increase the water surface elevation of the base flood elevation more than one foot at any point. 
Q.  Will not be sited and designed so as to require the construction or installation of flood protective works.  
30.56.070 - Additional Grounds for Application Approval/Denial (Coastal High Hazard). 
An application for a Floodplain Development Permit for a project located in an area designated as being within the Coastal High Hazard Sub-zone shall be approved if the Issuing Authority makes a finding that the proposal meets and is consistent with each of the applicable findings shown below. The failure of the proposal to meet and be consistent with each of the applicable findings shown below shall be grounds for denial of the application. Such finding for denial shall be supported by written findings of fact by the Issuing Authority as to how the application fails to meet one or more of the following findings: 
A.  The new construction or substantial improvement will not violate provisions of this or other sections of this Chapter, including those regarding General Grounds for Application Denial; 
B.  The new construction or substantial improvement will be located landward of the reach of mean high tide; 
C.  The new construction or substantial improvement will not involve the use of fill for structural support of buildings; 
D.  The new construction or substantial improvement will be elevated on pilings or columns such that: 
1.  The bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the lowest floor (excluding pilings or columns) is elevated at or above the base flood elevation; or 
2.  The pile or column foundation and the attached structure is anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement due to the effect of wind and water loads having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, acting simultaneously on all building components. 
E.  The new construction or substantial improvement will have the space below the lowest floor free of obstruction or constructed with non-supporting breakaway walls, open wood lattice work or insect screening intended to collapse under wind and water load without causing collapse, displacement or other structural damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system; or such enclosed space is not useable for other than parking of vehicles, building access, or storage.  
30.56.080 - Relief from Regulations. 
An application for a Floodplain Development Permit may include a request for relief from one or more of the regulations contained in this Chapter. The Issuing Authority for the Permit may approve the request only upon making each of the following written findings of fact that: 
A.  The failure to grant the request would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant or to adjacent properties; 
B.  The granting of the request will not: 
1.  Result in increased flood heights either on the project site or on surrounding properties; 
2.  Result in additional threats to public safety; 
3.  Result in extraordinary public expense; 
4.  Create a public or private nuisance; 
5.  Cause fraud on or victimization of the public; or 
6.  Conflict with other City regulations; and 
C.  The deviation from the requirements of the Chapter is the minimum necessary to afford relief, considering the flood hazard associated with the site.  
30.56.082 - Acknowledgment of Hazard/Waiver of Liability for Projects Approved with Relief from Chapter. 
The approval of a project which involves relief from the provisions of this Code shall be conditioned to require that the applicant acknowledges that the construction of the project in the manner proposed and approved may result in increased premium rates for flood insurance and that such construction increases risks to life and property. The acknowledgment shall be accompanied by a Waiver of Liability, holding the City harmless from damages, which may result from project implementation. The Acknowledgment and Waiver shall be provided in a covenant to be recorded against the deed for the property and to run with the land. 
Any applicant to whom a variance relief from the provisions of this Chapter is granted shall provide a written affidavit acknowledging that implementation of a project to construct a structure below the base flood level elevation may result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 worth of coverage. A copy of the affidavit notice shall be recorded against the deed for the property by the Floodplain Administrator in the Office of the County Recorder. The recorded affidavit shall run with the land so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel. The covenant shall be of a form and content acceptable to the Director of Planning and Community Development. 
The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of action on all applications for a Floodplain Development Permit, all variance actions, including justification for actions that involve authorization for relief from the provisions of this Chapter. All actions that involve authorization for relief from the provisions of this Chapter shall be reported in the City's biennial report submitted to the Federal Insurance Administration of the Federal Emergency Management Agency.  
30.56.090 - Additional Regulations within the Area of Special Flood Hazard. 
The following restrictions shall apply for properties located in areas designated as being located within a Special Flood Hazard Area pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter. 
A.  It shall be prohibited to store or process materials that, in a time of flooding, may become buoyant, flammable, explosive, or could be injurious to human, animal or plant life. 
B.  The storage of other material or equipment may be allowed if the storage area will not be subject to major damage by floods and if the stored material is firmly anchored to prevent flotation or is readily removable from the area within the time available after flood warning.  
30.56.100 - Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. 
The standards in this Chapter are reasonable for regulatory purposes and are based on scientific and engineering considerations largely determined by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. Floods may occur which result in damage. This Chapter is not intended to imply that development in accordance with these standards is immune from flood damage or that development on properties outside the areas designated as Special Flood Hazards, Areas of Mudslide (i.e., mudflow) will continually be free from flooding or flood damages. In including and enforcing the provisions of this Chapter, the City, including any officer or employee thereof, shall not assume liability for any flood damages that result from reliance on this Chapter or from any decision or action on a permit application lawfully made thereunder.  
Chapter 30.58 - HISTORIC PRESERVATION OVERLAY ZONE (HP-OZ) 
 
30.58.010 - Purpose. 
A.  The purpose of the Historic Preservation (HP) Overlay Zone is designed to protect, for the benefit of present and future generations, the architectural and historic integrity of certain historically significant properties located within the City of Del Mar, as may be so designated by the City Council pursuant to this Code. 
B.  It is the further intent of this overlay zone to provide for the long-term continued preservation of such designated historic landmark properties by providing for the architectural control of such properties, and by providing for flexible designation of permitted uses more befitting the economic viability of the historic structures occupying said properties than may otherwise exist under the permitted use provisions of the underlying zone.  
30.58.020 - Boundaries. 
Property within the HP Overlay Zone shall be designated by ordinance to be depicted upon the City zone map. (Zoning map boundaries modified per Ord. 642)  
30.58.030 - Allowable Uses. 
Allowable uses in the Historic Preservation (HP) Overlay Zone shall be those allowed by the underlying zone, subject to the regula-tions and restrictions of the underlying zone; except that, following public hearing, the City Council may permit use of a designated historic landmark property other than those uses permitted by the underlying zone, subject to such conditions and restrictions as the City Council deems appropriate. Where no specific use, or conditions or restrictions thereto have been so designated, the permitted uses and development criteria of the underlying zone shall apply.  
30.58.040 - Reserved.  
30.58.050 - Reserved.  
30.58.060 - Design Review. 
Within the HP Overlay Zone, no building, improvement, structure or portion thereof, shall be erected, constructed, demolished, relocated, converted, altered or enlarged, nor shall any lot or premises be excavated or graded unless approved by the Design Review Board in accordance with this Code and the following: 
A.  That all development demolitions, relocations, conversions, or other alterations occurring on designated historic landmark properties shall be in keeping with the architectural style and scale characterizing the period of history in which the structure was built, and shall be in keeping with the landscaping and architectural features which caused the property to be so designated as a historic landmark. 
B.  Restoration efforts utilizing forms, materials, textures, colors, and landscape features common to the period of history when the designated landmark was constructed shall be encouraged. Where necessary, alternative building regulations shall be applied pursuant to Part 2 of Title 24 of the California Administrative Code, entitled "The Historical Building Code." 
C.  Demolition and/or significant diminution of designated historic landmarks shall be permitted only if there are no viable alternatives for saving the landmark, and such alternatives have been fully addressed in an Environmental Impact Report filed pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act.  
30.58.080 - Special Regulations. 
Following review and recommendation by the Planning Commission and public hearings as are required for amendments to this Chapter, the City Council may designate any property located anywhere within the corporate limits of the City to be a designated historic landmark property, provided, however, that for each such designated landmark, specific findings are made that the designated property contains artifacts of archaeological or paleontological importance and/or structure(s) of historic significance. For purposes of this Section, historic significance shall mean any structure and/or use of a property which possesses a unique architect-ural style typifying a period of California or Del Mar history; any property and/or structure which is listed on a site or federal register of historic places; any property and/or structure which marks or represents a specific historic event; and/or any property and/or structure which typifies the historic character of a specific area of the City.  
Chapter 30.60 - OPEN SPACE OVERLAY ZONE (OS-OZ) 
 
30.60.010 - Purpose. 
The Open Space (OS) Overlay Zone is designed to protect open space areas of community-wide residents, define Del Mar as a distinct and separate community, ensure an atmosphere of openness, and preserve scenic vistas and particularly unique natural features in specific neighborhoods. This overlay zone is applied to all parcels shown in the Open Space Element of the adopted Community Plan, and as may be amended thereto: The locations and designations of properties subject to open space sensitivities as described on pages 34 through 41 of said plan, as well as the development criteria to preserve such open space character/sensitivities described on said pages, shall be made part of this Chapter as if the matters and information set forth by such pages of the Community Plan were all fully described herein.  
30.60.020 - Boundaries. 
Property within the OS Overlay Zone shall be designated by ordinance to be depicted upon the City zone map.  
30.60.030 - Allowable Uses. 
Allowable uses in the Open Space (OS) Overlay Zone shall be those allowed by the underlying zone, subject to the regulations and restrictions of the underlying zone, to the open space development criteria for each parcel so designated in the adopted Community Plan or any amendment thereto.  
30.60.040 - Reserved.  
30.60.050 - Reserved.  
30.60.060 - Reserved.  
30.60.070 - Reserved.  
30.60.080 - Special Regulations. 
A.  Unless otherwise exempted by this Chapter, no building, improvement, structure, or portion thereof shall be erected, constructed, converted, established, altered or enlarged, nor shall any lot or premises be excavated or graded unless a Conditional Use Permit is first obtained in accordance with the procedures set forth in this Code. Said Conditional Use Permit shall include, but not be limited to, provisions to assureconformity with the development criteria applicable to the property as described in the Open Space Element of the adopted Community Plan. If said element of the Community Plan so designates, the Planning Commission shall stay action on the Conditional Use Permit for a period of time necessary to enable residents of the area to attempt to form an assessment district for the purchase of such area. In no event shall the stay of action for such acquisition purposes exceed a one-year period from the time of filing the Conditional Use Permit application. 
B.  A project involving the minor construction alteration, or remodeling of the exterior of a structure shall not be subject to the receipt of a Conditional Use Permit, provided: 
1.  The proposed project involves the modification of an existing structure and the outer dimensions of such structure will not be extended by more than three feet; 
2.  The project conforms with the development criteria applicable to the property as described in the Open Space Element of the adopted Community Plan; and 
3.  The project receives all required design review approvals. 
(Ord. No. 643)  
Chapter 30.61 - PUBLIC ACCESS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Note— This Chapter of the Municipal Code forms a portion of the City of Del Mar Local Coastal Program Implementing Ordinances. The regulations found within this Chapter are not subject to "relief" through the Del Mar Variance process. Exceptions to, or relief from, the requirements found within this Chapter are limited to those specified within the language of this Chapter or found within other Chapters of the Implementing Ordinances. Where there is a conflict between the language of this Chapter and other portions of the Del Mar Municipal Code, the language of this Chapter shall take precedence. 
 
30.61.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Chapter is to ensure that physical access is provided to coastal recreation areas for the general public without creating a public safety concern, overburdening the City's public improvements, degrading the City's natural resources, or causing substantial adverse impacts to adjacent private properties. 
(Ord. No. 722)  
30.61.020 - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this Chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this Chapter its most reasonable application. 
A.  Coastal Bluff Top Access shall mean access provided for use by the general public along a coastal bluff top for the purpose of coastal viewing. 
B.  Lateral Public Access shall mean access provided for use by the general public along the water's edge of an ocean, lagoon, or river course. 
C.  New Development shall mean the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation, or enlargement of any structure; the division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels; and/or any excavation or placement of fill for which a permit is required pursuant to the provisions of the Del Mar Municipal Code. 
D.  Vertical Public Access shall mean access provided for use by the general public as a connection by which to travel from a public roadway, trail, or public use area to the water's edge of an ocean, lagoon, river course, or to an established lateral public access.  
30.61.030 - Provision of Public Access Required. 
A.  Unless otherwise specified herein, an application for a Coastal Development Permit in the areas identified below shall be subject to the dedication of a public access easement(s) in the manner and form prescribed in this Chapter: 
1.  New development on any parcel or location identified in the City of Del Mar Local Coastal Program Land Use Plan as containing an historically used or suitable informal public access pathway. 
2.  New development on any site where there is substantial evidence of a public right of access to the sea or public tidelands which has been acquired through use or by legislative authorization. 
3.  New development on any site where a trail, bluff top access, or other recreational access is necessary to mitigate the impact of the development on existing public access opportunities. 
4.  New development in locations where it has been determined that a trail access is required to link recreational areas to each other or to the sea. 
B.  Where the dedication of a public access easement(s) is required pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, the required Coastal Development Permit shall also be conditioned for the provision of public access improvements within the easement area. Such improvements shall be designed and constructed in the manner prescribed by this Chapter. 
C.  Public access improvements constructed or installed within access easements (e.g., walkways, paved paths, boardwalks, etc.) shall be no wider than deemed necessary to accommodate the numbers and types of users that can reasonably be expected. The width of facilities may vary for ramps or paved walkways depending on site factors. The determination of the minimum width necessary for such access improvements shall rest with the Director of Planning and Community Development using the standards contained within this Chapter.  
30.61.040 - Exceptions to the Requirement for the Provision of Public Access. 
A.  The requirement for the provision of public access easements or improvements thereto shall not apply where the review of the Coastal Development Permit required by this Title establishes the fact that the development for which the application has been filed will not adversely affect or reduce, either individually or cumulatively, the ability of the public to reach and use public tidelands, coastal bluffs, or coastal resources. 
B.  The requirement for the provision of public access easements or improvements shall also not apply where: 
1.  The project does not qualify as "new development" pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter. 
2.  The review of the Coastal Development Permit required by this Title results in a written finding that: 
a.  Public access would interfere with public safety or military security needs. 
b.  Public access would be inconsistent with the protection of fragile coastal resources. 
c.  Adequate opportunities for public access already exist at nearby facilities.  
30.61.050 - Lateral Public Access. 
A.  Where required pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, the alignment of a lateral public access easement and the improvements required therein, shall be designed to ensure that the access way, once implemented, will provide the public with the permanent right of lateral public access and passive recreational use along the shoreline or public tideland as applicable. 
B.  Active recreational use within a lateral public access easement may be appropriate in cases where the proposed development is determined to be especially burdensome on existing opportunities for lateral public access. Examples of cases involving especially burdensome impacts on opportunities for lateral public access include: 
1.  The proposed development severely impacts existing public recreational use of the shoreline. 
2.  The proposed development is not a visitor-serving recreational facility. 
3.  There is a history of active public use of the site. 
4.  Active recreational uses would be consistent with the use of the proposed project. 
5.  Such uses would not significantly interfere with the privacy of residential uses on or adjacent to the property. 
C.  Lateral access easements shall be legally conveyed and described as enumerated in this Chapter.  
30.61.060 - Vertical Public Access. 
A.  Minimum requirements. Where required pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, the alignment of the vertical public access easement and the improvements required therein, shall be designed to ensure that the access way, once implemented, will provide the public with the permanent right of vertical public access to the water's edge (shoreline) of an ocean, lagoon, tidelands, river course, or to an established lateral public access, as applicable. 
B.  A requirement to provide vertical access as a condition of approval of a Coastal Development Permit (or other authorization to proceed with development) shall provide the public with the permanent right of vertical access which shall be limited to the public right of passive recreational use. 
C.  Each vertical access way shall extend from the public road to the shoreline and shall be legally described as required in this Chapter. 
D.  Unless constrained due to factors beyond the applicant's control, as determined by the Issuing Authority for the Coastal Development Permit, vertical access easements shall be a minimum of ten feet in width, with the access easement sited and aligned so as to provide a minimum of ten feet between the access way and the closest residence. Examples of factors which may be deemed "beyond the control of the applicant" shall include, but not be limited to, topographical constraints or the existence of a structure(s) which is non-conforming in regard to the property setbacks required by this Title. 
E.  Vertical access easements shall be legally conveyed and described as enumerated in this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 733)  
30.61.070 - Coastal Bluff Top Access. 
A.  Minimum requirements. Where required pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, the alignment of a coastal bluff top public access easement and the improvements required therein shall be designed to ensure that the access way, once implemented, will provide the public with the permanent right of public access to and/or along the coastal bluff top. 
B.  Coastal bluff top accesses shall be limited to passive coastal viewing purposes only. 
C.  The design and alignment of required coastal bluff top access ways shall be as follows: 
1.  Unless constrained due to factors beyond the applicant's control, as determined by the Issuing Authority for a Coastal Development Permit, access easements to and/or along a coastal bluff top shall be a minimum of ten feet in width, with the access easement sited and aligned so as to provide a minimum of ten feet between the access way and the closest residence. Examples of factors which may be deemed "beyond the control of the applicant" shall include, but not be limited to, topographical constraints or the existence of a structure(s) which is non-conforming in regard to the property setbacks required by this Title. 
2.  Lateral Access easements shall extend landward in a parallel alignment along the coastal bluff top starting from a point five feet landward from the bluff top. 
3.  The improvements within the required access shall include measures necessary to prevent uncontrolled access to the adjacent coastal bluff face. 
D.  Coastal bluff top access easements shall be legally conveyed and described as enumerated in this Chapter.  
30.61.080 - Public Access Improvements—Design and Time-Use Constraints. 
The design of any public access easement or improvement required pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter shall include a consideration of the characteristics of the area in which the access would be located, including the existence of sensitive habitat or fragile topographic features. Consideration shall also be given to the protection of the privacy of adjacent residential uses. These factors may, in some cases, warrant a limitation on the time, place, and manner of the public access to be provided.  
30.61.090 - Protection of Historic Public Use. 
A.  New development shall be sited and designed in a manner that does not interfere with or diminish any public right of access which may have been established based on historic public use. When it is found that site constraints are so severe that siting of the access way in its historic location would significantly impair the proposed development, access may be provided in an alternative alignment and/or location on the development site. In such cases, the applicant shall provide, at a minimum, an equivalent area of public access or recreation to and along the same destination and accommodating the same type and intensity of public use as previously existed on the site. Mechanisms for guaranteeing the continued public use of the area or equivalent area shall be required in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. 
B.  The requirement for provision of an access easement or improvements therein shall not serve to extinguish or waive public prescriptive rights. 
C.  Applications for Coastal Development Permits which involve sites where there is evidence of the existence of potential prescriptive rights shall be subject to conditions to ensure that the applicant acknowledges, in writing, that the approval of the permit or the conditions attached thereto shall not be construed to constitute a waiver of any prescriptive rights which may exist on the parcel itself or on the designated easement area.  
30.61.100 - Recordation and Legal Description of Access Easements. 
A.  Access easements which are attached as conditions of approval pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter shall be described and recorded in a manner that provides the public, the property owner and the accepting agency the level of certainty as to the location of the access way and of the allowed uses therein. 
B.  An easement, which is required pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, shall be described as follows: 
1.  For lateral access: 
a.  Along the entire width of the property from the mean high tide line, or lagoon edge, to (as applicable) the toe of the bluff, the toe of the seawall, or other appropriate boundary. 
2.  For bluff top access or trail access: 
a.  Extending inland from the bluff edge or along the alignment of the access easement. 
3.  For vertical access: 
a.  Extending from the road to, as applicable, an intersecting lateral access, the shoreline or a coastal bluff top edge. 
C.  Where required pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, an access easement shall be provided in the form of a recorded irrevocable offer to dedicate the easement area to a public agency or private association as approved by the Director of Planning and Community Development. 
D.  The recorded document shall provide that the offer to dedicate shall not be used or construed to allow anyone, prior to acceptance of the dedication, to interfere with any rights of public access acquired through past use, which may have existed on the property. 
E.  The recorded document shall include legal descriptions, with metes and bounds as appropriate, of both the applicant's entire parcel and the easement area. The document shall also include a site plan, drawn to scale, showing the entire property and the easement area. 
F.  The recorded document shall include a description of the type and character of the access as specified in the conditions of approval. 
G.  Any access easement required pursuant to this Chapter shall be offered and recorded free of prior liens and any other encumbrances which would adversely affect the interest being conveyed. To ensure compliance with this requirement, the applicant shall furnish a title report for the affected property. If review of the required title report reveals an encumbrance which would adversely affect the interest being conveyed, the required easement shall be accompanied by a written, recorded subordination agreement prepared to the satisfaction of the Director of Planning and Community Development. 
H.  Any offer to dedicate an access easement shall run with the land in favor of the City of Del Mar. The easement shall be binding on all successors and assignees, and shall be irrevocable for a period of 21 years, such period running from the date of recordation. 
I.  Any offer to dedicate an access easement required pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter shall be subject to the review and written approval of the Coastal Commission's Executive Director or designee, Once recorded, a copy of the recorded Offer to Dedicate Public Access Easement shall be mailed to the closest regional office of the California Coastal Commission for filing with the Coastal Commission's Executive Director.  
30.61.110 - Access Management Plan. 
A.  Where determined appropriate in order to avoid and address potential conflicts between public access use and other uses on or immediately adjacent to the site, the requirement for provision and implementation of an Access Management Plan may be applied as a condition of approval of a Coastal Development Permit. Examples of "potential conflict" include: access in areas of sensitive habitats, agricultural resources, significant hazards, or adjoining residential neighborhoods, or military security areas. 
B.  An Access Management Plan required pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter shall be subject to review and approval by the accepting agency and the Director of Planning and Community Development. The purpose of the review is to ensure consistency with the provisions and intent of the conditions requiring public access. Review and approval of a required Access Management Plan shall occur prior to the opening of the accessway. 
C.  Where applicable, the Access Management Plan shall specify any approved management controls on the time and intensity of use or privacy buffers or requirements for maintenance of aesthetic values.  
30.61.120 - Implementation. 
Unless otherwise specified, a dedicated access way shall not be required to be opened to public use until a public agency or private association, approved in accordance with this Chapter, agrees to accept responsibility for maintenance and liability of the access way.  
30.61.130 - Required Findings. 
A.  All applications for Coastal Development Permits (whether redevelopment or new development) meeting one or more of the circumstances cited below shall be subject to written findings of fact, analysis, and conclusions addressing the appropriateness of including or omitting requirements for the provision of public access easements and improvements: 
1.  New development on any parcel or location identified in the City of Del Mar Local Coastal Program Land Use Plan as containing an historically used or suitable informal public access pathway. 
2.  New development on any site where there is substantial evidence of a public right of access to the sea or public tidelands which has been acquired through use or a public right of access through legislative authorization. 
3.  New development on any site where a trail, bluff top access, or other recreational access is necessary to mitigate the impact of the development on existing public access opportunities. 
4.  New development in locations where it has been determined that a trail access is required to link recreational areas to each other or to the sea. 
B.  The findings required herein shall address the applicable factors identified in this Chapter regarding the impact of the proposed development on existing public access opportunities and the type, alignment, and design of any public access required as a condition of approval. The findings required by this Section shall include, at a minimum: 
1.  A statement of the individual and cumulative burdens which would be placed on public access opportunities by the proposed development based on applicable factors identified in this Chapter. 
2.  An analysis based on the applicable factors identified in this Chapter of the necessity for requiring public access conditions to find the project consistent with the public access provisions of the Coastal Act. 
3.  A description of the legitimate governmental interest furthered by any access condition required. 
4.  An explanation of how the imposition of a condition to provide public access alleviates the burdens and impacts on public access, which would otherwise be created, were the development to be approved and implemented without public access requirements.  
Chapter 30.72 - BULK FLOOR AREA LIMITATIONS 
 
30.72.010 - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this Chapter to regulate the bulk of buildings by limiting the amount of bulk floor area that can be constructed upon a lot.  
30.72.020 - Bulk Floor Area Computation. 
A.  For purposes of determining compliance with the bulk floor area limitations contained in this Chapter, "bulk floor area" is the total horizontal area, expressed in square feet, of all floors below a roof. 
B.  To measure the bulk floor area of a particular project: 
1.  If there are walls around the bulk floor area, then the area is measured from the outside face of those walls. 
2.  If there are no walls around the bulk floor area, then the area under the roof is measured. 
3.  If there are walls partially around the bulk floor area, then the partially enclosed area under the roof is measured. The partially enclosed area shall be measured from the outside face of any wall or support and around the extension of an imaginary stringline(s) extending from the outside extent of each wall or support to the next wall or support closest to it. 
C.  Bulk Floor Area Excludes: 
1.  Floor area covered by open construction, such as trellis, sunscreen or lattice work, where the total square footage of the open spaces of the covering is 60 percent or more of the total square footage of the floor area below. 
2.  Floor area whose walls are of open construction, such as a trellis, sunscreen, lattice work, or partial wall where 45 percent or more of the total square footage of the vertical planes on all sides bounding the bulk floor area is open. 
3.  Floor area which has less than six feet of vertical dimension between the floor and the level of the finished floor above, or where there is no floor above, between the floor and the level of the finished roof above. 
4.  The floor area of the basement portions of residential buildings to be calculated as follows: 
a.  Floor area on a level where the finished ceiling over the floor area at any point is no more than two feet above the adjacent natural or finished grade, whichever is lower. Such floor area may abut lightwells which measure not more than four feet in width (perpendicular to the building wall) nor more than 20 feet in length (parallel to the building wall) and are no deeper than 28 inches above the finished floor. Such lightwells may occupy no more than 40 percent of the lineal perimeter of that level of the building. 
b.  A fraction of the floor area of the entire level having an exposed side or sides where any portion of the finished floor over the floor area of that level is more than three feet above the lower of the adjacent natural or finished grade. Such exposure shall be continuous, and limited to not more than two sides and not more than 40 percent of the perimeter of that level. For each linear foot of the perimeter of a level that is exposed more than three feet between the lower of the natural or finished grade and the level of the finished floor above, two percent of the interior floor area of that level shall contribute to bulk floor area. 
Lightwells which measure not more than four feet in width (perpendicular to the building wall) nor more than 20 feet in length (parallel) to the building wall and are no deeper than 28 inches above the finished floor shall be calculated as exposed perimeter but need not be continuous with the "exposed" side or sides. 
For purposes of this Section, "side" shall mean the exterior wall or walls of a structure as viewed from any single point and which could be depicted as an elevation on an architectural rendering. 
5.  Floor area of an underground parking structure in commercial zones. 
(Ord. No. 541)  
30.72.030 - Bulk Floor Area Ratio. 
Bulk Floor Area Ratio is the numerical value, expressed as a percentage, obtained by dividing the total bulk floor area contained on a lot by the total area of the lot.  
30.72.040 - Calculations, Special Instructions. 
In the R1-5B and RM-West zones, properties under common ownership and separated by a street or alley, when one or more such properties are of substandard lot size, shall jointly be considered as one lot for purposes of determining allowable floor area ratio.  
30.72.050 - Limitations on Bulk Floor Area. 
The development of bulk floor area shall be limited as follows: 
On a Lot Zoned 	Bulk Floor Area Shall Not Exceed a Ratio Of 
A. R1-40 	12.5% or 2,000 sq. ft., whichever is greater 
B. R1-14 	25% or 2,000 sq. ft., whichever is greater 
C. R1-10 	25% or 2,000 sq. ft., whichever is greater 
D. R1-10B 	30% or 2,000 sq. ft., whichever is greater 
E. R1-5 	30% or 2,000 sq. ft., whichever is greater 
F. R1-5B 	55% 
G. RM-East 	40% 
H. RM-West 	45% 
I. RM-Central 	30% 
J. RM-South 	35% 
K. R2 	35% 
L. RC 	30% 
M. CC 	45% or 2,000 sq. ft., whichever is greater 
N. BC 	10% or by approved Conditional Use Permit, not to exceed 20% 
O. PC 	60% 
P. NC 	30% 
Q. VC 	40% 
  
Chapter 30.73 - TEMPORARY USE PERMITS 
 
30.73.010 - Purpose. 
A "temporary use" shall mean any activity or land use of a temporary nature that extends beyond what is expressly allowed by the applicable base zone in terms of use and development standards. The purpose of this Chapter is to establish a process to accommodate reasonable requests for approval of temporary uses for a limited period of time in locations where the proposed use may be desirable and appropriate due to the limited and short-term nature of the activity, and where the use would not otherwise be allowed within the applicable zone. The intent is to consider such requests on an individual basis to ensure that they will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, and general welfare; to surrounding properties; or to the community as a whole. 
(Ord. No. 926 , § 5, 1-3-2017)  
30.73.020 - When a Temporary Use Permit is Required. 
A.  A Temporary Use Permit is required for any temporary use on private property that is proposed in a location where the use would not otherwise be allowed by the applicable zoning. 
1.  A Minor Temporary Use Permit is required for the following activities: 
a.  Off-Site construction parking and material storage associated with an approved permit for a development project. 
b.  Outdoor retail sales related to holiday and seasonal activities held within a parking lot or off-site. 
c.  The provision of up to ten off-street parking spaces for an off-site special event. 
d.  A special event or other type of public assembly and entertainment activity of a temporary nature with 50 or fewer participants. 
e.  A special event or other type of public assembly and entertainment activity of a temporary nature with more than 50 participants held in areas designated for quasi-public use on property subject to the Del Mar Specific Plan or Del Mar Hotel Specific Plan. 
2.  A Major Temporary Use Permit is required for the following activities: 
a.  The provision of 11 or more off-street parking spaces for an off-site special event. 
b.  A special event or other type of public assembly and entertainment activity of a temporary nature with more than 50 participants. 
c.  Any other temporary use as determined by the Director of Planning and Community Development that does not meet the criteria for administrative approval as a minor temporary use. 
3.  A Temporary Use Permit may be requested via the Minor or Major permit approval process, as applicable, to allow for a recurring temporary use event to occur multiple times at a specified location within a one-year period. 
4.  The maximum duration of time for each individual temporary use event shall be limited as appropriate to the type of activity and context of the location to ensure the use authorized by the permit remains temporary in nature. 
B.  For the purpose of this Chapter, a "special event" shall mean public assembly and entertainment of a temporary nature for activities such as concerts, street fairs, festivals, sports, cultural, philanthropic and/or educational events; and other commercial events deemed similar by the decision maker. 
C.  A Temporary Use Permit shall not be required for noncommercial events in a residential zone as customarily incidental and subordinate to the use and enjoyment of a home consistent with what is allowed as an accessory use in a residential zone, including "large assemblage" of more than 50 people on private property in a residential zone pursuant to an Operations Permit obtained in accordance with Chapter 6.52. 
D.  Applications filed pursuant to this Chapter may also be subject to approval of other permit types in addition to the Temporary Use Permit. 
1.  A Coastal Development Permit shall be obtained for uses that involve coastal development or potential impacts to coastal resources or public access pursuant to Chapter 30.75 (Coastal Development Permits) and that do not qualify for a permit exemption in accordance with Section 30.75.200. 
2.  An Operations Permit shall be obtained for those uses that are subject to Title 6 (Operations Permits), including an Operations Permit for use of a public facility pursuant to Chapter 6.48 (Operations Permit: Commercial Use of Public Property). 
3.  An Encroachment Permit shall be obtained for approval to encroach upon or use the public right-of-way pursuant to Chapter 23.28 (Encroachment Permits). 
4.  An Administrative Sign Review Permit shall be obtained for any proposed temporary signage pursuant to Chapter 23.09 (Administrative Sign Review). 
5.  An Electrical Permit shall be obtained if required pursuant to the California Building Code. 
6.  A Temporary Food Facility Sponsor Permit shall be obtained from the County of San Diego Department of Environmental Health for any public event where food or consumable products will be sold, served, or given away to the public. 
7.  If alcohol will be served at the event, then the applicant shall obtain the appropriate license from the State of California Department of Alcohol Beverage Control. 
(Ord. No. 926 , § 6, 1-3-2017; Ord. No. 933 , § 1, 10-16-2017)  
30.73.030 - How to Apply for a Temporary Use Permit. 
A.  An application for a Temporary Use Permit, Minor or Major, must be submitted in a form prescribed Director of Planning and Community Development and shall be accompanied by the following: 
1.  An application fee, as set forth by resolution of the City Council. 
2.  The applicant name(s), including organization(s) and principals within the organization applying for the Temporary Use Permit and written authorization by the property owner. 
3.  The proposed dates, hours, and total time duration for the temporary use event. 
4.  A detailed description of the temporary use event including: 
a.  A site plan showing the property and location where the event will be held. 
b.  An estimate of the number of persons who will attend. 
c.  A list of all vendors who are anticipated to operate at the event. 
d.  The proposed parking and traffic control plan for anticipated guests and vendors. 
e.  The details of any arrangements for private security personnel, as applicable. 
f.  The details of any live music or amplified sound planned for the event. 
5.  The business license number (or vendor business license exemption request) for any vendors that will be a part of the temporary use event. 
6.  Any additional information as may be required by the Director of Planning and Community Development to help the decision maker evaluate the request for a proposed temporary use event in accordance with Section 30.73.040. 
B.  In addition to the information required by Subsection A., an application for a Major Temporary Use Permit shall provide information as necessary to meet the public notice requirement in accordance with Section 30.73.050. 
(Ord. No. 926 , § 7, 1-3-2017)  
30.73.040 - Decision Process for Temporary Use Permits and Findings for Approval. 
A.  A decision on an application for a Minor Temporary Use Permit shall be made by the Director of Planning and Community Development in accordance with Subsection C. The decision may be appealed to the City Council within five working days from the date the required public notice is posted in accordance with Subsection 30.73.050.A. 
B.  A decision on an application for a Major Temporary Use Permit shall be made by the City Council in accordance with Subsection C. 
C.  A Temporary Use Permit, Minor or Major, may be approved or conditionally approved only if the decision maker makes all of the following Findings for Approval: 
1.  That the proposed site is adequate to accommodate the anticipated number of guests and vendors for the temporary use; 
2.  That operation of the temporary use for a limited period of time consistent with the permit conditions will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, and welfare and will not adversely affect the surrounding neighborhood; 
3.  That in consideration of the past and present use of the site, granting of the Temporary Use Permit would not authorize a permanent use to occur in conflict with the allowed uses of the applicable zone; and 
4.  That operation of the temporary use would not adversely affect the community plan. 
D.  The decision maker may impose conditions of approval on the Temporary Use Permit as deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare and to ensure compliance with the findings supporting such approval. Conditions of approval may include, but are not limited to: 
1.  Referral to Design Review Board; 
2.  Hours of operation; 
3.  Permit duration and expiration; 
4.  Requirement for adequate temporary off-street parking facilities, including safe vehicular ingress and egress; 
5.  Regulation of signs and advertising; 
6.  Regulation of the use of live music or a public-address or sound system; 
7.  Regulation of lighting, noise, gas, smoke, fumes, vibrations, and other nuisances; 
8.  Requirement for restrooms; 
9.  Requirement for security personnel; 
10.  Regulation of temporary or permanent site improvements; 
11.  Requirement for liability insurance and a "Hold Harmless" agreement to protect the City; 
Requirement of bonds or other guarantees for cleanup and removal of structures or equipment to return the site to its state prior to the temporary use within a specified time period; 
12.  Requirement of bonds or other guarantees for cleanup and removal of structures or equipment to return the site to its state prior to the temporary use within a specified time period; and 
13.  Any other conditions as deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare and minimize detrimental effects to surrounding properties. 
E.  Performance Standards. The temporary uses allowed pursuant to this section shall at a minimum comply with the following standards: 
1.  The applicant shall obtain all required permits, including those referenced in Subsection 30.73.020.D. as applicable. 
2.  All lighting shall be directed and shielded away from adjacent residential areas. 
3.  The temporary use shall be designed to accommodate safe pedestrian passage. 
4.  The temporary use shall comply with any applicable requirement of the Fire Department. 
5.  Prior to operation, the City shall conduct an inspection of the premise for compliance with any applicable code requirements. 
6.  Upon termination of the temporary use or expiration of the Temporary Use Permit, whichever occurs first, the property owner and/or applicant are required to remove all temporary structures including fencing, temporary restrooms, and signage. 
7.  The applicant shall return the site to its state prior to the temporary use, including the replacement or repair of any damaged landscaping or site improvements. Once an inspection of the premise has been completed by the City to verify compliance, any bonds and/or deposits that were collected will be returned. 
F.  The Director of Planning and Community Development may approve a request for renewal of a Temporary Use Permit in accordance with Subsection A. 
(Ord. No. 926 , § 8, 1-3-2017; Ord. No. 933 , § 2, 10-16-2017)  
30.73.050 - Public Notice Requirement. 
A.  Upon approval of a Minor Temporary Use Permit by the Director of Planning and Community Development, a notice shall be posted at City Hall and at the site of the temporary use for at least five working days to advise the public that the Director's approval may be appealed in accordance with Subsection 30.73.040.A. 
B.  The applicant for a Major Temporary Use Permit shall provide notice for a Major Temporary Use Permit as follows: 
1.  Notice of application shall be posted at City Hall and at the site of the temporary use (using a notification card provided by the City) within one working day of application submittal to notify the public that an application for a Major Temporary Use Permit was received; 
2.  Notice of the City Council hearing shall be mailed at least ten days prior to the hearing to all owners identified on County Tax Assessors' rolls as owners of real property within 300 feet of the location of the proposed temporary use; and 
3.  Notice of the City Council hearing shall be published at least ten days prior to the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the City. 
C.  The required contents for the Notice of City Council hearing shall contain the date, place, and time set for the hearing and the following: 
1.  The number assigned to the application; 
2.  Applicant and property owner name; 
3.  A description of the proposed temporary use and its location; and 
4.  An explanation that the City Council may approve or conditionally approve the Temporary Use Permit application after making all of the findings for approval pursuant to Subsection 30.73.040.C. 
(Ord. No. 926 , § 9, 1-3-2017)  
30.73.060 - Expiration of a Temporary Use Permit. 
A.  The decision maker may set an expiration date for each Temporary Use Permit in accordance with Subsection 30.73.040.D. The Temporary Use Permit shall expire and become null and void on the expiration date specified in the permit, or if no expiration date is specified, the permit shall expire 30 calendar days after the final date authorized for the event to occur in accordance with the Temporary Use Permit. 
B.  If exceptional circumstances exist, such as a change in the event dates due to inclement weather, additional time may be granted by the Director of Planning and Community Development to extend the Temporary Use Permit expiration if there is no change in circumstances that would otherwise render invalid the initial findings for approval made pursuant to Subsection 30.73.040.C. 
(Ord. No. 926 , § 10, 1-3-2017)  
Chapter 30.74 - CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS (CUP) 
 
30.74.010 - Conditional Use Permits and Authority to Grant. 
Certain uses require a special degree of control due to unusual effects or characteristics peculiar to them, or because of size, location, type of equipment used, or demands upon public facilities resulting from such use. Therefore, the Planning Commission, or City Council on appeal, shall have the authority subject to the provisions of this Chapter, to grant, upon such conditions as it may determine, a Conditional Use Permit as may be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this Chapter and the adopted Community Plan. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to give any property owner a right to use any property in any manner which requires a Conditional Use Permit, unless a Conditional Use Permit for such use has first been granted and is in full force and effect pursuant to all conditions attached thereto.  
30.74.020 - Required Findings to Grant. 
A.  Each determination granting a Conditional Use Permit shall be supported by written findings of fact showing specifically wherein all of the following conditions exist: 
1.  That the use for which the Conditional Use Permit is applied for is permitted within the zone in which the property is located. 
2.  That the granting of such Conditional Use Permit will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare, will not adversely affect the established character of the surrounding neighborhood, and will not be injurious to the property or improvements in such vicinity and zone in which the property is located. 
3.  That the proposed use is properly located in relation to the community as a whole and to other land uses and to transportation and service facilities in the vicinity; and further, that the use can be adequately served by such public facilities and street capacities without placing an undue burden on such facilities and streets. 
4.  That the site is of sufficient size to accommodate the proposed use and all yards, open spaces, walls and fences, parking, loading, landscaping and such other features as are required by this Chapter or as are needed, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, or City Council on appeal, are properly provided to be compatible and harmonious with nearby uses. 
5.  That the granting of such Conditional Use Permit will not be contrary to the adopted Community Plan, including its goals, objectives, or policies, or to the objectives of any ordinance, regulation, or plan in effect to implement said Community Plan.  
30.74.030 - Conditions on Conditional Use Permit Approvals. 
The Planning Commission, or City Council on appeal, shall have the authority to impose such conditions and safeguards as it deems necessary to protect and enhance the health, safety and welfare of the surrounding area, and to assure that the proposed use or activity fully meets the findings set forth in this Article. No Conditional Use Permit shall require as a condition the dedication of land for any purpose not reasonably related to the use of property for which the Conditional Use Permit is requested, or the posting of a bond to guarantee installation of public improvements not reasonably related to the use of property for which the Conditional Use Permit is requested.  
30.74.040 - Planning Commission Action. 
The decision of the Planning Commission to grant, amend or deny a Conditional Use Permit shall be by a majority vote of the total appointed membership of the Commission, and shall be final unless appealed to the City Council pursuant to this Chapter. No application for a Conditional Use Permit shall be acted upon until a recommendation by the Department of Planning and Community Development has been received and the public hearing is closed.  
30.74.050 - Expiration. 
Three years from the date of final approval of a Conditional Use Permit, the Permit will expire, unless a building permit has been issued and substantial construction has been accomplished in reliance upon the Conditional Use Permit, or, where no construction is involved, where the holder of the Permit has commenced the use authorized by the Conditional Use Permit prior to its date of expiration. 
(Ord. No. 641; Ord. No. 757)  
30.74.060 - Reserved.  
30.74.070 - Reserved.  
30.74.080 - Revocation of a Conditional Use Permit. 
A.  Following a public hearing held in the manner prescribed in this Chapter, the Planning Commission, or City Council on appeal, may revoke or add additional restrictions or conditions to any Conditional Use Permit issued on any one or more of the following grounds: 
1.  That the approval was obtained by fraud or erroneous information as presented by the applicant and considered in the granting of said Conditional Use Permit; 
2.  That the use for which such approval is granted is not being exercised; 
3.  That the use for which such approval was granted has ceased to exist or has been suspended for one year or more; 
4.  That the Conditional Use Permit granted is being, or recently has been exercised contrary to the terms or conditions of such approval, or in violation of any statute, ordinance, law or regulation; 
5.  That the use for which the approval was granted is being so exercised as to be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, or so as to constitute a nuisance.  
30.74.090 - Posting of Performance Bonds. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of this Chapter, whenever a Conditional Use Permit is granted upon any condition or limitation, the person seeking the Conditional Use Permit may be required to furnish security in the form of money or a surety bond in an amount fixed by the Planning Commission or City Council to ensure compliance with the conditions and limitations upon which such Conditional Use Permit is granted. Every such bond shall be a penalty bond and shall be in a form satisfactory to the Planning Commission or City Council requiring the same, shall be payable to the City, and shall be conditioned upon compliance with the conditions and limitations upon which such use permit is granted. Upon the breach of any condition or limitation upon which such use permit is granted, the money or the bond furnished as security shall be forfeited to the City, and such money or the money collected on any such bond shall be paid into the general fund of the City.  
30.74.100 - Reapplications. 
At least one year shall have elapsed since the effective date of disapproval of the application or revocation of a Conditional Use Permit before filing a new application seeking substantially the same Conditional Use Permit for any of the same property, provided, however, that the Planning Commission may permit the processing of such applications by the affirmative vote of a majority of its members.  
30.74.110 - Existing Conditional Use Permits. 
All Conditional Use Permits granted and exercised prior to the effective date of this Chapter plus subsequent amendments, may be continued; except that if any Conditional Use Permit granted prior to the effective date of this Chapter has never been exercised or is exercised but the development authorized has been discontinued or removed from the premises for a period of at least one year, such Conditional Use Permit shall no longer be of any force and effect, and shall be deemed revoked.  
Chapter 30.75 - COASTAL DEVELOPMENT PERMITS (CDPS)[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Note— This Chapter of the Municipal Code forms a portion of the City of Del Mar Local Coastal Program Implementing Ordinances. The regulations found within this Chapter are not subject to "relief" through the Del Mar Variance process. Exceptions to, or relief from, the requirements found within this Chapter are limited to those specified within the language of this Chapter or found within other Chapters of the Implementing Ordinances. Where there is a conflict between the language of this Chapter and other portions of the Del Mar Municipal Code, the language of this Chapter shall take precedence. 
 
30.75.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish a process for the review of new development within the City of Del Mar to ensure that it will be consistent with the provisions of the City of Del Mar Local Coastal Program and California Coastal Act. 
(Ord. No. 722)  
30.75.020 - Applicability. 
All properties within the City of Del Mar are located within the Coastal Zone as defined in the California Coastal Act and are subject to the provisions of this Chapter.  
30.75.030 - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this Chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this Chapter its most reasonable application. 
A.  Aggrieved Person shall mean any person who, in person or through a representative, appeared at a public hearing of the City of Del Mar or the California Coastal Commission in connection with the decision or action on a Coastal Development Permit application, or who, by other appropriate means prior to a hearing, informed the City of Del Mar or the California Coastal Commission of the nature of his/her concerns or who for good cause was unable to do either. "Aggrieved person" may include the applicant for a Coastal Development Permit. 
B.  Appealable Development shall mean, in accordance with the Coastal Act, any of the following: 
1.  A development which is approved under a Coastal Development Permit issued by the City and which is appealable to the California Coastal Commission due to its location in an appealable area under Section 30603 of the Coastal Act and as generally shown on the City Post Certification Map as the Coastal Development Permit Appeals Area. The Coastal Development Permit Appeals Area is generally composed of properties located between the sea and the first public road paralleling the sea or within 300 feet of the inland extent of any beach or of the mean high tide line of the sea where there is no beach, whichever is the greater distance, and all areas within 100 feet of wetlands and streams. 
2.  Any development which constitutes a "major public works project" or a "major energy facility" as defined in this Chapter. The phrase "major public works" or a "major energy facility" as used in Public Resources Code § 30603(a)(5) in these regulations shall mean: any proposed public works project or energy facility, as defined by Section 13012 of the Coastal Commission Regulations and the Coastal Act. 
C.  California Coastal Act or Coastal Act shall mean the California Coastal Act of 1976, Division 20 of the Public Resources Code, as amended. 
D.  Chapter Three Policies shall mean those policies of the Coastal Act contained in Chapter Three as amended, commencing with Section 30200, which constitute the standards by which the adequacy of Local Coastal Programs and the permissibility of proposed development subject to the provisions of the Coastal Act are determined. 
E.  City shall mean the City of Del Mar. 
F.  Coastal Commission shall mean the California Coastal Commission. 
G.  Coastal Dependent Development or Use shall mean any development or use which, in order to function at all, requires location on or adjacent to the sea. 
H.  Coastal Development Permit shall mean a permit for any development or use within the Coastal Zone that is required pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter and of subdivision (a) of California Coastal Act § 30600. 
I.  Development shall mean on land, in or under water, the placement or erection of any solid material or structure; discharge or disposal of any dredged material or of any gaseous, liquid, solid, or thermal waste; grading, removing, dredging, mining, or extraction of any materials; change in the density or intensity of use of land, including, but not limited to, subdivision pursuant to the Subdivision Map Act (commencing with Section 66410 of the Government Code), and any other division of land, including lot splits, except where the land division is brought about in connection with the purchase of such land by a public agency for public recreational use; change in the intensity of use of water, or of access thereto, construction, reconstruction, demolition, or alteration of the size of any structure, including any facility of any private, public, or municipal utility; and the removal or harvesting of major vegetation other than for agricultural purposes, kelp harvesting, and timber operations. As used in this Section, "structure" includes, but is not limited to, any building, road, pipe, flume, conduit, siphon, aqueduct, telephone line, and electrical power transmission and distribution line. "Development" shall include the division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels; the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation, or enlargement of any structure; any mining, excavation, landfill, or land disturbance; and any use or extension of the use of land. 
J.  Director shall mean the Director of the City of Del Mar Planning and Community Development Department. 
K.  Disaster shall mean a situation in which the forces, which destroyed a structure or improvement, were beyond the control of its owners. The term "disaster" shall mean the same as "natural disaster." 
L.  Emergency shall mean a sudden, unexpected occurrence demanding immediate action to prevent or mitigate loss or damage to life, health, property, or essential public services. 
M.  Executive Director shall mean the Executive Director of the California Coastal Commission. 
N.  Energy Facility shall mean any public or private processing, producing, generating, storing, transmitting, or recovering facility for electricity, natural gas, petroleum, coal, or other source of energy. 
O.  Fill shall mean any earth or material or substance, including pilings, placed for the purposes of erecting structures thereon, placed in a submerged or upland area. 
P.  First Public Road Paralleling the Sea or First Public Road shall mean that road nearest the sea, as defined in this Section, and which meets all of the following criteria: 
1.  The road is lawfully open and suitable for uninterrupted use by the public; 
2.  The road is maintained by a public agency; 
3.  The road contains an improved all-weather surface open to motor vehicle traffic in at least one direction; 
4.  The road is not subject to any restrictions on use by the public except during an emergency or for military purposes; and 
5.  The road connects with other public roads providing a continuous access system and generally parallels and follows the shoreline of the sea so as to include all portions of the sea where the physical features such as bays, lagoons, estuaries and wetlands cause the waters of the sea to extend landward of the generally continuous coastline. 
Q.  Inland Extent of Beach shall mean and shall be determined as follows: 
1.  By a distinct linear feature (e.g. a seawall, road, or bluff, etc.); 
2.  By the inland edge of the furthest inland beach berm as determined from historical surveys, aerial photographs and other records or geological evidence; or 
3.  Where a beach berm does not exist, by the furthest point separating the dynamic portion of the beach from the inland area as distinguished by vegetation, debris or other geological or historical evidence. 
R.  Local Coastal Program shall mean the City of Del Mar's Local Coastal Program (LCP), comprised of the LCP Land Use Plan and Implementing Ordinances, including the associated maps and exhibits, which have been certified by the California Coastal Commission as being consistent with and meeting the requirements of the Coastal Act. 
S.  Major Public Works shall mean a facility that costs more than $100,000.00 with an automatic annual increase in accordance with the Engineering News Record Construction Cost Index, except for those governed by the provisions of the Coastal Act. 
T.  Original Jurisdiction shall mean that area of the City of Del Mar that consists of tidelands, submerged lands and/or public trust lands, whether filled or unfilled, as generally depicted on the LCP Post-Certification Maps wherein the authority for review of Coastal Development Permit applications rests with the California Coastal Commission pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter and the Coastal Act. 
U.  Public Trust Lands shall mean all lands subject to the Common Law Public Trust for commerce, navigation, fisheries, recreation, and other public purposes. Public trust lands include: tidelands, submerged lands, beds of navigable lakes and rivers, and historic tidelands and submerged lands that are presently filled or reclaimed, and which were subject to the Public Trust at any time. 
V.  Public Works shall mean and include the following: 
1.  All production, storage, transmission, and recovery facilities for water, sewerage, telephone, and other similar utilities owned or operated by any public agency or by any utility subject to the jurisdiction of the California Public Utilities Commission, except for energy facilities. 
2.  All public transportation facilities, including streets, roads, highways, public parking lots and structures, ports, harbors, airports, railroads, and mass transit facilities and stations, bridges, trolley wires and other related facilities. 
3.  All publicly financed recreational facilities, all projects of the State Coastal Conservancy, and any development by a special district. 
4.  All community college facilities. 
W.  Sea shall mean the Pacific Ocean and all harbors, bays, channels, estuaries, salt marshes, sloughs, and other areas subject to constant or periodic tidal action through any connection with the Pacific Ocean, excluding non-estuarine rivers, streams, tributaries, creeks, and flood control and drainage channels. 
X.  Temporary Event shall mean an activity or use that constitutes development as defined in this Chapter but which is an activity or function which is or will be of limited duration and involves the placement of non-permanent structures. Temporary Events, as defined herein, may involve the use of sandy beach, parkland, filled tidelands, water, streets, or parking areas which are otherwise open and available for general public use. 
Y.  Submerged Lands shall mean all lands that lie below the line of mean low tide. 
Z.  Tidelands shall mean all lands which are located between the lines of mean high tide and mean low tide. 
AA.  City Zone Map shall mean, for purposes of the Local Coastal Program (LCP), all those maps shown as exhibits to the City of Del Mar LCP Implementing Ordinances, including both base zoning maps and overlay zoning maps. 
BB.  Environmentally sensitive habitat area means any area in which plant or animal life or their habitats are either rare or especially valuable because of the special nature or role in an ecosystem and which could be easily disturbed or degraded by human activities and developments.  
30.75.040 - Permit Required. 
A.  Unless otherwise provided in this Chapter, no development, as defined herein, shall occur unless and until a Coastal Development Permit has been granted in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. 
B.  Where required pursuant to this Chapter, a valid Coastal Development Permit shall be obtained prior to the commencement of development and shall be required in addition to any other permits or approvals required by the City. The review of a Coastal Development Permit application may be combined with and/or processed concurrently with the review of any other discretionary permit application required by this Title and the action of the decision-maker shall be considered one consolidated action. For decisions involving coastal development within the appealable area, the entire consolidated decision is appealable to the Coastal Commission. 
C.  Where the procedures described in this Chapter for review and issuance of Coastal Development Permits conflict with other procedures in this Title, the procedures described herein shall take precedence.  
30.75.050 - Determination of Permit Requirement, Exemption or Categorical Exclusion. 
A.  The Director of Planning and Community Development shall have the authority to make the following determinations regarding the requirement for receipt of a Coastal Development Permit, with such determinations to be based on the applicable components of the Local Coastal Program, including, but not limited to, the Post Certification Maps prepared by the Coastal Commission and filed with the City: 
1.  Whether a proposed project requires the receipt of a Coastal Development Permit or is exempt from or categorically excluded from the requirement for a Coastal Development Permit. 
2.  Whether the review of an application for a Coastal Development Permit, or amendment thereto, is to be processed and reviewed by the City or by the California Coastal Commission. 
3.  Whether the action taken by the City in its review of a Coastal Development Permit application is appealable to the Coastal Commission. 
B.  Where there is a challenge to a determination regarding the requirement for a Coastal Development Permit or the validity of a Coastal Development Permit exemption or Categorical Exclusion, or where the Director of Planning and Community Development wishes to have the Coastal Commission determine the appropriate designation, the following procedure shall be used: 
1.  The Director of Planning and Community Development shall notify the Executive Director of the Coastal Commission in writing of the challenge or request for determination and shall request an Executive Director's opinion. 
2.  The Executive Director shall, within two working days of receipt of the City's request (or upon completion of a site inspection where such inspection is warranted), transmit his or her determination as to whether the development is categorically excluded, non-appealable, or appealable. 
3.  Where the Executive Director's determination is not in accordance with the determination of the Director of Planning and Community Development, the Coastal Commission shall hold a hearing for purposes of determining the appropriate designation for the area. The hearing before the Coastal Commission shall be scheduled within a reasonable period of time and shall be conducted in the appropriate geographic region of the State.  
30.75.060 - Permit Review Authority for Projects Crossing Jurisdictional Boundaries. 
Where a proposed project straddles the boundaries of the City of Del Mar and another local jurisdiction or where a proposed project straddles the boundaries of the City's Coastal Development Permit jurisdiction area and the Coastal Commission's Original Jurisdiction area, the following procedures shall apply: 
A.  The applicant shall obtain separate Coastal Development Permits from each jurisdiction for the corresponding portion of the proposed project within that jurisdiction area. 
B.  If the applicant is a public agency seeking approval for a public works project, that agency may obtain a single "Public Works Plan" approval from the Coastal Commission, in lieu of locally issued Coastal Development Permits.  
30.75.070 - Coastal Development Permits Issued by the California Coastal Commission—Original Jurisdiction. 
A.  In addition to those City permits and approvals that are required pursuant to this Title, development located in areas of Original Jurisdiction, as shown on the Local Coastal Program Post-Certification Map shall also require the receipt of Coastal Development Permit or exemption issued by the California Coastal Commission. 
B.  Where the provisions of this Chapter require the receipt of a Coastal Development Permit issued by the Coastal Commission, no Coastal Development Permit issued by the City shall be required.  
30.75.080 - Coastal Development Permits Issued by the City—Issuing Authority, Public Hearing Required. 
A.  The City Council shall serve as the Issuing Authority to render a determination on applications for Coastal Development Permits, or other noted authorizations, which involve the following: 
1.  Applications for Local Coastal Program Amendments. 
2.  Appeals of decisions rendered by other City entities on Coastal Development Permit applications. 
B.  Unless otherwise specified in this Chapter, the Planning Commission shall serve as the Issuing Authority to render a determination on applications for Coastal Development Permits for the following: 
1.  Projects located within the Bluff, Slope and Canyon Overlay Zone for which a Conditional Use Permit is also required. 
2.  Projects located within the Open Space Overlay Zone. 
3.  Projects located within the Coastal Bluff Overlay Zone. 
4.  Projects located within the Lagoon Overlay Zone. 
5.  Projects for which a Floodplain Development Permit issued by the Planning Commission are also required. 
6.  Projects located within the Floodway Zone. 
7.  Applications for the subdivision of land. 
8.  Projects which require the receipt of a Conditional Use Permit or Variance pursuant to the provisions of this Title. 
9.  Applications for Interpretation of the Local Coastal Program. 
10.  Applications referred to the Planning Commission by the Director of Planning and Community Development pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter. 
C.  Unless otherwise specified, the Design Review Board shall serve as the Issuing Authority to render a determination on applications for Coastal Development Permits for the following: 
1.  Projects which require the receipt of a Design Review Permit. 
2.  Projects which require the receipt of a Land Conservation Permit. 
3.  Applications referred to the Design Review Board by the Director pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter. 
D.  For projects which require the receipt of a permit or authorization from both the Planning Commission and the Design Review Board pursuant to the provisions of this Title, the Planning Commission shall serve as the Issuing Authority to review and render a determination on the corresponding Coastal Development Permit application. 
E.  The Director of Planning and Community Development shall serve as the Issuing Authority to render a determination on applications for Coastal Development Permits for the following: 
1.  Projects which qualify for Administrative Design Review pursuant to the provisions of this Title. 
2.  Applications for Lot Line Adjustments and/or Certificates of Compliance. 
3.  An application for an Accessory Dwelling Unit in accordance with Subsection 30.91.030.D.5. that is not otherwise exempt from a Coastal Development Permit. 
F.  A public hearing shall be required for all Coastal Development Permit applications except that, unless located in the Coastal Commission's appeals area as defined in Subsection 30.75.030.B.1 of this Chapter, no public hearing shall be required for CDP applications for which the Director of Planning and Community Development is designated as the Issuing Authority. 
(Ord. No. 932 , § 32, 10-2-2017)  
30.75.090 - Appeal to City Council on Coastal Development Permits issued by Planning Commission, Design Review Board, and Director of Planning and Community Development. 
Actions on Coastal Development Permit applications rendered by the Planning Commission, Design Review Board, or Director of Planning and Community Development shall be appealable to the City Council in accordance with the provisions of the Del Mar Municipal Code.  
30.75.100 - Notice of Action on Coastal Development Permit Applications. 
Upon final action on an application for a Coastal Development Permit, the City shall, within seven days of the final action, mail notice to the Executive Director of the California Coastal Commission and to interested parties who have requested notice in writing describing the action taken by the City.  
30.75.110 - Coastal Development Permits Reviewed by the City—Appeals to the Coastal Commission. 
A.  An action rendered by the City on an application for a Coastal Development Permit which constitutes an Appealable Development, as defined in this Chapter, may be appealed to the California Coastal Commission by an Aggrieved Person in accordance with the provisions of the Coastal Act and the California Code of Regulations. 
B.  The period for appeal to the Coastal Commission on an action rendered by the City on a Coastal Development Permit application shall be ten calendar days, commencing on the day after written notice of the City's final action on the application is received at the staff offices of the Coastal Commission. 
C.  Prior to appealing a decision on a Coastal Development Permit rendered by the City to the California Coastal Commission, an Aggrieved Person shall exhaust all City of Del Mar appeals processes. There shall be no fee charged by the City of Del Mar for an appeal of a coastal development permit.  
30.75.120 - Provision of Notice for Public Hearings. 
A.  Notice for Coastal Development Permit applications shall be provided in accordance with this Section. 
B.  Notice shall contain the date, place, and time set for the hearing, which shall be set for a date not less than ten days nor more than 40 days from the date of notice. The required notice shall include all of the following: 
1.  A statement that the development is in the Coastal Zone. 
2.  The number assigned to the application. 
3.  A description of the proposed development and its location. 
4.  A brief description of the purpose of the hearing and of the public hearing process. 
5.  For Appealable Developments, a brief description of the appeal procedures for City of Del Mar and California Coastal Commission. 
C.  Notice shall be provided as follows: 
1.  Published once in a newspaper of general circulation within the City. 
2.  Mailed to all of the following: 
a.  All owners of real property within 300 feet of the exterior boundaries of the property, which is the subject of the hearing with ownership as identified on County Tax Assessors' rolls; 
b.  All occupants of property within 100 feet of the exterior boundaries of the property which is the subject of the hearing; and 
c.  All parties requesting notice of the Coastal Development Permit application. 
3.  Posting at City Hall and on the site of the property which is the subject of the hearing. 
D.  Projects which are provided a Categorical Exclusion from the Coastal Development Permit requirements of this Chapter shall be exempt from the requirement for public notice except that a record of such Categorical Exclusion shall be posted at City Hall and kept on public file in the Planning and Community Development Department, and shall be mailed to the Executive Director of the California Coastal Commission and to interested parties who have requested notice in writing.  
30.75.130 - Application Requirements. 
A.  An application for a Coastal Development Permit shall be initiated by submitting an application on a form provided by the Department of Planning and Community Development. The application shall include all information and material as required in the submittal requirements for the application, including at a minimum: a location map of the project site and vicinity; a detailed description of the proposed development; proof of the applicant's legal interest in the development site; and the applicant's signature attesting to the truth, completeness, and accuracy of the submitted material. All submitted application material shall be in a form so as to allow reasonable reproduction and distribution to members of the public and interested public agencies. 
B.  In addition to the submittal requirements required by this Section, an application for a Coastal Development Permit shall also include any information deemed necessary and appropriate by the Director to render a determination on the application.  
30.75.140 - Requirement for Findings. 
A.  Each determination granting a Coastal Development Permit shall be supported by written findings of fact showing that each of the following conditions exist: 
1.  That the use for which the Coastal Development Permit is applied is permitted within the zone in which the property is located. 
2.  That the proposal meets the criteria of the applicable chapters of this Title. 
3.  That the granting of such Coastal Development Permit will be in conformity with the certified City of Del Mar Local Coastal Program. 
4.  That for all development proposals located seaward of the first public roadway, the proposed development is consistent with and implements the applicable requirements for provision of public access contained in this Title and in the public access and public recreation policies of Chapter 3 of the California Coastal Act. 
5.  That for all development proposals involving the construction or placement of a shoreline protection device, that the proposed development is consistent with and implements the applicable requirements of the Beach Overlay Zone and Setback Seawall Zone provisions contained in this Title and is consistent with and implements the provisions of the Chapter Three Policies of California Coastal Act. 
6.  That the proposal is consistent with and implements the provisions of public view protection policies IV-22 through IV-27 of the City of Del Mar LCP Land Use Plan. 
7.  That for all development proposals on sites with identified wetland resources, that the proposed development is consistent with and implements the provisions of the Lagoon Overlay Zone as contained within the City of Del Mar Local Coastal Program Implementing Ordinances and Land Use Plan.  
30.75.150 - Conditions on Coastal Development Permit Approvals. 
A.  Each Coastal Development Permit approval shall have attached to it, the conditions and safeguards deemed necessary by the Issuing Authority to ensure that the proposed use or activity fully meets and will continue to meet the provisions of this Title and of the City of Del Mar Local Coastal Program. The conditions may include provisions for public access, open space or conservation easements or the relocation or redesign of proposed site improvements. In any subdivision or other land division, such conditions shall be imposed at the time of the subdivision or other land division, rather than through subsequent development permits. 
B.  No Coastal Development Permit shall require as a condition of approval, the dedication of land for any purpose or the posting of a bond to guarantee installation of public improvements where such dedication or bond is not reasonably related to the use of the property for which the Coastal Development is requested.  
30.75.160 - Posting of Performance Bonds. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of this Chapter, whenever a Coastal Development Permit is granted upon any condition or limitation, the applicant(s) seeking such Coastal Development Permit may be required to furnish security in the form of cash deposit, bond, or other device in an amount deemed appropriate to ensure compliance with the conditions and limitations upon which such Coastal Development Permit is granted.  
30.75.170 - Expiration. 
Three years from the date of final approval of a Coastal Development Permit, the Permit will expire, unless a building permit has been issued and substantial construction has been accomplished in reliance upon the Coastal Development Permit, or where no construction is involved, where the holder of the Permit has commenced the use authorized by the Coastal Development Permit prior to its date of expiration. 
(Ord. No. 757)  
30.75.180 - Revocation of a Coastal Development Permit. 
A.  Following a public hearing held in the manner prescribed in this Chapter, the Issuing Authority for a Coastal Development Permit may revoke or add additional restrictions or conditions to such permit if it is determined that: 
1.  The approval was obtained by fraud or erroneous information as presented during the review process and considered in the granting of said Coastal Development Permit. 
2.  That public notice of the application for the Coastal Development Permit was not provided in accordance with the requirements of this Chapter. 
3.  The use for which such approval is granted is not being exercised. 
4.  The use for which such approval was granted has ceased to exist or has been suspended for six months or more. 
5.  The Coastal Development Permit granted is being, or recently has been, exercised contrary to the terms or conditions of such approval or in violation of any statute, ordinance, law, or regulation.  
30.75.190 - Reapplications. 
At least one year shall have elapsed since the effective date of denial of an application for or the revocation of a Coastal Development Permit before the filing of a new application seeking substantially the same Coastal Development Use Permit for any of the same property. However, the Issuing Authority for the Permit Application may, by the affirmative vote of a majority of its members, allow the processing of a denied application within one year of the date of denial.  
30.75.200 - Exemptions. 
The types of development projects listed below are exempt from the requirement for receipt of a Coastal Development Permit provided such development is in conformance with all other provisions of the Municipal Code. The granting of an exemption from the requirement for a Coastal Development Permit shall not constitute or be construed as an exemption from any other permit or authorization required pursuant to the provisions of the Municipal Code. 
A.  The replacement of any structure, other than a public works facility, which is destroyed by disaster, provided that the replacement structure: 
1.  Conforms to all Zoning Code and Building Code requirements applicable at the time of replacement. 
2.  Is used for the same the purpose as the destroyed structure. 
3.  Does not exceed the floor area or height of the destroyed structure by more than ten percent and is sited in essentially the same location on the site as the destroyed structure. 
B.  Categorically Excluded development projects pursuant to a certified Coastal Commission Categorical Exclusion Order. 
C.  Improvements to existing single-family residences except as noted below. For purposes of this Section, the term "improvements to single-family residences" includes those structures and improvements normally associated with a single-family residence, such as garages, swimming pools, fences, storage sheds, landscaping and affordable second dwelling units, but specifically excludes guest houses or accessory living quarters. The allowance of affordable second dwelling units shall be reviewed by the Planning and Community Development Director, who shall require certain modifications to the project to ensure compliance with this Chapter. The exemption provided in this Section shall not apply where: 
1.  The existing residence or proposed improvements would be located on a beach, wetland, seaward of the mean high tide line, or within 50 feet of the edge of a coastal bluff. 
2.  The proposed improvements would involve any significant alteration of landforms including removal or placement of vegetation, on a beach, wetland or sand dune, or within 50 feet of the edge of a coastal bluff. 
3.  The proposed development would be located within the Lagoon Overlay Zone and within 50 feet of a wetland. 
4.  The proposed development would be located within the Bluff, Slope and Canyon Overlay Zone and would be located within 20 feet of the top or 10 feet of the bottom of a substantial steep slope. 
5.  The proposed improvements would be located on a property in the Coastal Development Permit Appeals Area as defined in this Chapter and as shown on the City Zoning Map and where the proposed improvement would result in an increase of 10 percent or more of floor area or an increase in height by more than 10 percent; or where the proposed development in the Coastal Development Permit Appeals area would involve any significant non-attached structure such as garages, fences, shoreline protective works, or docks. 
6.  The proposed improvement would involve a property for which a previously issued Coastal Development Permit indicated that any future additions on the property would require the receipt of a Coastal Development Permit. 
D.  Improvements to structures other than existing single-family residences and public works facilities except as noted below. For purposes of this Section, the term "improvements to structures" includes all fixtures and structures attached to the structure and landscaping. The exemption provided in this Section shall not apply where: 
1.  The existing structure or proposed improvements would be located on a beach, wetland, seaward of the mean high tide line, or within 50 feet of the edge of a coastal bluff. 
2.  The proposed improvements would involve any significant alteration of landforms including removal or placement of vegetation, on a beach, wetland or sand dune, or within 100 feet of the edge of a coastal bluff. 
3.  The proposed development would be located within the Lagoon Overlay Zone and within 50 feet of a wetland. 
4.  The proposed development would be located within the Bluff, Slope and Canyon Overlay Zone and would be located within 20 feet of the top or 10 feet of the bottom of a substantial steep slope. 
5.  The proposed improvements would be located on a property in the Coastal Development Permit Appeals area as defined in this Chapter and as shown on the City Zoning Map and where the proposed improvement would result in an increase of 10 percent or more of the floor area of the structure or an increase in its height by more than 10 percent. 
6.  The proposed improvement would involve a property for which a previously issued Coastal Development Permit indicated that any future additions on the property would require the receipt of a Coastal Development Permit. 
7.  The proposed improvement to a structure would change the intensity of use of the structure. 
8.  The proposed improvement would consist of the conversion of an existing structure from a multiple unit rental use or visitor-serving commercial use to a use involving a fee ownership or long-term leasehold including, but not limited to, a condominium conversion, stock cooperative conversion, or motel/hotel timesharing conversion. 
E.  Repair and maintenance activities to existing structures or facilities that do not result in an addition to, or enlargement or expansion of, the structures. The exemption provided in this Section shall not apply where the proposed repair or maintenance involves: 
1.  Any method of repair or maintenance of a seawall revetment, bluff retaining wall, breakwater, groin, culvert, outfall, or similar shoreline work that involves: 
a.  The substantial alteration of the foundation of the protective work including pilings and other surface or subsurface structures; 
b.  The placement, whether temporary or permanent, of rip-rap, artificial berms of sand or other beach materials, or any other forms of solid materials, on a beach or in coastal waters, or wetlands; 
c.  The replacement of 20 percent or more of the materials of an existing structure with materials of a different kind; or 
d.  The presence, whether temporary or permanent, of mechanized construction equipment or construction materials on any sand area or within 50 feet of a coastal bluff or within 20 feet of coastal waters, wetlands, wetland buffer, or streams. 
2.  Any repair or maintenance to facilities or structures or work located in an environmentally sensitive habitat area, any sand area, within 50 feet of the edge of a coastal bluff or environmentally sensitive habitat area, or within 20 feet of coastal waters, streams or wetlands where such repair or maintenance involves either: 
a.  The placement or removal, whether temporary or permanent, of rip-rap rocks, sand, or other beach materials or any other forms of solid materials; or 
b.  The presence, whether temporary or permanent, of mechanized equipment. 
F.  The installation, testing, and placement in service or the replacement of any necessary utility connection between an existing service facility and any development which has been granted a valid Coastal Development Permit or exemption. 
G.  Development excluded from Coastal Development Permit requirements as described in the Coastal Commission's Interpretive Guidelines on Exclusions from Permit Requirements as adopted pursuant to Subsections (c) and (e) of Section 30610 of the Coastal Act. 
H.  Interior remodeling of a building except where such remodeling is associated with a change or intensification of the use of such building. 
I.  The minor alteration of public facilities that are required to restore service where it is determined by the Director of Planning and Community Development that the alteration of such facilities is the minimal amount necessary to restore service to a level compatible with existing development in the area. 
J.  The testing, installation, or replacement of utility services and lines as follows, provided however that the exemptions specified in this Section shall not apply for major public works facilities/projects as regulated by the Coastal Act: 
1.  The installation, testing, or replacement of any utility connection between an existing service facility and any existing, permitted development. 
2.  The installation, maintenance, and repair of underground electrical facilities and the conversion of existing overhead facilities to underground facilities, provided the work is limited to public road or railroad rights-of-way or public utility easements and provided the site is restored as closely as is reasonably possible to its original condition. 
3.  The installation, maintenance, and minor alteration of utility improvements that do not increase the capacity of the service or which are required to restore service or prevent service outages. 
K.  Temporary events for which all other permits and approvals required by the Municipal Code have been received and which meet all of the following criteria: 
1.  The event will not last more than three (consecutive) days. 
2.  The event will occupy a portion of a publicly or privately owned beach or park area but will not occur between Memorial Day weekend and Labor Day and a fee will not be charged for general public admission or seating where no fee is currently charged for use of the same area, and the event has been reviewed by the Director with a resulting finding that due to the proposed location and or timing of the event, there will be no adverse impact on opportunities for public use of the area. 
3.  The event has been reviewed by the Director with a resulting finding that the event does not have the potential to create adverse impacts on any environmentally sensitive area. 
(Ord. No. 733; Ord. No. 760)  
30.75.210 - Listing of Permit Exemptions. 
Those developments, which have been authorized as being exempt from the requirement for a Coastal Development Permit pursuant to this Chapter, shall be recorded on a list which shall be made available for review by members of the public and representatives of the California Coastal Commission.  
30.75.220 - Coastal Development Permits Issued by the City for Emergency Work. 
A.  Projects normally requiring the prior receipt of a Coastal Development Permit from the City may be undertaken under an Emergency Permit without the prior receipt of such Coastal Development Permit. Such Emergency Permit shall be issued only when the work to be performed is undertaken in order to protect life and property from imminent danger, or to restore, repair or maintain public works, utilities or services destroyed, damaged or interrupted by natural disaster, serious accident, or in other cases of emergency where immediate action is required. Where such emergency work is undertaken, the Director shall be the Issuing Authority for an Emergency Permit. 
B.  An application for an Emergency Permit may be made to the Director by telephone or in person, if time does not allow a written application. Notification of the type and location of the work shall be provided within seven calendar days of the disaster or emergency or discovery of the emergency, whichever occurs first. The information to be reported shall include the following: 
1.  The nature of the emergency. 
2.  The cause of the emergency, insofar as it can be established. 
3.  The location of the emergency. 
4.  The remedial protective, or preventive work required dealing with the emergency. 
5.  The circumstances during the emergency that appear to justify the course of action taken, including the probable consequences of failing to take such action. 
C.  Upon receipt of the required information, the Director shall verify the facts, including the existence and nature of the emergency, insofar as time allows, and shall provide public notice of the emergency action to the maximum extent practical under the circumstances. In granting an Emergency Permit, the Director may attach reasonable terms and conditions which shall include, at a minimum, expiration date for the work to be performed and a requirement for the post facto submittal of an application for a regular Coastal Development Permit within thirty (30) calendar days. The conditions may also include a requirement for the corresponding restoration of the site to its previous condition within 30 calendar days. 
D.  The issuance of an Emergency Permit shall be supported by findings of fact that: 
1.  An emergency exists and requires action more quickly than could be accommodated by the permitting process for a Coastal Development Permit prescribed in this Chapter and the development can and will be completed within 30 days unless otherwise specified by the terms of the permit. 
2.  Public comment on the proposed emergency action has been reviewed to the extent that time allows. 
3.  The work proposed would be consistent with the provisions of the City of Del Mar Local Coastal Program. 
E.  Following the issuance of an Emergency Permit, the Director shall prepare an informational report to the City Council describing the issued Emergency Permit, with a description of the nature of the emergency and the work involved. Notice of emergency permits shall also be provided by phone or letter to the California Coastal Commission as soon as possible, but at a maximum, within three working days, following issuance of the Emergency Permit.  
30.75.230 - Amendments to Coastal Development Permits. 
Unless otherwise specified herein, an application for amendment to a previously issued Coastal Development Permit shall be processed in accordance with the applicable provisions of this Chapter and the Local Coastal Program for review of Coastal Development Permit applications.  
30.75.240 - Applications for Coastal Development Permits Made Prior to Certification of Local Coastal Program. 
A.  Any Coastal Development Permit application which has been filed with the Coastal Commission before the effective certification of the Local Coastal Program, but which has not been deemed as being complete, shall be re-submitted to the City through an application for a Coastal Development Permit to be processed and reviewed pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter. Any application fee paid to the Commission shall be refunded to the applicant. 
B.  Any application for a Coastal Development Permit filed with the Coastal Commission, which has been deemed complete, may, at the request of the applicant, be continued to be processed by the Coastal Commission with application review based solely upon the requirements of the certified Local Coastal Program.  
30.75.250 - Severability. 
Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to give any property owner a right to use any property in any manner which requires a Coastal development Permit, unless a Coastal Development Permit for such development, activity, or use has first been granted and is in full force and effect, including all conditions attached thereto.  
30.75.260 - Special Regulations. 
In order to ensure compliance with the provisions of the Local Coastal Program, no Coastal Development Permit or exemption shall be issued or authorized for development which involves any of the following: 
A.  The construction of a new structure or portion thereof which exceeds 26 feet in height, as measured pursuant to the provisions of the Municipal Code. 
B.  The construction of a new structure on a project site which does not conform to the lot coverage development standards for the property as specified in the underlying zone for the property. 
C.  The installation of a new rooftop mounted sign or any new freestanding or monument sign that exceeds eight feet in height as measured pursuant to the provisions of the Municipal Code.  
Chapter 30.76 - NONCONFORMITIES 
 
30.76.010 - Purpose. 
A.  This Chapter is enacted to accomplish the regulation and eventual elimination of nonconforming uses and structural nonconformities. 
B.  This Chapter is not intended to restrict the City's ability to eliminate a public nuisance. 
C.  This Chapter is not intended to limit the City's ability to condemn a use or structure and pay to the owner thereof reasonable compensation. 
D.  Nothing in the Chapter shall preclude the City from declaring a building, structure, improvement or use to constitute a danger to the safety, health or welfare of the public and to take lawful action to remedy that danger. 
E.  This Chapter does not preclude the City from requiring an owner of a structure which has been constructed, expanded or altered either without a required building permit or contrary to the provisions of an issued building permit to modify or remove such structure or to obtain a required building inspection and final approval.  
30.76.020 - Nonconforming Use. 
A nonconforming use is a use that: 
A.  Is not within the scope, either expressly or implicitly, of the zoning restrictions set forth in this Chapter that announce the purpose, intent, permissible uses, accessory uses, and prohibited uses for the zone in which the particular use is located; 
B.  Did comply with the zoning restrictions contained in the Zoning Ordinance in effect at the time the use was created and was lawfully created; and 
C.  Has not been terminated in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.  
30.76.030 - Structural Nonconformity. 
Structural nonconformity is a physical aspect of a building, structure or improvement that: 
A.  Does not conform to the development standards announced in this Chapter to include, without limitations, height, setbacks, lot area, parking, type of building, or coverage of lot by structure; 
B.  Did comply with the development standards contained in the Zoning Ordinance in effect at the time the building, structure or improvement was constructed or structurally altered and was lawfully constructed; and 
C.  Has not been terminated in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.  
30.76.040 - Establishment of Nonconformity. 
In order to legally continue a use or structural aspect of a building, structure or improvement that is not consistent with the zoning restrictions of this Chapter, the person asserting a claim of nonconforming use or structural nonconformity has the burden of proof to establish that the use or structural feature qualifies in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.  
30.76.050 - Prohibition on Enlargement. 
It is unlawful for any person to enlarge, extend, expand or in any other manner change a nonconforming use or a structural nonconformity so as to increase its inconsistency with the zoning restrictions of this Chapter.  
30.76.060 - Repair/Maintenance of Structural Nonconformity. 
Repairs and maintenance may be performed on structural nonconformities so long as the nonconformity is not enlarged, relocated or increased in intensity.  
30.76.070 - Remodeling or Reconstruction of Building with Structural Nonconformity. 
A.  Any application for a project to restore or reconstruct a building that had one or more structural nonconformities and has been damaged to more than 50 percent of its valuation, as established by the Planning Director at the time of such application, shall be approved only if the project complies with all of the regulations contained in this Code. 
B.  Any application for a project for the remodeling of a building with one or more structural nonconformities at an estimated cost of more than 50 percent of the building's value, as established by the Planning Director at the time of application, shall be approved only if the project complies with all of the regulations of this Code. 
C.  Any project for a building with one or more structural nonconformities that is damaged to less than 50 percent of its valuation or that is the subject of a remodeling project at an estimated cost of less than 50 percent of the building's value, as determined by the Planning Director at the time of the application, may be approved with the continuation of the nonconformities so long as the nonconformities are not enlarged, extended or expanded. However, the owner must covenant to complete the project within 18 months of the issuance of the required permits, or, in the alternative, to abandon the structural nonconformities and comply with the regulations contained in this Code. 
D.  In applying this Section to remodeling, the City shall consider all remodeling accomplished in the 12 months preceding the application in determining whether "more than 50 percent of the building's value" is involved in the present application.  
30.76.075 - Nonconforming garage parking requirements for compliance. 
A project involving the remodeling or enlargement of an existing residential structure which fails to conform to the garage off-street parking requirements of this Title shall be required to comply with such garage off-street parking requirements unless both of the following conditions apply: 
A.  The valuation of the project is less than 50% of the valuation of the existing structure; and 
B.  The project has been designed so that after remodel or expansion, there is an amount of allowable floor area for the property which will remain unconstructed and unused for any purpose other than garage off-street parking, with the amount of such area commensurate with the amount of floor area required to satisfy the garage off-street parking requirements for the project. 
(Ord. No. 695)  
30.76.080 - Nonconforming Lots. 
A single building may be constructed on a lot of less area than required by this Chapter so long as the lot is a legal lot of record, has not merged, and is not mergeable.  
30.76.090 - Termination of Nonconforming Uses—General. 
A.  A nonconforming use may be replaced with the same or a similar use so long as the subsequent use does not enlarge, extend, expand or in any other manner increase the inconsistency with the regulations of this Chapter. 
B.  If a nonconforming use is changed to a use that conforms to or is more consistent with the regulations of this Chapter, then any entitlement to maintain the nonconforming use is modified in that same degree. 
C.  A nonconforming use which remains inactive, as specified in the provisions in this Chapter, shall be deemed to have ceased, in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, and shall not thereafter be renewed. 
D.  If a nonconforming use or structural nonconformity is enlarged, extended, expanded or in any other manner changed to increase its inconsistency with the regulations of this Chapter, then, in addition to any other consequences imposed by this Code, any entitlement to thereafter maintain the nonconformity is terminated. 
E.  Unless otherwise specified in this Chapter, a nonconforming use terminates if inactive for 180 consecutive days.  
30.76.100 - Nonconforming Rental Dwelling Use. 
A nonconforming rental dwelling use is inactive if the rental dwelling area is not occupied and is not subject to being occupied in accordance with an existing lease or rental agreement: 
A.  Entered into for a fair market rent; and 
B.  Entered into by the tenant with the intention of occupying the unit.  
30.76.110 - Nonconforming Guest Dwelling Use. 
A.  A nonconforming guest dwelling use is inactive if the unit is not occupied by a guest during any 730-day period. 
B.  A nonconforming guest dwelling use is terminated if the unit is the subject of a rental or lease agreement.  
30.76.120 - Nonconforming Multi-Family Dwellings. 
Nonconforming multi-family dwellings of three or more units may be reconstructed or structurally altered so long as neither the number of dwelling units for each complex nor the number of bedrooms for each unit is increased; the height of any structure is not increased; existing building profiles are maintained; and the number and size of existing parking spaces is not reduced.  
30.76.130 - Redevelopment Project. 
Except in cases where a building has been damaged to more than 50 percent of its valuation, as determined in accordance with this Chapter, if a property owner proposes a project that will replace or develop all or a portion of an existing structure which contains several nonconformities, the City may allow the owner to continue certain nonconformities if: 
A.  The Planning Commission concludes based on specific findings of fact that: 
1.  The proposed project will not expand an existing nonconformity; and 
2.  There is a public benefit in obtaining Code compliance to be derived from the elimination of one or more of the existing nonconformities that is not outweighed by the public detriment of allowing other, existing nonconformities to continue; 
B.  The Design Review Board concludes based on specific findings of fact that the proposed project design will improve the aesthetic quality of the community and will not violate any of the design criteria set forth Chapter 23.08. 
C.  A nonconforming floor area ratio shall not be maintained by this Section unless the Planning Commission finds that to do so will not have an adverse impact on the neighborhood.  
Chapter 30.78 - VARIANCES 
 
30.78.010 - Purpose. 
A.  The purpose of this Chapter is to establish the procedures and standards for exercising the authority granted to the City by the State of California regarding variances consistent with the General Plan. 
B.  Director shall mean "Director of Planning and Community Development." 
(Ord. No. 486)  
30.78.020 - Procedure. 
A.  An application for variance shall be submitted to the Department of Planning and Community Development on a form approved by the Director. 
B.  The application shall be deemed to have been filed when: 
1.  The Director has determined that all required information has been submitted in proper form; and 
2.  The applicant has submitted to the City the required deposit regarding the processing fee. 
C.  The Director shall cause the filed application to be presented at a noticed public hearing conducted by the Planning Commission. 
D.  At least ten days prior to the public hearing, notice shall be published and shall be mailed to property owners of record of real property within 300 feet of the project site. 
E.  During the hearing the applicant must present all arguments in favor of the granting of the variance or in support of any challenge to the regulations. The applicant cannot thereafter raise arguments which are not presented at the hearing. 
F.  By resolution, the Planning Commission shall announce its determination which shall become final on the 11th day following such determination, unless the determination is appealed to the City Council in accordance with the provisions of this Code. A notice of determination shall be posted at City Hall.  
30.78.030 - Standards. 
A.  A variance from the terms of the Zoning Ordinance shall be granted only when, because of the special circumstances applicable to the property, including size, shape, topography, location or surroundings, the strict application of the Zoning Ordinance deprives such property of privileges enjoyed by other property in the vicinity and under identical zoning classification. 
B.  Any variance granted shall be subject to such conditions as will assure that the adjustment thereby authorized will not constitute a grant of special privileges inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and zone in which such property is situated. 
C.  A variance will not be granted for a parcel of property which authorizes a use or activity which is not otherwise expressly authorized by the zoning regulation governing the parcel of property. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to conditional use permits. 
D.  No variance shall be granted if the inability to enjoy the privilege enjoyed by other property in the vicinity and under identical zoning classification: 
1.  Could be avoided by an alternate development plan; 
2.  Is self-induced as a result of an action taken by the property owner or the owner's predecessor; 
3.  Would allow such a degree of variation as to constitute a rezoning or other amendment to the zoning code; or 
4.  Would authorize or legalize the maintenance of any private or public nuisance.  
30.78.040 - Resolution of Determination. 
A.  A resolution granting a variance shall, at a minimum, contain the following: 
1.  The privilege lawfully enjoyed by other property owners in the vicinity and under an identical zoning classification; 
2.  The factors which make the subject property special when compared to other property in the area; 
3.  The way in which the special circumstances combine with the strict application of the zoning regulations to deprive the applicant of the privilege enjoyed by other property in the vicinity and under the identical zoning classification; 
4.  The way in which the grant of the variance will bring the applicant's property development into parity with other property in the vicinity and will not amount to a grant of special privilege over and above those privileges enjoyed by other properties in the vicinity and under an identical zoning classification; 
5.  The Code Section from which the variation is granted, the degree of variation allowed, and the conditions imposed on the variation. 
B.  A resolution denying a variance application shall set forth the basis of the denial.  
30.78.050 - Conditions. 
A.  Conditions imposed upon the granting of the variance shall be set forth in a covenant executed by the property owner and recorded with the County Recorder. 
B.  The City may require security for the performance of conditions imposed upon the grant of a variance.  
30.78.060 - Expiration. 
Three years from the date of final approval of a Variance, the Variance will expire, unless a building permit has been issued and substantial construction has been accomplished in reliance upon the Variance. 
(Ord. No. 641; Ord. No. 757)  
30.78.070 - Reserved.  
30.78.080 - Revocation of Variance. 
In the event that one or more of the conditions imposed on the variance is violated, the Director, upon notice and an opportunity to present information, may revoke the variance or impose additional conditions.  
30.78.090 - Reapplication. 
In the event that an application for variance is denied, the City shall not receive for filing any application for the same or similar variance within 12 months of such denial.  
Chapter 30.80 - PARKING[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Note— This Chapter of the Municipal Code forms a portion of the City of Del Mar Local Coastal Program Implementing Ordinances. The regulations found within this Chapter are not subject to "relief" through the Del Mar Variance process. Exceptions to, or relief from, the requirements found within this Chapter are limited to those specified within the language of this Chapter or found within other Chapters of the Implementing Ordinances. Where there is a conflict between the language of this Chapter and other portions of the Del mar Municipal Code, the language of this Chapter shall take precedence. 
 
30.80.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish a unified set of regulations, standards, and procedures pertaining to the provision of off-street parking spaces in a manner that preserves the community character and effectively addresses the peak parking needs of allowed uses. The intent is to offer a range of parking options that support multi-modal transit alternatives consistent with the City's Community Plan and Climate Action Plan, and to facilitate efficient use of parking in commercial zones in order to reduce the potential for adverse impacts on adjacent residential neighborhoods. 
(Ord. No. 509; Ord. No. 722; Ord. No. 778; Ord. No. 815; Ord. No. 817; Ord. No. 821; Ord. No. 850; Ord. No. 856; Ord. No. 924 , § 1, 12-5-2016)  
30.80.020 - General Parking Regulations. 
A.  Unless otherwise permitted pursuant to the Del Mar Municipal Code, every person conducting a use on private property shall provide permanently maintained off-street parking spaces reserved for parking purposes only, with such off-street parking spaces designed and installed in the amount and in the manner required by this Chapter. 
B.  Off-street parking spaces may be provided in a common area to meet the required parking for two or more uses located on the same site. Separate areas for the parking spaces corresponding to each use are not required. The use of common parking areas shall not modify the minimum parking requirements, which shall remain the sum of the required spaces of all uses computed separately, unless otherwise authorized pursuant to a Shared Parking Permit. 
C.  When an existing use with a structural nonconformity per Section 30.76.030 does not meet the off-street parking requirement and is proposed to be enlarged, then additional off-street parking shall be provided for the proposed enlargement at the rate required by Section 30.80.030. 
D.  Unless approved through a Conditional Use Permit (CUP) pursuant to Chapter 30.74, the parking of motor vehicles shall be without monetary charge when such parking is required pursuant to this Chapter. This Section shall not prohibit measures to limit the use of such parking to the owners, proprietors, employees, and customers for which the parking is required and provided. Any CUP authorized to allow a monetary charge for parking shall be subject to conditions and the findings for approval in Section 30.74.020 and shall only be allowed during times at least 30 minutes before or after the hours of operation for which the parking is required to ensure that the monetary charge will not result in adverse impacts to the availability of parking either in the public right-of-way or on other private properties in the vicinity. 
E.  Accessible parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with Title 24 of the California Building Code and shall be designed to meet applicable State and Federal standards for accessibility. Section 30.80.085 provides a process for existing uses to bring existing parking into compliance in cases where no expansion of the existing use is proposed. 
(Ord. No. 924 , § 2, 12-5-2016; Ord. No. 928 , § 1, 6-19-2017)  
30.80.030 - Required Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces. 
A.  The number of off-street parking spaces required for each use shall not be less than those set forth in this Section. 
1.  The required off-street parking ratios are specified in Tables within Subsection B. for residential uses and Subsection C. for non-residential uses. References within the Parking Tables to "GFA" shall mean "gross floor area" and references to "sq. ft." shall mean "square feet". 
2.  Where the required parking ratio is based on the gross floor area of a use, any areas devoted to parking shall be excluded from the calculation. 
3.  When the calculation of required parking results in a fractional part of an automobile parking space, a remaining fraction of one-half space or more shall be construed as one space; and a remaining fraction of less than one-half space shall be disregarded. 
B.  Residential Use Parking Requirements. 
1.  The following Table identifies the required off-street parking for specified residential uses: 
Residential Land Use 	Required Off-Street Parking Ratio 
Boarding House; Lodging House; Fraternity-Sorority Housing 	1 space per 2 sleeping rooms 
Community Care Facility; Residential Care 
Facility 	1 space for the facility operator plus 1 additional space for each employee during the largest shift; see Subsection B.3. 
Dwelling Unit, Single-Family 	Unit with 3 bedrooms or less 	2 garage spaces per unit 
	Unit with 4 bedrooms or more 	3 spaces per unit (minimum 2 spaces in a garage) 
Dwelling Unit, Multiple-Family 	Studio or 1-bedroom unit 	1 garage space per unit 
	2-bedroom or 3-bedroom unit 	2 spaces per unit (minimum 1 space in a garage) 
	Unit with 4+ bedrooms 	3 spaces per unit (minimum 2 spaces in a garage) 
	Guest Parking 	See Subsection B.2. 
Mobile Home Park 	1.5 spaces per mobile home or trailer site 
Senior Care Facility; Nursing Facility 	1 space for every 3 beds; see Subsection B.3. 
 
2.  In addition to the required off-street parking ratio specified in Subsection B.1., Multi-Family Dwelling Unit development shall comply with the following: 
a.  Provide one guest parking space per every four dwelling units; 
b.  Provide the guest parking spaces on the same parcel of land where the dwelling units are located; 
c.  Identify the spaces as "Guest Parking"; and 
d.  Prohibit the storage of recreational vehicles, boats, trailers, or similar oversized vehicles in guest parking spaces. 
3.  The parking rate for any community care, residential care or senior care facility may alternatively be provided at the same parking rate required for an equivalent dwelling unit. 
4.  The proposed remodel or enlargement of an existing dwelling unit with nonconforming garage parking is subject to Section 30.76.075. 
C.  Non-Residential Use Parking Requirements. 
1.  The following Table identifies the required off-street parking rate for specified non-residential uses that are grouped in the following general use categories: Commercial Services, Institutional, Office, Retail Sales, Vehicle and Vehicular Equipment Sales and Services, and Industrial. 
Non-Residential Land Use 	Required Off-Street Parking Ratio 
Commercial Services 
 Billiard Parlor 	1 space per 150 sq. ft. GFA 
 Bowling Alley 	4 spaces for each bowling lane 
 Child Daycare Facility 	1 space per employee, plus 1 space per 5 children 
 Church or Religious Facility/ 
Auditorium/Public Assembly 	1 space for each 5 seats of permanent seating; or 1 space for each 18 inches of bench seating (lineal inches); or 1 space per 7 sq. ft. of seating floor area where there is no permanent seating 
 Dance-Ballroom Hall/Meeting Hall 	1 space per each 40 sq. ft. of GFA or 2 spaces for every 6 seats plus 1 additional space for each 30 sq. ft. of dance floor area 
 Golf Course 	10 spaces for each hole or tee 
 Golf Driving Range 	3 spaces for each hole or tee 
 Hotel/Motel 	1.25 spaces for each lodging room/suite; and additional spaces for accessory commercial service uses greater than 500 sq. ft. GFA (using parking rate for that use type) 
 Miniature Golf Course 	3 spaces for each hole or tee 
 Mortuary/Funeral Home/ 
Commercial Chapel 	1 space for each 50 sq. ft. of assembly room GFA 
 Motion Picture and Live Theater 	1 space for every 4 seats 
 Personal Services 	
  • 5,000 sq. ft. or less of GFA 	1 space for each 300 sq. ft. of GFA 
  • 5,001 to 20,000 sq. ft. of GFA 	17 spaces, plus 1 space for each additional 150 sq. ft. of GFA in excess of 5,000 sq. ft. of GFA 
  • More than 20,000 sq. ft. of GFA 	17 spaces, plus 1 space for each additional 100 sq. ft. of GFA in excess of 20,000 sq. ft. GFA 
 Pet Services—Grooming 	1 space per 300 sq. ft. of GFA 
 Restaurant/Bar/Cocktail Lounge/Tea Room/Other Businesses for the on-site consumption of food and/or beverage 	1 space per 90 sq. ft. of GFA up to 4,000 sq. ft. and 1 space for each 45 sq. ft. of GFA in excess of 4,000 sq. ft. including all outdoor space, covered or uncovered, used for any restaurant purpose 
 Sports & Recreation Club/Facility 	1 space per 400 sq. ft. GFA 
 Swimming Pool/Ice-Roller Skating Rink 	1 space per 100 sq. ft. of pool/rink surface area 
 Tennis/Handball/Volleyball Courts 	2.5 spaces for each court 
 Veterinarian/Boarding Kennel 	1 space for each 200 sq. ft. of GFA (excludes overnight animal holding areas) 
 Warehouse/Storage Facility 	1 space for each 1,000 sq. ft. of GFA 
Institutional 
 Hospital 	1 space for each bed 
 Library 	1 space for each 250 sq. ft. of GFA 
 Museum 	1 space for each 250 sq. ft. of GFA 
 Post Office 	1 space for each 300 sq. ft. of GFA, plus 1 additional space for each commercial vehicle operated or kept in connection with the use 
 Public Utilities 	1 space for each 2 employees on the largest shift, plus 1 additional space for each commercial vehicle operated in connection with the use 
 School 	
  • Elementary/Junior High 	1 space per employee, plus 5 additional spaces (playground areas available for parking may be used to satisfy parking for an accessory auditorium where included) 
  • High School/Vocational/Adult 
Extension 	1 space for every 5 students plus parking for accessory auditorium, as applicable 
  • College/University 	1 space for every 3 students plus parking for accessory auditorium, as applicable 
Office 
 Banks/Financial Institutions 	1 space for every 300 sq. ft. of GFA 
 Medical/Dental/Clinical/Real Estate Mortgage Broker Office 	1 space for each 200 sq. ft. of GFA 
 Professional/Business Office 	1 space for each 300 sq. ft. of GFA 
Retail Sales 
 Appliance/Furniture Sales 	1 space for each 600 sq. ft. of GFA, plus 1 additional space for each commercial business vehicle operated in connection with the use 
 Liquor Store 	1 space per 300 sq. ft. GFA 
 Outdoor Sales 	1 space for each 200 sq. ft. of GFA for all areas used for sales, displays, viewing aisles/walkways or storage (required parking spaces shall be located in an area distinct from all sales, displays, viewing aisles, walkways, and storage areas) 
 Retail Food and Beverage Establishment (no table service) 	1 space per 300 sq. ft. GFA 
 Retail Nursery/Open Sales/Rental Yards 	
  • 10,000 sq. ft. or less of open sales and/or rental area 	1 space for each 500 sq. ft. of GFA, plus 1 additional space for each 1,000 sq. ft. of indoor/outdoor open sales and/or rental area 
  • More than 10,000 sq. ft. of open sales and/or rental area 	10 spaces for first 10,000 sq. ft. of GFA, plus 1 additional space for each 5,000 sq. ft. of indoor/outdoor open sales and/or rental area in excess of 10,000 sq. ft. 
 Other Sales that do not fit in a category listed above: 	
  • 5,000 sq. ft. or less of GFA 	1 space for each 300 sq. ft. of GFA 
  • 5,001 to 20,000 sq. ft. of GFA 	17 spaces, plus 1 additional space for each additional 150 sq. ft. of GFA in excess of 5,000 sq. ft. of GFA 
  • More than 20,000 sq. ft. of GFA 	17 spaces, plus 1 space for each additional 100 sq. ft. of GFA in excess of 20,000 sq. ft. GFA 
Vehicle and Vehicular Equipment Sales and Services 
 Automobile/Boat Sales 	
  •10,000 sq. ft. or less of open sales and/or rental area 	1 space for each 500 sq. ft. of GFA, plus 1 additional space for each 1,000 sq. ft. of indoor/outdoor open sales and/or rental area 
  •More than 10,000 sq. ft. of open sales and/or rental area 	10 spaces for first 10,000 sq. ft. of GFA, plus 1 additional space for each 5,000 sq. ft. of indoor/outdoor open sales and/or rental area in excess of 10,000 sq. ft. 
 Automobile Washing 	
  • Automatic 	1 space for every 2 employees, plus 1 space for each queue space per queue line 
  • Manual 	1 space for each car wash bay, plus 2 spaces for each queue space per queue line 
 Gasoline Service Station 	1 space for each gasoline pump, plus 1 additional space for each employee of the largest shift and 1 space per 300 sq. ft. gross floor area for any retail sales area (Note: parking spaces adjacent to the pump count towards the required parking) 
 Vehicular Repair and Maintenance Facility 	2 spaces per service bay, plus 1 additional space for each employee of the largest shift, and 1 additional space for each commercial business vehicle operated in connection with the use 
Industrial 
 Industrial/Manufacturing/ Laboratory/ Wholesale Printing 	1 space for each 500 sq. ft. of GFA, plus 1 additional space for each commercial vehicle operated in connection with the use 
 
2.  Bicycle spaces: In addition to the required number of standard off-street automobile parking spaces, proposed non-residential development shall comply with all of the following: 
a.  Provide a minimum of two short-term bicycle parking spaces or five percent of the required automobile spaces, whichever is greater in permanently anchored bicycle racks within 200 feet of the visitor's entrance and readily visible from the public right-of-way. 
i.  Existing bicycle parking spaces in a permanent bicycle rack located in the public right-of-way within 200 feet of the visitor entrance may be counted towards the requirement. 
ii.  Uses that are not anticipated to generate visitor traffic and new additions or alterations that add nine or fewer automobile parking spaces are exempt from the requirement for short-term bicycle parking. 
b.  Provide secure long-term bicycle parking in bicycle lockers or indoors in a secure bicycle parking location at a rate of one space or five percent of the required automobile parking spaces, whichever is greater, for new multi-tenant buildings with more than ten tenant-occupants; or for any projects where ten or more automobile spaces would be added. 
3.  Clean Air Vehicle spaces. 
a.  For the purpose of Chapter 30.80, the term "Clean Air Vehicle" shall mean any low-emitting and fuel efficient vehicle regulated under Health and Safety Code § 43800 and CCR Title 13, §§ 1961 and 1962 and the following vehicles identified below: 
i.  Compressed natural gas (CNG) fueled vehicles (original equipment manufacturer only); 
ii.  High efficiency vehicles bearing a High Occupancy Vehicle sticker issued by the Department of Motor Vehicles; 
iii.  Neighborhood Electric Vehicles (NEV) that meet the definition of "low-speed vehicle" either in Section 385.5 of the Vehicle Code or in 49 CFR 571.500 (as it existed on July 1, 2000) and are certified to zero-emission vehicle standards; 
iv.  Partial Zero Emission Vehicles (PZEV) and Advanced Technology Partial Zero Emission Vehicles (ATZEV) certified by the California Air Resources Board; 
v.  Vanpool Vehicles that are designed for carrying ten to 15 persons including the driver, and that are maintained and used primarily for the nonprofit work-related transportation of adults for the purposes of ridesharing; and 
vi.  Zero Emission Vehicles (ZEV) that are certified to zero-emission standards. 
b.  For proposed non-residential development that would add ten or more automobile spaces, off-street parking spaces shall be reserved for Clean Air Vehicles that meet the definition in Subsection C.4.a. in accordance with the rate specified in the following Table: 
Total Number of Standard 
Automobile Spaces 	Number of Required Spaces 
Reserved for 
Clean Air Vehicles 
0—9 	0 
10—25 	1 
26—50 	3 
51—75 	6 
76—100 	8 
101—150 	11 
151—200 	16 
201 or more 	8% of automobile parking 
 
c.  The required number of Clean Air Vehicles spaces may be allocated from the total required number of automobile spaces for a development. 
d.  New Clean Air Vehicle spaces shall be designed to accommodate future installation of electric vehicle supply equipment in accordance with the California Green Building Standards Code § 5.106.5.3. 
4.  Within the Central Commercial, Visitor Commercial, North Commercial, Professional Commercial, and Beach Commercial Zones, alternative transportation spaces may be provided for Clean Air Vehicles, compact cars, micro-cars, motorcycles or bicycles in place of up to 15 percent of the standard automobile parking spaces. 
a.  The number of reserved Clean Air Vehicle spaces provided may exceed the number of required Clean Air Vehicle spaces identified in Subsection C.3. by up to an additional 15 percent of the total required standard automobile parking spaces. 
b.  The number of micro-car spaces shall not exceed a ratio of one micro-car space to ten standard automobile parking spaces. 
c.  Where provided in accordance with Subsection C.4., the following minimum ratios shall be complied with as applicable for credit towards the off-street parking requirement: 
i.  Clean Air Vehicle parking spaces or Compact parking spaces shall be provided in place of standard spaces at a ratio of one to one. 
ii.  Micro-car parking spaces shall be provided in place of standard spaces at a ratio of two micro-car spaces to one standard space. 
iii.  Motorcycle parking spaces shall be provided in place of standard spaces at a ratio of four motorcycle spaces to one standard parking space. 
iv.  Bicycle parking spaces provided within secure bicycle lockers (labeled as bicycle parking with posted directions for how to access and use the spaces) shall be provided in place of standard spaces at a ratio of four bicycle locker spaces to one standard space. 
v.  The Director of Planning and Community Development may approve any equivalent combination of Clean Air Vehicle, compact, micro-car, motorcycle, and bicycle spaces to meet the off-street parking requirement. 
D.  For multiple-tenant commercial buildings and sites with a mix of commercial uses and lease spaces, common areas such as common entryways, hallways, restrooms, and stairwells or elevators shall be exempt from the calculation of gross floor area for the purpose of required parking. 
E.  Unless otherwise specified, accessory uses that are customarily incidental and subordinate to the primary use on a property may be exempt from the requirement to provide additional off-street parking where they comply with the following: 
1.  The primary use must occupy at least 50 percent of the property; 
2.  The accessory use must occupy an area no greater than 25 percent of the floor area of the primary use; and 
3.  The use category that corresponds to the accessory use must require the same or fewer parking spaces than the use category for the primary use per the parking rates specified in Subsection C. 
F.  Alternative compliance with the required non-residential parking rates may be requested subject to Planning Commission approval of a Site-Specific Parking Management Plan pursuant to Section 30.80.095. 
(Ord. No. 718; Ord. No. 924 , § 3, 12-5-2016) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 924 , § 3, adopted December 5, 2016, changed the title of Section 30.80.030 from "Number of Spaces: Specified Requirement" to "Required Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces." The historical notation has been preserved for reference purposes.  
30.80.040 - Planning Commission Determination of Required Parking. 
Where ambiguity exists in the application of off-street parking requirements, or where the parking requirements for a use are not specifically defined herein, the parking requirements for such use shall be determined by the Planning Commission and such determination shall be based upon the requirements for the most comparable use specified herein. 
(Ord. No. 924 , § 4, 12-5-2016) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 924 , § 4, adopted December 5, 2016, changed the title of Section 30.80.040 from "Number of Spaces: Determination of Requirement."  
30.80.050 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 924 , § 5, adopted December 5, 2016, repealed the former Section 30.80.050 in its entirety, which pertained to computing number of spaces, and derived from original codification.  
30.80.060 - Design of Parking Space(s). 
A.  Size. 
1.  Each off-street parking space provided to meet required parking shall be designed to meet the minimum dimensions identified in the Table below. 
Types of
Parking Space 	Required Minimum
Dimensions 	Special
Circumstances 
Standard Automobile Space 	9 feet wide by 18 feet long 	Add 6 inches to the width on each side that the space abuts an immovable obstacle higher than 6 inches above grade; and refer to City of Del Mar Parking Lot Layout standards 
Compact Space 	8 feet wide by 15 feet long 	
Micro Car Space 	6 feet wide by 9 feet long 	
Motorcycle Space 	4.5 feet wide by 8 feet long 	
Tandem Automobile Spaces 	9 feet wide by 36 feet long 	
One-Car Garage Parking 	10 feet wide by 20 feet long 	
Two-Car Garage Parking 	20 feet wide by 20 feet long 	Length and width may be adjusted for tandem parking (minimum 400 sq. ft.) 
Three-Car Garage Parking 	30 feet wide by 20 feet long 	Length and width may be adjusted for tandem parking (minimum 600 sq. ft.) 
 
2.  The following standards apply to alternative parking designs where incorporated to meet required parking: 
a.  Clean Air Vehicles. 
i.  For the purpose of this Section, Clean Air Vehicles shall have the meaning identified in Subsection 30.80.030.C.3. 
ii.  In accordance with the California Green Building Standards, spaces reserved for Clean Air Vehicles shall be clearly identified on the paved surface of the parking space in the same paint used for the parking stall striping. The lower edge of the text shall align with the end point of the stall striping so that the signage is visible beneath a parked vehicle as follows: 
 CLEAN AIR/ 
VANPOOL/EV 
b.  Micro-car, and Motorcycle spaces. 
i.  Micro-car spaces shall be clearly identified and reasonably distributed throughout the project rather than all clustered in one location. 
ii.  Motorcycle spaces shall be clearly identified. 
c.  Tandem Parking spaces. Tandem parking is a parking configuration where one vehicle parks directly behind another and the vehicle in back must be moved in order for the front vehicle to leave. 
i.  Tandem parking spaces designed to count towards required parking shall be limited to a maximum of two cars in depth. 
ii.  Non-residential accessible parking spaces that are required for persons with disabilities in accordance with California Building Code Title 24 shall not be provided in a tandem configuration. 
iii.  Proposals for use of tandem parking to satisfy required parking for non-residential development shall be accompanied by a plan for operation to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the applicable decision maker that the use of tandem parking will be operated effectively and will not result in adverse impacts. 
iv.  For residential uses with no alley access, tandem parking may be permitted within the required front yard setback area. 
d.  Automobile stacking mechanisms (horizontal and vertical), including mechanical lifts or elevators, may be used to provide access to required off-street parking spaces within an enclosed garage parking structure regardless of whether the spaces within the parking structure are located at-grade, above-grade, or below-grade provided the applicant complies with the following: 
i.  The applicant shall provide a plan for operation of the automobile stacking mechanism to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City's Fire Chief and Director of Planning and Community Development that the automobile stacking mechanism will be operated effectively in compliance with all safety features required by the manufacturer and shall incorporate any permit conditions required by the applicable decision maker to ensure the approval will not result in adverse impacts. 
ii.  Automobile stacking mechanisms shall not obstruct access to other required off-street parking spaces. 
3.  All parking areas shall be surfaced and maintained with an asphalt, concrete or other surface material deemed acceptable by the City Engineer that will provide equivalent protection against potholes, erosion, dust and/or other nuisances. 
4.  Any required accessible (disabled) parking space shall be constructed in a manner required by the most current edition(s) of the California Building Code (Title 24). 
B.  Location. Off-street parking required by this Chapter shall be located: 
1.  On the same site as the use necessitating such parking; or 
2.  Subject to the authorization and approval of an Off-Site Parking Permit. 
C.  Access from Street to Space. All parking spaces required by this Chapter shall be serviced by adequate ingress and egress as provided for herein: 
1.  Access to parking areas with six spaces or less and serving only residential uses shall have an unobstructed, permanently surfaced driveway not less than ten feet in width. Said driveway(s) shall not exceed a total maximum width of 20 feet along all abutting street lines. (Refer to the City of Del Mar Parking Layout standards for parking space design and layout.) 
2.  Access to parking areas serving other than residential uses of any size, or serving a residential use of seven or more parking spaces, shall have an unobstructed, permanently surfaced driveway not less than ten feet in width for a one-way driveways and 20 feet in width for two-way driveways. The driveway shall have a maximum width of 24 feet within a front yard or required side yard abutting a street. A suitable turnaround area shall be provided for each such parking area to enable all vehicles using such parking area to enter the street in a forward manner. (Refer to the City of Del Mar Parking Layout for parking space design and layout.) 
D.  Aisle Dimensions. 
1.  All aisles, fire lanes, maneuvering areas and/or other specified non-parking area shall be clearly marked and maintained with directional arrows and stripping. 
2.  Aisle dimensions for parking lots shall conform to the dimensions shown on the City of Del Mar Parking Layout. 
(Ord. No. 924 , § 6, 12-5-2016)  
30.80.070 - Conflict with Use of Street or Alley. 
A.  Unless otherwise provided, no portion of a street or alley shall be counted as a part of a required parking space. 
B.  All parking spaces and driveways shall be so located and designed as to avoid undue interference with the public use of streets and/or alleys.  
30.80.080 - Standards. 
A.  All parking and turnaround areas shall be subject to the same restrictions governing accessory buildings as defined in the zone in which such parking area is located, unless otherwise identified. 
B.  Parcels of land that abut an alley, shall allow required parking within the rear yard setback according to Subsection 30.86.200.C. 
C.  Parking and storage of vehicles on vacant lots including boats, house trailers, camper trailers and detached camper-trailer tops shall not be permitted for more than 72 consecutive hours unless otherwise provided for. 
(Ord. No. 924 , § 7, 12-5-2016)  
30.80.085 - Reduction of Off-Street Parking to Enable Existing Development to Comply with Accessible Parking Requirements. 
A.  When required to meet the California Building Code (Title 24) or the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) requirements for provision of accessible off-street parking spaces and paths of travel thereto, an applicant may obtain approval from the Director of Planning and Community Development for an existing use to reduce the total number of existing parking spaces upon demonstrating that the reduction in the number of spaces will be the minimum necessary to achieve compliance with State and Federal accessible parking requirements and that no change of use or expansion of the existing use is proposed. 
B.  This Section shall not be construed or applied so as to authorize a reduction of the off-street parking requirements to be provided in proposals for new development(s). 
C.  The reduction in the number of required parking spaces shall be subject to the receipt of all required permits. 
(Ord. No. 815; Ord. No. 924 , § 8, 12-5-2016) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 924 , § 8, adopted December 5, 2016, changed the title of Section 30.80.085 from "Reduction of Off-Street Parking Requirement to Comply with Accessible Parking Regulations" to "Reduction of Off-Street Parking to Enable Existing Development to Comply with Accessible Parking Requirements." The historical notation has been preserved for reference purposes.  
30.80.090 - "Town and Country" Parking Spaces. 
"Town and Country" parking is a type of private/public parking design where spaces are provided partially on private property and partially in the public right-of-way along a specified portion of Camino del Mar. "Town and Country" parking shall be permitted within that portion of the Central Commercial (CC) Zone, which lies between 11th Street on the south side of Camino del Mar and 13th Street on the north side of Camino del Mar, provided that the parking spaces meet all of the following: 
A.  The design of such parking, including location, parking angle, dimensions, walkways, landscaping and lighting, shall be consistent with the City of Del Mar Camino del Mar Streetscape Plan and subject to the approval of the City Council. 
B.  When Town and Country parking is permitted in conjunction with the construction of new buildings, such buildings shall be set back not less than 20 feet from the Camino del Mar ultimate right-of-way. Side yard and rear yard requirements cited elsewhere in this Title shall not be modified as a result of these Town and Country parking requirements. 
C.  When Town and Country parking is permitted in conjunction with the construction of new buildings, at least 30 percent of the required parking shall be located within the rear 50 percent of the lot; except, however, that this provision shall not apply if the total number of required parking spaces can be provided by the Town and Country configuration. 
D.  The property owner shall execute and record, with the Office of the San Diego County Recorder, a sidewalk (for pedestrian access) and landscape easement not less than ten feet in width, giving the public rights of access over said private property. The language of such easement shall be approved by the City Attorney and the Director of Planning and Community Development prior to recordation. Improvements and maintenance of improvements constructed within the easement area shall be the responsibility of the property owner. 
E.  Parking provided partially on private property and partially on public right-of-way, as herein allowed, shall be credited against off-street parking required by this Chapter. 
F.  Landscape peninsulas, located on public right-of-way, shall be required at all street corners, and at minimum between every ten parking spaces. Such peninsulas shall include tree forms and indirect lighting. Such landscaping shall be consistent with the City of Del Mar Camino del Mar Streetscape Plan. 
G.  To maintain acceptable safety standards, parking angles and dimensions shall be designed to align with the existing adjacent parking configuration insofar as possible. 
(Ord. No. 924 , § 9, 12-5-2016)  
30.80.095 - Site-Specific Parking Management Plans. 
A.  For commercial development with multiple tenants that are located within the Central Commercial, Visitor Commercial, North Commercial, Professional Commercial, and Beach Commercial zones, approval to alternatively meet the required parking as set forth in Section 30.80.030 may be requested by making application for approval of a Site-Specific Parking Management Plan. The approved blended rate parking requirements for the multi-tenant commercial development as a whole shall generally be no lower than one space per 300 feet. 
B.  Requests for approval of a Site-Specific Parking Management Plan are subject to Planning Commission approval. 
C.  The owner of each business in operation on the subject property shall be required to comply with the terms of the approved Site-Specific Parking Management Plan. 
D.  As a condition of approval, each business covered by the Site-Specific Parking Management Plan shall be required to demonstrate compliance with the approved Site-Specific Parking Management Plan to the satisfaction of the Director of Planning and Community Development on an annual basis upon application for business license renewal. 
E.  If the Director of Planning and Community Development determines the development is not in compliance with the approved Site-Specific Parking Management Plan, then the permittee shall bring the development into compliance or shall file an application for a revised Site-Specific Parking Management Plan subject to Planning Commission approval. 
(Ord. No. 924 , § 10, 12-5-2016; Ord. No. 928 , § 2, 6-19-2017)  
30.80.100 - Improvement and Maintenance of Commercial and Industrial Parking Spaces. 
All commercial and industrial parking areas, including parking spaces, access aisles and driveways, shall be developed and maintained in the following manner: 
A.  Off-street parking areas shall be so graded and drained as to dispose of all surface water into public drainage systems. The design and improvement of such parking areas shall prevent runoff water from draining across public sidewalks and pedestrian access easements. 
B.  Automobile parking spaces and access aisles shall be designed and/or marked or otherwise made clearly identifiable to assure safe and convenient automobile circulation. 
C.  Walls, fences, and trees within or adjacent to parking areas shall be protected by permanently affixed curbing or wheel stops, located not closer than four feet, from such wall, fence, or tree to be protected. 
D.  Any lighting used to illuminate parking areas shall be decorative, a low illumination level, and not more than 15 feet in height. Such lights shall be arranged and designed to reflect the light downward and away from any public right-of-way and/or from any property used for residential purposes. 
E.  Each site shall include loading/unloading stalls in addition to the required number of parking spaces required for a specific use. 
1.  One loading/unloading stall shall be required for the first 5,000 square feet of gross floor area and one additional loading/unloading stall for each additional 20,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
2.  Each loading/unloading stall shall be a minimum of 12 feet in width and 20 feet in depth. 
3.  Loading/unloading stalls shall be located in an area on-site and not within the required front yard setback. Such loading/unloading stalls shall be located in a manner so as not to interfere with pedestrian and/or vehicle traffic. 
4.  A loading/unloading stall shall not be used for storage at any time. 
F.  Surface parking areas containing three or more parking spaces shall be separated from an adjacent street or streets, except for driveways and access routes, by a compact evergreen hedge or a wall or fence not less than two feet or more than three feet six inches in height located three or more feet within the property line(s) adjacent to such street or streets. If said separation structure is a wall or a fence, the face of the wall or fence facing the adjacent street or streets shall be landscaped. Said three-foot or more setback area from the street property line shall be landscaped and maintained in accordance with the applicable provisions of this Section. 
G.  Where surface parking areas containing three or more parking spaces abuts property in the R1, RM, or R2 Zones, screening (e.g. a solid wall, view obscuring fence, or compact evergreen hedge) shall be erected and maintained. Screening shall be a minimum of six feet in height above the surface of the parking area; except, that within the area of the front yard setback, the maximum height shall be calculated according to Subsection 30.86.090.A.1. No such wall, fence or hedge need be provided where the elevation of that portion of the parking area immediately adjacent is six feet or more below the elevation of abutting property located in the R1, RM, or R2 Zones. 
H.  Plans for proposed parking areas shall be submitted to the City prior to the issuance of any Building Permit for such parking area or building for which the parking is accessory. Such plans shall clearly indicate the proposed development, including location, size, shape, design, curb cuts, lighting, landscaping, drainage, and other features and appurtenances of the proposed parking area. 
(Ord. No. 924 , § 11, 12-5-2016)  
30.80.110 - Landscaping Improvements. 
A.  All applicable residential projects shall include a detailed landscaping plan including plant location, plant types listed by the common name and Latin name and maximum mature heights of vegetation. Such landscaping shall be permanently maintained. 
B.  All portions of any front yard or side yard abutting a street, except for driveways, walks, fish ponds and decorative bodies of water, as provided in Subsection 30.86.200.M.4., shall be landscaped with trees, shrubs, flowers, or other plant materials, planter boxes (subject to the setback/height provisions applicable to fences contained within this Title), or rock gardens; and shall be permanently maintained in a neat, attractive, and orderly manner. In no case shall boats, trailers, trucks, campers or the like be stored or parked in any required front or side yard abutting a street, nor shall any storage of any materials whatsoever be permitted in said yards. 
C.  All commercial, industrial, multi-family and religious facility projects shall provide a minimum of ten percent of the off-street parking area(s) with landscaping comprised of trees and shrubs in accordance with the following criteria: 
1.  Landscape areas shall be dispersed throughout the parking area(s) in such a manner as to reasonably interrupt the expanse of paving or the mass of parked automobiles. There shall be a minimum landscaped area between every six parking spaces. 
2.  All tree species, once established, shall be trimmed to remove branches below the height of 80 inches from the paving surface. 
3.  All trees shall be in good condition upon planting and shall be placed in holes of sufficient size and backfilled with appropriate organic matter/topsoil mixture to assure successful growth. 
4.  All trees shall be adequately staked or guyed. 
5.  All required planting shall be permanently maintained in good growing condition by the property owner and, whenever necessary, replaced with new plant materials to ensure continued compliance with applicable landscaping requirements. All required fences and walls shall be permanently maintained in good condition and, whenever necessary, repaired or replaced. 
6.  All landscape areas shall be served, as necessary, by an adequate, permanently installed irrigation system. 
(Ord. No. 615; Ord. No. 924 , § 12, 12-5-2016)  
30.80.130 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 924 , § 13, adopted December 5, 2016, repealed the former Section 30.80.130 in its entirety, which pertained to common parking, and derived from Ord. No. 821.  
30.80.140 - Shared Parking Permit. 
A.  Where two or more non-residential uses will be operated with no substantial overlap in the hours of operation of the uses, a portion of the off-street parking spaces required and provided for one or more of the uses(s) may be provided as Shared Parking spaces subject to approval of a Shared Parking Permit. 
B.  The decision on an application for a Shared Parking Permit shall be made by the Planning Commission. A decision by the Planning Commission may be appealed to the City Council within ten working days from the date of the Planning Commission's approval. Any appeal of the Planning Commission's decision shall be filed in accordance with the procedures set forth in DMMC Chapter 1.12. 
C.  In reviewing an application for a Shared Parking Permit, the Planning Commission shall apply the following standards and requirements: 
1.  The applicant shall demonstrate that there will be no substantial overlap in the principal operating hours of the buildings or uses for which the Shared Parking spaces are proposed. For purposes of this Section, the term "no substantial overlap" shall mean that, on a daily basis, there will be at least 30 minutes between the time of closing of one use or activity and the opening of the other use or activity for which shared parking is proposed. The requirement for this separation of time between operation of uses enumerated herein shall not apply to normal support services such as cleaning and maintenance operations. 
2.  Not more than 66 percent of the off-street parking spaces required for a use or activity may be satisfied through the use of a Shared Parking Permit. 
3.  Parking spaces to be used for Shared Parking shall be unencumbered for any uses or activities other than those for which the Shared Parking Permit is proposed. 
4.  All Shared Parking spaces shall meet the location, design and layout requirements for off-street parking spaces specified in this Chapter. 
5.  Any proposal for Shared Parking which is to be located off-site, shall be also subject to the receipt of an Off-Site Parking Permit in accordance with Section 30.80.150. 
6.  A Shared Parking Permit shall be recorded as a covenant against the deed for the property on which the Shared Parking spaces are located. The purpose of the covenant shall be to memorialize the terms and conditions of the Shared Parking Permit and to inform subsequent property owners and business operators of the restrictions on use and parking which apply to the site. The recorded covenant shall specify the operating hours, as conditioned, of the businesses for which a Shared Parking Permit has been approved. 
(Ord. No. 821; Ord. No. 924 , § 14, 12-5-2016)  
30.80.150 - Off-Site Parking Permit. 
A.  An applicant may request approval to provide the required parking for a non-residential use or activity on a separate site than the location of the use or activity itself subject to approval of an Off-Site Parking Permit. 
1.  An application for an Off-Site Parking Permit may be submitted for any non-residential use allowed within the applicable zone. 
2.  Off-Site Parking shall be located only within the Central Commercial, Professional Commercial, North Commercial Visitor Commercial or Beach Commercial Zone. 
B.  The decision on an application for an Off-Site Parking Permit shall be made by the City Council. 
C.  In reviewing an application for an Off-Site Parking Permit, the City Council shall apply the following conditions of approval: 
1.  The location of all required parking shall be within a 500-foot walking distance measured from the nearest point of the parking facility to the nearest point of the building that such parking is required to serve. 
2.  Signage notifying the public of the location of the use and of the location of the Off-Site Parking shall be provided at each property subject to the Off-Site Parking Permit. 
a.  The required content of the signage shall be as follows: 
i.  A sign one square foot in size shall be conspicuously posted at the site of the use stating that Off-Site Parking Spaces are available for use by patrons and employees of the use and shall identify the location of the Off-Site Parking Spaces; and 
ii.  A sign one square foot in area shall be posted at each Off-Site Parking Space stating the space is available for use by patrons and employees of the use for which the Off-Site Parking has been authorized. 
b.  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the DMMC, the signs required in this Section shall not be included in the calculation of the maximum amount of signage allowed for a property or use. 
3.  The owner of the property containing the Off-Site Parking and the owner of the business to be served by the Off-Site Parking shall file with the City a signed agreement, prepared in a form for recordation with the San Diego County Recorder, and containing at a minimum the following terms: 
a.  That the agreement shall be to lease the Off-Site Parking Spaces pursuant to an approved Off-Site Parking Permit obtained in accordance with DMMC Section 30.80.150; 
b.  That the lease term for the Off-Site Parking Spaces shall coincide with the maximum term of the business owner's lease and shall automatically be renewed with any extension of the business owner's lease; 
c.  That the owner of the property containing the Off-Site Parking Spaces shall be required to maintain the Off-Site Parking Spaces subject to the terms of the approved Off-Site Parking Permit; 
d.  That the conditions and terms of the Off-Site Parking Permit shall be binding upon the successors in interest of all parties subject to the Permit and lease agreement; and 
e.  That the agreement is a covenant running with the land and shall be recorded with the San Diego County Recorder. 
4.  An Off-Site Parking Permit shall be recorded as a covenant against the deed for the property on which the Off-Site Parking is to be located. The purpose of the covenant shall be to memorialize the terms and conditions of the Off-Site Parking Permit to inform subsequent property owners and business operators of the restrictions on use and parking that apply. 
5.  On an annual basis in conjunction with renewal of the Business License, the benefitted owner of the business with Off-Site Parking shall provide evidence to the satisfaction of the Director of Planning and Community Development that the lease agreement is still valid in compliance with the Off-Site Parking Permit or that one of the following actions has occurred: 
a.  That a separate Off-Site Parking Permit has been obtained to satisfy the required off-street parking for that business; or 
b.  The Off-Site Parking Permit is no longer necessary, in which case the permit holder shall record a cancellation of the Off-Site Parking Permit with the San Diego County Recorder for all properties as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 821; Ord. No. 924 , § 15, 12-5-2016)  
30.80.160 - Conditional Use Permit Approval for Valet Parking. 
A.  A Conditional Use Permit shall be required for approval to conduct valet parking operations. The permit application shall include the following information to the satisfaction of the Director of Planning and Community Development: 
1.  An application fee as set forth by Resolution of the City Council; 
2.  Details regarding the type of business that the valet parking operation will serve including the number of required off-street parking spaces for that use; 
3.  Details regarding the proposed valet parking operation including, the number of employees, the proposed location for the pick-up and drop-off of customer vehicles, off-street parking facilities, and the route of travel to be used to store and retrieve customer vehicles; 
4.  Details about the proposed type and location for any signage that will be used to identify the valet parking operation to customers; and 
5.  Any other information relevant to the proposed valet parking operation as deemed appropriate by the Director of Planning and Community Development. 
B.  A Conditional Use Permit application for valet parking shall be decided as follows: 
1.  Valet parking operations on private property shall be subject to approval by the Planning Commission. 
2.  Valet parking operations on public property or in the public right-of-way shall be subject to approval by the City Council. 
3.  A Conditional Use Permit for valet parking may be approved or conditionally approved only if the decision maker makes all of the findings to grant the permit in accordance with Section 30.74.020. 
C.  As part of their review and consideration of the Permit, the decision maker may approve the valet parking operation as a means for the business that it serves to alternatively comply with the off-street parking requirement. 
D.  The decision maker may impose conditions of approval as deemed necessary to protect the public, health, safety and welfare, to ensure the right of coastal access, and to ensure compliance with the Permit. At a minimum, conditions shall address the following: 
1.  Hours of operation; 
2.  The location for pick-up and drop-off of customer vehicles to occur; 
3.  The location of the off-street parking facilities where customer vehicles will be parked and stored; 
4.  Signage for the valet parking operation; 
5.  The number of required off-street parking spaces authorized by the permit where valet parking is being used as an equivalency for compliance; 
6.  Any conditions to ensure that valet parking operations will not interfere with required off-street parking; 
7.  Proof of general liability insurance and garage liability insurance; and 
8.  Copies of any executed agreements (between the valet parking operator and the business being served by the valet parking operator or between the valet parking operator and the property owner where vehicles will be parked and stored off-site) as necessary to demonstrate compliance with the Permit. 
E.  A Conditional Use Permit for valet parking may be revoked in accordance with Section 30.74.080. 
(Ord. No. 924 , § 16, 12-5-2016; Ord. No. 928 , § 3, 6-19-2017) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 924 , § 16, adopted December 5, 2016, changed the title of Section 30.8160 from "Valet Parking Permit" to "Conditional Use Permit Approval for Valet Parking."  
30.80.170 - In-Lieu Parking Fee Program. 
The In-Lieu Parking Fee Program was established to provide a tool for better management and utilization of parking spaces within the City's Downtown area. The goal of the program is to expand on the existing capacity of off-street parking spaces available to the public, and to facilitate public access and mobility within the Village Center and to local park and beach areas. 
A.  For projects located within the Central Commercial Zone, the provision of the off-street parking spaces otherwise required pursuant to this Chapter may instead be partially satisfied through the payment of an In-Lieu Parking Fee in accordance with the following: 
1.  Authorization for use of an In-Lieu Parking Fee(s) to satisfy off-street parking requirements shall be subject to the review and approval of the Director of Planning and Community Development, with such approval based on compliance with the provisions of this Chapter. 
2.  The payment of an In-Lieu Parking Fee shall be made on a one-for-one basis with a fee paid for each required parking space to be satisfied through the In-Lieu Parking Fee Program. 
3.  The amount of the In-Lieu Parking Fee shall be set by resolution of the City Council and may be amended from time to time by resolution of the City Council. 
4.  No more than 75 percent of the off-street parking spaces otherwise required for a project may be satisfied through use of the In-Lieu Parking Fee Program. 
5.  An applicant may not utilize Shared Parking in addition to the In-Lieu Parking Fee Program. 
B.  In-Lieu Parking Fee funds collected by the City shall be deposited in a designated fund and shall be expended by the City exclusively for: 
1.  The acquisition, development, operation or maintenance of off-street parking spaces available for use by the general public; and 
2.  The development and implementation of an alternate public transportation program, such as a shuttle system, to transport the public to and from off-street parking spaces available for use by the general public along Camino del Mar through the Village Center and to the Powerhouse/Seagrove Parks at the foot of 15th Street to facilitate public access and mobility within the Village Center and to beach areas. 
C.  The payment of In-Lieu Parking Fees to satisfy the provisions of this Chapter shall occur prior to the issuance of any required Building Permits for the development for which the fees are required or prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy for any activity for which the fees are required, whichever comes first. 
D.  In-Lieu Parking Fees paid to satisfy the provisions of this Chapter shall not be refundable. 
E.  The option for payment of In-Lieu Parking Fees to satisfy the off-street parking requirements of this Chapter shall not be allowed to satisfy the off-street parking requirements for residential units or for hotel or motel uses. 
F.  In-Lieu Parking Fees may not be collected for more than 50 total parking spaces before both the public parking facility and alternate public transportation program are fully operational. Once the public parking facility and alternate public transportation program become fully operational, the City shall utilize its best efforts to continue the In-Lieu Parking Fee Program. Should the program ever be discontinued or substantially modified, the City shall seek reauthorization of the program with the Coastal Commission through a separate Local Coastal Program Amendment. 
(Ord. No. 817; Ord. No. 850; Ord. No. 856; Ord. No. 924 , § 17, 12-5-2016; Ord. No. 928 , § 4, 6-19-2017)  
Chapter 30.84 - SIGNS 
 
30.84.010 - Purpose. 
A.  The purpose of this Chapter is to reduce visual clutter, preserve the character and quality of the environment, achieve an aesthetically pleasing appearance for the City, and provide adequate opportunity to erect signs. In doing so, this Chapter intends to enhance the visual environment of the City, to eliminate traffic hazards, to include without limitation pedestrian traffic, hazards caused by improper signs, and to ensure that information is presented safely and effectively. 
B.  This Chapter establishes a comprehensive system for the regulation of signs to promote the public safety, health, and welfare. The intent is to present a set of reasonable, non-arbitrary and non-discretionary standards and procedures which will facilitate the improvement and protection of the environment by prohibiting the misuse of signs. 
C.  It is the intent of this Chapter to further the greater public interest in allowing a property owner to identify the owner's and tenant's property and the activities, services, and products available thereon rather than having the property owner and tenant use allowable sign area to identify property, activities, services, and products located elsewhere. 
(Ord. No. 616; Ord. No. 813; Ord. No. 830)  
30.84.020 - Definitions. 
A.  Sign. 
1.  Balloons are any inflatable object. 
2.  Banner, flag or pennant shall mean any cloth bunting, plastic, paper, fabric or similar material used for advertising purposes attached to or pinned on or from any structure, staff, pole, line, framing or vehicle, not including governmental flags. 
3.  Blade Sign shall be defined as a single or double-faced sign mounted perpendicular, or nearly perpendicular, from an exterior building wall or hanging from a support feature mounted perpendicular, or nearly perpendicular from an exterior building wall. 
4.  Building Face shall mean the outer surface of a main exterior wall. This excludes any projecting fins, columns, pilasters, canopies, marquees, showcases, patios or any other structure that does not directly contribute to the space's floor area ratio. 
5.  A-Frame Sign shall mean a single or double-faced moveable sign consisting of a smooth, hard panel for the display of changeable messages or copy as advertising for a commercial establishment, as regulated per this Chapter. 
6.  City Property shall mean land, light standards, structures, or other property owned or controlled by the City. 
7.  Community Event shall mean an event held within the City oriented towards recreational, cultural, or civic activities, sponsored by the City or a nonprofit organization, and open for participation by the general public. 
8.  Monument Signs are a type of freestanding sign, as defined in this Chapter, wherein business advertising or identification is provided on or as part of the design of a thin, vertically aligned structure mounted on the ground, either with a solid base or on intermittent piers or supports. 
9.  Sign is any word, letter, placard, board, notice, logo, insignia, flag, or banner, and any or all devices, fixtures, structures, construction, cloth or backing which conveys a message in pictorial, symbolic, or worded form and which is intended to call attention to the site, or used to advertise or promote the interest of any person, institution, business or product. 
10.  Sign Area is the entire area within a single, contiguous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of a sign. The perimeter shall include all elements and ornamentation forming an integral part of the design of the sign and the sign structure. Where the sign is an integral part of a wall or awning, or any other supporting structure, the sign area shall include the smallest rectangular area which includes all letters, designs, logos, and other features and including all intervening and enclosed open spaces. The "sign area" of a double-faced sign is the area of one side only. The "sign area" of an inflated balloon is equivalent to the square of the maximum diameter. 
11.  Sign Area Total is the sum total of the areas of all signs on a lot that is regulated by this Chapter. 
12.  Sign Height is the total distance between the lowest grade adjacent to the base of the sign measured to the top of the highest sign element, including the sign structure. 
13.  Sign Structure is a structure which supports or is capable of supporting a sign. A sign structure may be a single pole or multiple poles, or may be designed as an integral part of the building or any combination thereof. 
14.  Street Frontage shall mean the total linear distance of which a building face fronts the street. Street frontage shall be measured as a straight, contiguous line parallel to the abutting street and shall not reflect articulation in a building face. Street frontage shall not apply to alleyways. 
B.  Sign Parameters . 
1.  Directional Signs are signs which direct, point or guide, for example, without limitation: "Office," "one way," "parking," "restrooms." 
2.  External Lighting is lighting from a source which is external to the sign that casts light upon the sign. 
3.  Freestanding Signs are signs which are supported by one or more columns, uprights or braces in or upon the ground. 
4.  Identification Signs are signs which identify the name of the building, street address, or the occupants/tenants located in the specific building or area. 
5.  Internal Lighting is lighting from a source coming from within the sign and includes, without limitation, neon lighting. 
6.  Off-Site Messages are messages on signs which identify a use that is not occurring on the site; identifies an activity not occurring at the site of the sign; identifies a product not available at the site of the sign; or identifies a property located elsewhere than the site of the sign. 
7.  Temporary Signs are signs used, installed or displayed so as to be visible from an adjacent property or a City right-of-way, continuously or intermittently, for a total duration of not more than 60 days in a calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 764; Ord. No. 782; Ord. No. 830; Ord. No. 906; Ord. No. 923 , §§ 1, 2, 12-5-2016)  
30.84.030 - Permitted Sign Area Total for Residential Zones. 
On a lot zoned for residential use, a property owner may post, erect, and maintain signs of a sign area total as follows: 
A. Identification Sign 	Maximum one square foot per dwelling unit displayed by each unit. 
	For properties of five or more units, an additional maximum sign area of 12 square feet. 
B. Temporary Signs 	Maximum five and one-half square feet displayed for each individual unit. 
  
30.84.040 - Permitted Sign Area Total for Commercial Zones. 
On a lot zoned for commercial uses, one of the following methods shall be used to calculate the permitted sign area: 
1.  If a business has street frontage, the following calculation may apply: 
A.  One square foot of signage per every one foot of street frontage associated with a business. 
B.  For a building that fronts more than one street, each street frontage shall be calculated separately. The allowable signage area per street frontage is not transferrable to any other building face of said building. 
C.  Total allowed signage area shall not exceed the following maximums: 
1.  The Beach Commercial (BC), Central Commercial (CC), Professional Commercial (PC) and Residential Commercial (RC) Zones shall have a maximum of 40 square feet; 
2.  The North Commercial (NC) and Visitor Commercial (VC) Zones shall have a maximum of 60 square feet. 
2.  If a business does not have street frontage, the following calculation shall apply: 
	Sign Area Total 
A. Floor area of Business 
 1,000 sq. ft. or less 	10 sq. ft. 
 1,001—3,000 sq. ft. 	15 sq. ft. 
 3,001 or more sq. ft. 	20 sq. ft. 
B. Additional Sign Area Allowance 
 1. Identification Sign 	Maximum of two square feet, per street frontage, per business. 
 2. Temporary Sign 	Maximum six square feet displayed by each individual business. 
 3. Gasoline Price Signs 	Maximum of eight square feet per each street or alley frontage. Such sign shall be in accordance to State Law. (Sections 13530—13540 of the California Business and Professional Code). 
 4. Blade Signs 	Maximum of six square feet of area displayed by each individual business with street frontage (sign message may repeat to be on both sides). 
 5. A-Frame Sign 	Maximum size 10.5 square feet, with maximum dimensions of 36 inches in width by 42 inches in height and limited to one A-Frame sign per establishment. 
 
(Ord. No. 906; Ord. No. 923 , §§ 3, 4, 12-5-2016)  
30.84.045 - Permitted Sign Area Total for Outdoor Sales Operations. 
Notwithstanding the other provisions of this Chapter, the following regulations shall apply to signage for Outdoor Sales operations: 
A.  Allowable sign size: 
1.  Six square feet total of temporary signage per vendor stall, with such signage to be located within the perimeter of the individual vendor stall and installed so that no point of any sign exceeds eight feet in height. 
2.  Ten square feet of permanent signage or six square feet of temporary signage for identification of the outdoor sales operation itself. 
B.  Temporary signage allowed pursuant to this Section shall be exempt from the requirement for receipt of Design Review Permit. Permanent signage allowed pursuant to this Section shall be subject to the receipt of a Design Review Permit in accordance with the provisions of the DMMC. 
(Ord. No. 718)  
30.84.050 - General Regulations. 
A.  Except as allowed by the provisions of this Chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to post, erect, or maintain any sign within the City. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any owner of real property within the City to allow the posting, erection, or maintenance on such person's property of any sign which is in violation of the provisions of this Chapter. 
C.  Unless authorized by other provisions of the Chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to post, erect, or maintain any sign within the public right-of-way without first obtaining a Sign Encroachment Permit from the Planning Commission in accordance with this Chapter. (See Section 30.84.075) 
D.  Criteria. 
1.  No sign attached perpendicular to any building shall project more than 48 inches beyond the face of such building and any such projecting sign shall be a minimum eight feet above the finished grade below. 
2.  No sign attached perpendicular to any building shall exceed 20 square feet in size. 
3.  Freestanding Signs. All freestanding signs shall be located in a landscaped area or planter. 
No freestanding sign greater than three feet in total height shall be permitted except where: 
a.  The building is setback from the applicable property line by 20 feet or more; and 
b.  Sign height does not exceed eight feet or two-thirds of the building height, whichever is less; and 
c.  The sign is permitted upon a finding that it does not interfere with automotive or pedestrian sight lines. 
4.  Balloons. Balloons used as signs shall comply as follows: 
a.  Is considered a "Temporary Sign" and maintained for a duration of 30 days or less; 
b.  Shall have a maximum diameter of no more than 12 inches when fully inflated; and 
c.  Shall not be released into the atmosphere. 
5.  Lighting. 
a.  Any sign may be lighted externally, provided that the source of the light shall not be visible from any adjacent property or the public right-of-way. 
b.  Any sign may be illuminated internally so long as such internal illumination does not illuminate more than 25 percent of that sign's area. 
6.  A sign, and all of its supporting features, shall be maintained in a state of good repair and in accordance with the conditions of any permit issued for such sign. A sign or a portion thereof in need of repair shall be repaired or removed within ten days of notification by the enforcement officer. 
7.  A-Frame Signs. A-Frame signs shall comply with all of the following: 
a.  Installed/placed only during open business hours and removed at the close of business each day; 
b.  Located entirely on private property, on the premises of the business establishment for which advertising is provided; 
c.  Placed so as to not block access to a parking stall, drive aisle or pedestrian travel way; 
d.  Limited to changeable message/copy for the advertisement of products or services available in the establishment for which advertising is provided; 
e.  Composed of a hinged A-frame structure; 
f.  Devoid of any strobe, blinking or flashing lights, electronic animation, or electronic reader copy; 
g.  Devoid of any flags, balloons, pendants, flyers, handouts or other attachments; and 
h.  Is anchored or secured to maintain the sign in a stable, upright position. 
E.  Prohibited Signs. No sign shall be posted, erected or maintained: 
1.  So as to obstruct a clear view of the street from any intersecting street; 
2.  So as to obstruct access to a public street from a driveway; 
3.  That moves, rotates, gives the illusion of movement, shimmers, blinks, involves a change of color or hue, flashes, or is intermittently illuminated; 
4.  That interferes with the effectiveness of or obscures any official notice; 
5.  That is placed on or projects above the roof of the structure on which the sign is constructed; 
6.  That is attached parallel to a building and projects more than 16 inches beyond the face of that building; 
7.  That interferes with automotive or pedestrian sight lines; 
8.  That obstructs any door or fire escape of any building; 
9.  That obstructs free passage over any public right-of-way; 
10.  That would unreasonably obscure from public view existing, conforming signs on adjacent properties; 
11.  That are attached to utility poles, street light standards (except when specifically authorized in Subsection 30.84.080.J., or trees; 
12.  That is posted or attached to a truck or vehicle which is parked so as to be used as a sign; 
13.  That is located within the public right-of-way unless approved in accordance with Section 30.84.075 of the Del Mar Municipal Code; and 
14.  That presents an off-site message except as otherwise permitted in Section 30.84.070. 
(Ord. No. 616; Ord. No. 709; Ord. No. 782; Ord. No. 906; Ord. No. 923 , § 5, 12-5-2016)  
30.84.055 - Monument Signs. 
A.  Monument signs shall comply with all of the following standards: 
1.  Monument signs shall be subject to the limitations regarding Freestanding Signs, as contained in this Chapter; 
2.  Monument signs shall not exceed eight feet in height, measured from the topmost point of the sign down to the lower of the finished or natural grade level adjacent to the base or supports of the sign; 
3.  Monument signs shall not exceed two feet in depth (thickness); 
4.  Monument signs shall not exceed 12 feet in width. 
5.  Only one monument sign shall be allowed per street frontage of the business for which the monument sign is being installed. 
B.  Notwithstanding the other provisions of this Chapter, the measurement of the sign size of a monument sign shall be calculated as follows: 
1.  Where the business advertising and/or business identification messages (text, logos or other embellishments) are integrated into the construction material of the monument structure itself, the sign area shall be calculated as the smallest rectangle that can be applied around the perimeter of all of the advertising and/or identification messages (language logos, embellishments etc.), with such rectangle to include all intervening spaces between the advertising/ information messages. 
2.  Where the business advertising and/or business identification messages (text, logos or other embellishments) are contained on a plaque, board or panel mounted or otherwise attached to the monument structure, the sign area shall be calculated as the size of the entire mounted panel. 
C.  The "sign area" of a double-faced sign monument sign shall be calculated based on only one side (face) of the monument sign. 
D.  The Design Review process to be implemented for monument signs shall in accordance with the regulations for Design Review of signage, as contained in the Del Mar Municipal Code. 
E.  Any proposed lighting for illumination of a monument sign shall be included in the plans submitted for the design review process, as required under the DMMC. Additionally, any external lighting shall be designed and installed in a manner such that the light bulb, lamps or other source(s) of illumination are shielded so as to not be visible from adjacent rights-of-way or properties. 
F.  In cases where a monument sign will include advertisements for two or more businesses, the submitted materials shall include a comprehensive plan for all materials and signage, so as to ensure consistency of design. 
(Ord. No. 830)  
30.84.060 - Design Review Permit/Administrative Sign Review Permit Required. 
Unless otherwise exempt pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, the installation of new or replacement signage shall be subject to the receipt of a Design Review Permit or Administrative Sign Review Permit. 
(Ord. No. 709)  
30.84.070 - No Design Review Permit or Administrative Sign Review Permit Required. 
The following signs may be erected and maintained without first having obtained a Design Review Permit or Administrative Sign Review Permit, provided that the sign is erected and maintained in accordance with the standards of this Chapter. The sign area of the signs identified below will not be included in calculating the sign area total of the property. 
A.  Directional Sign. Directional signs not exceeding an area of one square foot so long as the sign is for on-site purposes and there is no more than one such sign for each street or alley frontage. 
B.  Property Information. Signs for the purpose of advertising property for sale, lease or exchange, or advertising directions to the property by the property owner or agent may be displayed on real property owned by another with that person's consent if such signs are limited to the following information as permitted in State Law (Sections 712 and 713 of the Civil Code): 
1.  That the property is for sale, lease, exchange or presented for viewing by the owner or his or her agent. 
2.  Directions to the property. 
3.  The owner's or agent's name. 
4.  The owner's or agent's address and telephone number. 
Nothing in this Section authorizes the display or placement of a sign on a public or private right-of-way. 
C.  Temporary Signs. In all zones, a temporary sign may be posted, erected, or maintained in conformance with the provisions of this Chapter. 
D.  Reserved. 
E.  City-sponsored Cultural/Community Interest Signs, as regulated per this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 656; Ord. No. 709; Ord. No. 894; Ord. No. 923 , § 6, 12-5-2016)  
30.84.071 - Maintenance of Signs—No Design Review Permit or Administrative Sign Review Permit Required. 
The performance of maintenance on a sign shall not require the receipt of a Design Review Permit or Administrative Sign Review Permit, provided such maintenance does not involve structural changes, or material or color changes to the sign. 
(Ord. No. 656; Ord. No. 709)  
30.84.075 - Sign Encroachment Permit Required/Exemptions from Requirement. 
A.  Unless otherwise provided in this Chapter, no sign shall be installed, posted, erected or maintained so as to encroach within a public right-of-way without the prior receipt of a Sign Encroachment Permit. 
B.  Where a Sign Encroachment Permit is required, the Planning Commission shall serve as the issuing authority. 
C.  No sign Encroachment Permit shall be required for a blade sign which meets all of the parameters listed below. 
Parameters for exemption: 
1.  The sign has received all other required permits, including Design Review, or Administrative Design Review, as required by DMMC Chapter 23.08 or 23.09; 
2.  The sign complies with all applicable regulations contained in this Chapter; 
3.  The sign complies with the sign size parameters contained in the Sign Chapter of the Municipal Code; 
4.  The sign is installed so that the bottom of the sign is elevated a minimum of eight feet above any adjacent sidewalk or walkway; 
5.  The sign does not extend within five feet of the vertical extension above any driving surface; 
6.  There is only one blade sign per business for each street frontage of the business; 
7.  The sign is not an internally illuminated plastic ("can") sign; and 
8.  The sign or sign support system does not extend more than four feet from the building wall, measured from the point at which the sign or sign support is attached to the building. 
(Ord. No. 813; Ord. No. 906)  
30.84.076 - Procedure. 
A.  An application for a Sign Encroachment Permit shall be submitted to the Department of Planning and Community Development on a form approved by the Director of Planning and Community Development. The application shall contain sufficient information and plans to permit review pursuant to this Chapter. 
B.  The application shall be deemed to have been filed when: 
1.  The Director has determined that all required information has been submitted in proper form; and 
2.  The applicant has submitted to the City the required deposit regarding the processing fee. 
C.  Within 60 days after receipt of all required materials of the sign application, the Director of Planning and Community Development or a designated representative shall cause the filed application to be presented at a noticed, public hearing conducted by the Planning Commission. 
D.  At least ten days prior to the public hearing, notice shall be published and shall be mailed to property owners of record of real property within 300 feet of the project site. 
E.  By resolution, the Planning Commission shall announce its determination which shall become final on the 11th day following such determination. 
F.  The decision of the Planning Commission to deny a permit may be appealed to the City Council in accordance with Del Mar Municipal Code Chapter 1.12. 
G.  An applicant may seek judicial review of a final decision on any sign permit application, pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure § 1094.8. This provision does not limit an applicant's ability to seek judicial review by other means. 
(Ord. No. 616)  
30.84.077 - Standards. 
The following standards shall be applied in review of Sign Encroachment Permit consistent with the Community Plan: 
A.  A Sign Encroachment Permit shall be granted only when, because of special circumstances applicable to the property in terms of location or surroundings, the strict application of the sign regulations deprives such property of a privilege to post a sign for public view enjoyed by other property in the vicinity and under identical zoning classification. 
B.  Any Sign Encroachment Permit shall be subject to such conditions as will assure that the grant of the permit will not constitute a grant of special privileges inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and zone in which such property is situated. 
C.  A Sign Encroachment Permit shall not be granted if the applicant's inability to post a sign on private property so that the message is viewable by the public; 
1.  Could be avoided by an alternative development plan; or 
2.  Is self-induced as a result of an action taken by the current property owner or a prior owner of the property. 
D.  A Sign Encroachment Permit shall not be granted if: 
1.  Granting the permit would authorize or legalize the maintenance of a public or private nuisance; or 
2.  The property can serve as a site for a sign whose access to public view is the same or better than the access enjoyed by other property in the vicinity and under an identical zoning classification. 
(Ord. No. 616)  
30.84.078 - Conditions. 
A.  The following conditions shall be imposed on all Sign Encroachment Permits: 
1.  Design Review Board approval of design through the guidelines of Chapter 23 of the DMMC; 
2.  City Traffic Engineer review for potential nuisance to traffic and safety hazards; 
3.  Maximum size of the sign shall be specified so as to be in compliance with Section 30.84.040; 
4.  Maintenance of the sign; 
5.  Specific location of the sign shall be noted; and 
6.  Hours per day for installation of sign specified. 
B.  Conditions imposed upon the granting of a Sign Encroachment Permit shall be set forth in a covenant executed by the property owner and recorded with the County Recorder. 
(Ord. No. 616)  
30.84.079 - Revocation of Sign Encroachment Permit. 
In the event that one or more of the conditions imposed on the Sign Encroachment Permit is violated, the Director, upon notice to the permittee with an opportunity to present a response, may thereafter revoke the permit. The Director may reinstate the permit and impose additional conditions in conformity with the goals of the Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 616)  
30.84.080 - Exemptions from Chapter. 
The following are exempt from the regulations of this Chapter: 
A.  Official notices posted or issued by a court or other governmental body. 
B.  Signs posted, erected or maintained by the City or other governmental agencies. 
C.  A governmental flag so long as there are not more than three different, or more than one of the same governmental flags displayed on a lot of record, (flag poles must receive Design Review Board approval). 
D.  Religious symbols. 
E.  The display of merchandise within any business premises. 
F.  Signs which are located so as not to be visible from the public right-of-way, such as, without limitation, signs located in interior areas of shopping centers or commercial buildings. 
G.  In all commercial zones, signs which are located within a structure and which are set back, in their entirety, 36 inches or more from the window, door or other transparent surface through which they are otherwise visible. 
H.  In all commercial zones, signs which are located within a structure where some or all of the sign is within 36 inches of a door, window or other transparent surface through which the sign is visible, and where such signs meet all of the following criteria: 
1.  Located such that no portion of the sign is directly attached to the window, doorway or other transparent surface through which the sign is visible from the public right-of-way; 
2.  No individual letter or number included within the sign is in excess of one-half-inch in height or width; 
3.  No individual sign for which a business claims the exemption provided in this Subsection is greater than 1.25 square feet in area; 
4.  The cumulative total area of the signs for which a business claims the exemption provided in this Subsection is not in excess of 20 square feet; 
5.  No portion of the sign is, in whole or part, internally lit; and 
6.  The sign conforms with all of the other regulations in this Chapter. 
I.  Temporary seasonal decoration which is not used as a display of advertising. 
J.  Signs and banners located on City Property [as defined in Subsection 30.84.020.A.3.] and on street light standards in the public right-of-way in the Central Commercial (CC), and Public Facility (PF) zones, for the purpose of identifying the Downtown Village of Del Mar, or advertising a Community Event [as defined in Subsection 30.84.020.A.4.] provided the sign or banner meets all of the following criteria: 
1.  Only one sign or banner identifying the Downtown Village of Del Mar, or advertising the Community Event is placed on a single City Property, or street light standard in the public right-of-way, at any one time; 
a.  The sign or banner on a single City Property shall be no greater than 64 square feet in area, or four feet by 16 feet, of which a maximum of ten square feet may be devoted to identification of sponsorship of the Community Event; 
b.  The banner on a single street light standard in the public right-of-way shall be no greater than 24 square feet in area, three feet by eight feet; and 
c.  The bottom of the banner on a street standard shall be installed at a minimum of 16 feet above the roadway. 
d.  The applicant shall provide and maintain all hardware. 
e.  The banner may be two-sided and shall be made of durable cloth or canvas. 
f.  All hardware installations, including mounting arms, shall be removed from the street light standards prior to November 24 each year to allow for City utilization during the month of December. 
2.  The sign or banner shall be installed no sooner than one month prior to the date of the event being advertised and shall be removed no later than one week following the date of the event being advertised; 
3.  The sign or banner shall not be placed in a manner that will cause an adverse impact on the health, safety or welfare of the public; and 
4.  The application for the sign or banner has been reviewed, and the Director of Planning and Community Development, or her/his designee, has determined that it is in compliance with the provisions of this Section. 
K.  In all commercial zones, signs used and intended solely for the purpose of indicating whether an establishment is open or closed, provided the total area of the sign does not exceed two square feet and provided that any internal illumination associated with the sign be turned off between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. daily. 
L.  In all commercial zones, a new-business sign provided the sign or banner meets all of the following criteria: 
1.  The sign is installed only after the submittal of a complete City of Del Mar application for permanent business signage. 
2.  The sign is removed not later than 30 days following the date of approval of the permanent signage or installation of the approved permanent signage, whichever occurs first. 
3.  The total sign area does not exceed ten square feet. 
M.  City-sponsored Cultural/Community Interest Signs. 
1.  A City-sponsored Cultural/Community Interest Sign subject to the regulatory exemptions provided in this Section shall meet all of the following parameters: 
a.  The sign will provide information to the public about a cultural or historic site, structure or amenity; 
b.  The City-sponsored Cultural/Community Interest Sign will not include any business advertisements; 
c.  The maximum size of the City-sponsored Cultural/Community Interest Sign will not exceed two square feet (288 square inches); 
d.  The City-sponsored Cultural/Community Interest Sign will be designed and constructed of a material so as to be durable and weather resistant; and 
e.  The City-sponsored Cultural/Community Interest Sign will be attached to a building, rather than being a free standing, pole or monument sign. 
2.  The Director of Planning and Community Development (Director) shall be the designated City authority for a determination that a proposed City-sponsored Cultural/Community Interest Sign meets the parameters listed in this Section. 
3.  A written request for a determination that a sign qualifies as a City-sponsored Cultural/Community Interest Sign shall be submitted to the Director a minimum of 15 calendar days prior to installation of the City-sponsored Cultural/Community Interest Sign. 
4.  The Director's determination on the request shall be made in writing within 15 days of submittal of a complete request. 
5.  The Director's determination is ministerial and, therefore, not appealable. 
(Ord. No. 656; Ord. No. 764; Ord. No. 782; Ord. No. 894; Ord. No. 923 , §§ 7, 8, 12-5-2016)  
30.84.090 - Abatement/Removal of Off-Premises Non-residential Signs. 
The City shall remove off-premise advertising display signs, as defined in the Outdoor Advertising Act, Business and Professions Code Section 5200 et. seq., in accordance with the provisions of Business and Professions Code §§ 5412 et seq. which regulate removal and the payment of compensation (Business and Professions Code §§ 5412—5413).  
30.84.100 - Nonconformity/Abatement. 
A.  Nonconforming Signs. 
1.  Any on-premise sign which was lawful when erected and continues to comply with those prior regulations but which does not now conform to the regulations of this Code shall be deemed to be nonconforming. 
2.  It shall be unlawful for any person to expand a nonconforming sign, contrary to the provisions of this Code. Nothing in this Chapter shall prevent the normal maintenance and repair of any nonconforming sign or sign structure during its effective life. Normal maintenance or repair shall be limited to only the following: 
a.  Routine cleaning and painting which does not alter any aspect of the sign including changes of message, colors and materials. 
b.  Replacing nuts, bolts, screws, or nails. 
c.  Re-leveling the structure without the addition of guy wires or struts for stabilization. 
3.  The extension, enlargement, replacement, or the rebuilding of a nonconforming sign is prohibited. 
4.  When the designation of a sign as a non-conforming sign expires, the sign shall thereafter be illegal. The designation as a nonconforming sign shall expire in accordance with the following schedule: 
Sign 	Expiration 
a. Residential 	2—7 years from date of adoption of current regulation and in accordance with Business and Professions Code § 5412.1 
b. On-premise advertising display defined by Business and Professions Code § 5490 	15 years from date of adoption of current regulation 
c. Other signs 	Five years from adoption of current regulation 
 
5.  For signs within Subsection c. above, if such sign has been allowed to be depreciated for tax purposes by the Internal Revenue Service and evidence is presented that the cost has not been fully recovered upon expiration of said five-year period, such sign may remain classified as a nonconforming sign until its cost has been recovered in accordance with the depreciation schedule on the date that the sign became non-conforming. Documentation necessary to establish the remaining or undepreciated value shall be presented to the Director, prior to the expiration of the initial five-year period. The Director shall determine the validity of the claim and establish a new expiration, as appropriate. Appeals from decisions of the Director may be appealed in accordance with the provisions of this Code. 
6.  On-premises advertising display signs within the provisions of Business and Professions Code § 5499 may be deemed to be in conformance by the Director upon application of the sign owner. The decision of the Director may be appealed in accordance with the provisions of this Code. 
B.  Abatement of Nonconforming, On-Premise Signs. 
1.  Nonconforming signs shall be removed or be brought into conformance with the regulations of this Code and the owner shall obtain all required permits for so doing upon the happening of any of the following: 
a.  Expiration of the status as a nonconforming sign. 
b.  The use of the nonconforming sign or the structure upon which it is displayed has been abandoned by its owner, for a period of 91 days or more. 
c.  The sign has been more than 50 percent destroyed. 
d.  If the building located upon the site is more than 50 percent remodeled, then the nonconforming sign must be made to conform with the provisions of this Code. 
e.  The owner of the sign relocates or applies for permission to relocate the sign. 
f.  The owner of the sign agrees with the City for its removal as of a given date. 
g.  The sign is a danger to the public or is unsafe. 
2.  Removal by Purchase. The City may remove a nonconforming on-premise advertising display by paying fair and just compensation in accordance with the Business and Professions Code §§ 5490 et seq. (Business and Professions Code §§ 5491, 5495)  
30.84.110 - Illegal and Abandoned Signs. 
A.  A sign is illegal and shall be removed if: 
1.  It did not comply with the ordinance or regulations in existence at the time it was constructed, erected or initially used; or does not comply with the provisions of this Chapter and is not a nonconforming sign. 
2.  It was a nonconforming sign but its designation has expired. 
B.  A sign shall be considered abandoned and shall be removed if: 
1.  The use of the sign or the structure upon which it is displayed has been abandoned by its owner, for a period of 91 days of more. 
2.  The use that the sign is identifying has been abandoned for 90 days. 
3.  The sign has been more than 50 percent destroyed.  
Chapter 30.85 - MEDICAL MARIJUANA LAND USE PROHIBITION 
 
30.85.100 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
A.  Marijuana means any or all parts of the plant Cannabis Sativa Linnaeus, Cannabis Indica, Cannabis Ruderalis and any genetic or synthetic derivative thereof, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin or separated resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds or resin, including marijuana infused in foodstuff or any other ingestible or consumable product containing marijuana or any marijuana derivative. The term "marijuana" shall also include "medical marijuana" as such phrase is used in the August 2008 Guidelines for the Security and Non-Diversion of Marijuana Grown for Medical Use, as may be amended from time to time, that was issued by the office of the Attorney General for the state of California or subject to the provisions of the California Health and Safety Code § 11362.5 (Compassionate Use Act) or California Health and Safety Code §§ 11362.7 to 11362.83 (Medical Marijuana Program Act). 
B.  Marijuana Cultivation means growing, planting, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, trimming, or processing of marijuana. 
C.  Marijuana Delivery/Distribution means the commercial transfer of medical cannabis or cannabis products, which includes all forms of marijuana dispensary. 
D.  Marijuana Dispensary or Marijuana Dispensaries means any business, office, store, facility, location, retail storefront or wholesale component of any establishment, cooperative or collective that delivers (as defined in Business and Professions Code § 19300.5(m) or any successor statute thereto) whether mobile or otherwise, dispenses, distributes, exchanges, transmits, transports, sells or provides marijuana for any reason to any person, group of persons, corporation, limited liability company, non-profit corporation or any other entity of any kind. 
E.  Marijuana Processing means any method used to prepare marijuana or its byproducts for commercial retail and/or wholesale use including, but not limited to: drying, cleaning, curing, packaging, and extraction of active ingredients to create marijuana related products and concentrates, production of foodstuffs containing marijuana and production of any pill, tablet, liquid, lozenge or other delivery system containing marijuana or any derivative thereof. 
(Ord. No. 912)  
30.85.200 - Prohibited Activities. 
Commercial marijuana cultivation, marijuana delivery/distribution, and marijuana processing shall be prohibited activities within the City of Del Mar, except where the City is preempted by federal or state law from enacting a prohibition on such activity. No use permit, variance, building permit, business license, or any other entitlement, license or permit, whether administrative or discretionary shall be approved or issued for the activities of marijuana cultivation, marijuana delivery/distribution, or marijuana processing establishments in the City, and no person shall otherwise establish or conduct such activities in the City, except where the City is preempted by federal or state law from enacting a prohibition on any such activity for which the use permit, variance, building permit, or any other entitlement, license, or permit is sought. 
(Ord. No. 912)  
30.85.300 - Exemptions. 
This Chapter shall not apply to the cultivation or processing of medical marijuana by patients and primary caregivers for personal medical use (with a doctor's approval) which meet all of the following criteria: 
A.  The marijuana is cultivated/processed in a fully-enclosed and secured structure by a qualified patient or primary caregiver, as defined in the CUA, within only residential zoning districts. 
B.  Cultivation/processing of marijuana is prohibited within all other zoning districts. 
C.  All marijuana cultivated/processed onsite shall be for the personal use of either a qualified patient or primary caregiver residing on the property and not be distributed to any other person, collective, cooperative, or dispensary. 
D.  The cultivation/processing of marijuana shall not be a commercial enterprise. 
E.  The owner of the property, if other than the qualified patient or primary caregiver, has consented in writing to the cultivation/processing of marijuana. 
F.  The area where marijuana is grown shall not exceed 50 square feet of floor area. 
G.  The marijuana cultivation/processing is not visible from any public or private property. 
H.  The fully-enclosed and secured space used for the cultivation/processing of marijuana shall be located at least 30 feet away from any habitable structure located on an adjacent property. 
I.  The cultivation/processing of marijuana does not occur within a garage, or any portion thereof. 
J.  The lighting for cultivation/processing does not exceed 1200 Watts. 
K.  The use of flammable or combustible products for the cultivation/processing of marijuana is prohibited. 
L.  The cultivation/processing of medical marijuana is not permitted if the cultivation activity adversely affects the health or safety of the residents or nearby properties through the creation of mold, mildew, dust, glare, heat, noise, odor, or other impacts. 
(Ord. No. 912)  
30.85.400 - Public Nuisance. 
Any violation of this Chapter is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and subject to abatement under the laws of this Municipal Code and the State of California. 
(Ord. No. 912)  
30.85.500 - Violations. 
Any violation of this Chapter shall be punishable as provided in Section 1.32.010 of this Municipal Code or any successor section thereto. 
(Ord. No. 912)  
30.85.600 - Conflicting Provisions. 
If any other provisions of the Municipal Code conflict with the provisions of this Chapter as it relates to the regulation of land use related to Marijuana, this Chapter shall be controlling. 
(Ord. No. 912)  
30.85.700 - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence or clause of this Chapter is for any reason, held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 912)  
Chapter 30.86 - SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS 
 
30.86.010 - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this Chapter to establish regulations which supplement other regulations contained in this Code.  
30.86.020 - Animals. 
Except as may be permitted by other provisions of this Code, it shall be unlawful for any person to keep animals within the City except domestic animals as household pets.  
30.86.030 - Annexed Lands. 
No building permit shall be issued except for normal maintenance and interior alterations of existing buildings, for a period of 90 days after the effective date of any annexation of land to the City for any property lying partially or wholly within such annexation area, or until such property has been properly zoned by the City, whichever time is the lesser. Prezoning or adoption of an interim ordinance pursuant to the provisions of the California Government Code shall suffice for the purposes of this Section.  
30.86.040 - Reserved.  
30.86.050 - Buildings Moved. 
No building or structure shall be moved on a lot or parcel of land, or relocated from one lot or parcel of land to another, unless such building or structure conforms, or is made to conform to all provisions of this Title applicable to the property upon which the building will be located. All buildings or structures moved within the City, or from outside the City to within the City, shall first be approved by the Design Review Board pursuant to this Code.  
30.86.060 - Conformity with Other Regulations. 
No building permit shall be issued for any project or development activity which does not conform both to the California Coastal Act and the California Environmental Quality Act providing such permit or conformity is thereby required, nor shall any building permit be issued for any project not receiving all final approvals by the City as may be required by this or other Chapters of this Code.  
30.86.070 - Dumping or Removing Soil, Sand, or Other Material. 
The use of land for the removal or dumping of topsoil, sand, or other material shall be prohibited in all zones except when performed in conjunction with an approved construction project.  
30.86.080 - Emergency Repairs. 
Nothing in this Title shall prevent emergency repairs or construction to prevent the immediate loss of life or property providing, however, that the person or persons proposing such emergency repairs or construction shall secure written approval from the Director of Planning and Community Development, or his or her authorized representative, prior to undertaking such emergency repairs or construction. All repairs or construction as herein authorized shall, within fifteen days, be followed with the filing of appropriate applications and/or reviews as may be otherwise required. Any such repairs and/or construction activities not approved after such review shall be removed, and the area restored to its condition prior to making such emergency repairs or construction. Nothing in this Section gives or is intended to give any person a right to circumvent or eliminate any requirement of this Title nor to maintain facilities repaired or constructed under the authority of this Section, without first securing the necessary approvals as may be otherwise required.  
30.86.090 - Fences/Retaining Walls. 
The construction or installation of fences, retaining walls and entryway structures shall be subject to the following limitations and regulations: 
A.  Fences in Residential Zones. 
1.  Fences and gates located within the required front yard or side yard abutting a street shall not exceed the height of three and one-half feet, except that for every two feet that a fence or wall is set back from the property line, its height may be increased by six inches, not to exceed a height of six feet, zero inches. 
2.  Fences within the rear yard or interior side yard shall not exceed a total height of six feet, zero inches. 
3.  Fences constructed within the building area may be as high as the building within said area. 
4.  Notwithstanding other provisions of this Code, an entryway structure consisting of open work, such as a trellis, may be located within a required front or street side yard setback, provided such structure does not exceed the following maximum dimensions: 
a.  Maximum Height. Ten feet (as measured pursuant to the provisions for measurement of fence height specified in this Chapter); 
b.  Maximum Width. Eight feet measured from outside dimensions parallel to the property line. 
c.  Maximum Depth. Five feet (measured from outside dimensions perpendicular to the property line). 
d.  Maximum Enclosure. 50 percent of each vertical plane or overhead covering surrounding the structure. This means that a minimum of 50 percent of each vertical plane or overhead covering shall be open to light and air. The enclosure for each vertical plane or overhead covering shall be measured as a percentage of the total area of that vertical plane or overhead coverage of the trellis structure. This requirement for openness of construction shall not apply to the installation of an entryway structure consisting of a single set of two opposing vertical posts connected by a single horizontal cross-piece which meets the other provisions of this Section and which is constructed with post and cross-piece materials no greater than six inches in diameter or width. 
No more than one entryway structure permitted pursuant to this Section may be constructed for each property line fronting a street. 
Entryway structures which conform to the provisions of this Section shall be considered to be the same as a fence for purposes of determining the appropriate review process. 
In addition to the other review requirements provided in this Chapter, an entryway structure proposed within a front or street side yard setback pursuant to this Section shall receive approval of the Director of Planning and Community Development. Such approval shall be given only if the Director finds that construction of the trellis within a front or street side yard setback will not threaten the public safety. 
B.  Fences in Nonresidential Zones. Notwithstanding other provisions of this Chapter, fences constructed in all zones other than residential shall not exceed a total height of six feet, zero inches, except that walls or fences constructed within the building area and set back ten feet or more from the front property line and five feet or more from the side property line abutting a street may be as high as the building within said property line. 
C.  Fences Serving as Retaining Walls. The construction of any fence retaining more than three feet of earth or similar materials shall be designed or approved by a registered, professional civil or structural engineer or a registered architect, and/or otherwise conform to County specifications. A fence serving as a retaining wall shall not extend more than one foot above the material retained. 
D.  Calculation of Fence Height. Fences constructed in all zones shall not exceed a maximum height as set forth herein. For purposes of this Section, fence height herein shall be calculated as the vertical distance between the elevation at the top of the fence and the elevation of the lower of the natural or finished adjacent grade when measured from the exterior facade(s) of such fence at any point. The exterior facade shall be considered to be that side of a fence which faces and is closest to adjacent properties and public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 640)  
30.86.100 - Garbage/Trash Storage Space. 
Unless specifically waived by the Design Review Board pursuant to finding that the proposed use does not generate a need for exterior trash receptacles, all automobile garages and service stations, retail stores, restaurants, hotels and motels, multiple-family residence, and manufacturing use shall provide an adequate trash storage space which does not interfere with required automobile parking and circulation.  
30.86.110 - Height Limitations and Exceptions. 
A.  Limitations. In all zones: 
1.  No building or structure shall exceed two stories or 26 feet in height, whichever is the lesser. For purposes of this Section, if any floor area is not included in calculating the bulk floor area ratio because the construction over it is more than 60 percent open, that construction shall not be considered a roof. 
2.  At no point can the building height be more than 26 feet measured vertically from the existing grade directly below. 
B.  Exceptions for Specified Rooftop Structures. Chimney and vents not exceeding three feet in height above the roof; church steeples, church spires, and radio antennae not exceeding ten feet above the roof; and all television antennae may be erected to a height greater than the permitted height. In solar retrofit installations, solar energy collectors, storage tanks and equipment, roof ponds, and/or other solar equipment appurtenant to a solar energy system may exceed, by three feet, the maximum height limits established by zoning, subject to approval by the Design Review Board following a Board finding that there is no suitable alternative. Notwithstanding other provisions of this Title, no free-standing accessory structure shall exceed the building height limit specified for the zone in which said accessory structure is located. 
C.  Exceptions for Specified Lightwell Areas. When determining height pursuant to Subsection 30.04.080.A.2., for any portion of a structure adjacent to a lightwell measuring not more than four feet in width (perpendicular to the building wall), and not more than 20 feet in length (parallel to the building wall), and which is no deeper than 28 inches above the finished floor, the lower of the natural or finished grade along the exterior (outside) wall of said lightwell shall be considered as the lower of the natural or finished exterior adjoining grade for that portion of the structure. 
(Ord. No. 541; Ord. No. 549; Ord. No. 586; Ord. No. 724)  
30.86.111 - Calculation of Floor Area Ratio and parking requirements for temporary enclosures. 
A.  Notwithstanding the other provisions of this Title, bulk floor area covered or partially covered and/or surrounded or partially surrounded by a temporary enclosure(s) shall not be included in the calculation of a lot's permitted Floor Area Ratio, provided that, together, the bulk floor area and temporary enclosure meet all of the following criteria: 
1.  The bulk floor area is a lawfully-established component of a restaurant use; 
2.  The temporary enclosure is constructed of durable material, including but not limited to: canvas or vinyl; and is designed and installed so as to be mechanically retractable to its non-covering or enclosing position through the operation of not more than two persons in a period of not more than 30 minutes using equipment permanently available on site; 
3.  The temporary enclosure will not be installed or extended to its covering or enclosing position except during periods of inclement weather. For purposes of this Section, the term "inclement weather" shall mean circumstances wherein the weather forecast for the day of intended use of the temporary enclosure, as provided by the San Diego office of the National Weather Service, indicates the potential for one or more of the following conditions in the San Diego County coastal area: a daytime temperature lower than 50 degrees or a nighttime temperature lower than 40 degrees (Fahrenheit); a likely probability (60 percent or greater) of rain; or winds in excess of 25 miles per hour; 
4.  Regardless of the existence of inclement weather, as defined in this Section, the temporary enclosure will not be installed or extended to its covering or enclosing position on more than ten (calendar) days during the period of May 1st to October 31st of any year; and not more than 90 (calendar) days during the period of November 1st to April 30th of any year; and 
5.  The temporary enclosure receives all required permits, including a Design Review Permit or Administrative Design Review Permit, as required by the DMMC. 
B.  The installation of a temporary enclosure, as defined and regulated in this Title, shall not be deemed an intensification of use of a lawfully-established outdoor restaurant area for the purpose of calculating the off-street parking requirements of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 744)  
30.86.115 - Determination of existing or natural grade. 
The Director of Planning and Community Development shall have the discretion to make a determination of a property's natural grade as defined in this Title. The determination shall be based on available information, including but not limited to: City records, surveys, grading and architectural plans, geotechnical reports or other substantial evidence that can be used to reasonably document the historic natural grade. 
(Ord. No. 724)  
30.86.120 - Lots. 
A.  Merger. Two or more contiguous parcels or units of land which have been subdivided under the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act, or any prior law regulating the division of land or local ordinance enacted pursuant thereto, shall not merge by virtue of the fact that such contiguous parcels or units are held by the same owner; except that, if any one of such contiguous parcels or units held by the same owner does not conform to standards for minimum parcel size, including width, depth, or area to permit use or development under this Title, and at least one of such contiguous parcels or units is not, or has not within the previous year been developed with a building for which a permit has been issued, then such parcels shall be merged. All parcels or units of land lying partially or wholly within the CC, BC, PC, NC, VC, FR, or RR zones shall herein be excepted from such merger pursuant to Sec. 66424.2 of the California Government Code. 
B.  Merger Process. Whenever the City has knowledge that real property has merged pursuant to this Section, it shall cause to be filed for recording with the Office of the County Recorder a Notice of such merger specifying the names of the record owners and particularly describing the real property, provided that at least 30 days prior to the recording of the Notice, the owner of the parcels or units to be affected by the merger, shall be advised in writing of the intention to record the Notice and specifying a time, date, and place at which the owner may present evidence to the City Council why such Notice should not be recorded. 
C.  Lots Reduced for Public Use. Where a portion of an otherwise conforming lot has been acquired for a public use or for street purposes, including dedication condemnation, or purchase, the remainder of such lot shall be considered as having the minimum required width, depth and area.  
30.86.130 - Maintenance of Property. 
All portions of a lot, including yards, setbacks, buildings, structures, parking or loading areas, driveways, open areas, landscaping, and other features shall be permanently maintained in a neat, attractive, and orderly manner.  
30.86.140 - Screening. 
A.  Screening of Unsightly Uses. All open storage of automobiles, trucks, boats, trailers, building materials, appliances and similar materials shall be screened from all other properties by dense landscaping not less than five and one-half feet high, and from abutting streets by dense landscaping not less than three and one-half feet high, and installed in planters not less than three feet in width. Decorative fencing or walls may be used for such screening purposes pursuant to this Chapter. Garbage cans and trash receptacles shall be screened from view pursuant to this Chapter. 
B.  Garbage and Trash Receptacles. All garbage can and trash receptacle areas, whether required by this Code or not, shall be adequately screened from abutting properties, streets, and alleys. Such screening shall consist of an opaque, visual barrier no lower in height than the maximum height of the receptacles. Lids or tops may be required where necessary to achieve the intent of this Section.  
30.86.150 - Street Corner Sight Distance. 
No structure, plant material, or other object shall be erected, placed, planted, or allowed to grow within 20 feet of the intersection of arterial streets or arterial-collector streets, as measured from the center of the nearest curb return or, where there is no curb, from the edge of pavement, in such a manner as to materially obstruct or impede vision from passing automobiles.  
30.86.160 - Street Improvements. 
Public street and utility improvements as may be needed directly in front of a building site shall be required by the City Engineer prior to the construction, move-on, or major alteration (whose costs exceed the assessed valuation of the structure as shown on the most current County Tax Assessor's rolls) or any new main building, as defined in this Title, providing such public improvements are specifically shown or referenced on maps adopted by the City Council and on file with the Department of Planning and Community Development.  
30.86.170 - Swimming Pools. 
To assure public safety, the construction, installation, or maintenance of all swimming pools or outside water bodies shall be subject to the limitations and regulations set forth herein. 
A.  Fence Required. Every person, firm or corporation in possession of land within the City of Del Mar, California, either as an owner, purchaser under contract, lessee, tenant, or licensee, upon which is situated a swimming pool or outside body of water having a depth of over 12 inches, shall maintain a protective fence, wall, enclosure or other effective barrier as required by the Uniform Building Code around said pool or outside body of water. The height of said fence(s), wall(s), enclosure(s) or other effective barrier shall be not less than five feet as measured on the exterior facade above the finished grate at any point, with no opening therein provided, however, that no such fence or wall shall be erected that affords ladder-like or step-like access. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to premises where a swimming pool is used or maintained and the premises are used for any hotel or motel consisting of ten or more units, where the owner or any employee thereof is on duty on such premises 24 hours each day. 
B.  Gates. All gates or doors opening through such fences, walls, or enclosures shall be equipped with self-closing and self-latching devices designed to keep, or capable of keeping, such door or gate securely closed and latched at all times when not in actual use, provided, however, that the door of any dwelling that is forming any part of the enclosures hereinabove required need not be so equipped. Unlatching devices shall be located not less than four feet above the ground. Gates shall be kept securely closed and latched or attended at all times. 
C.  Existing Pools. All requirements of this Chapter shall apply to existing swimming pools and outside bodies of water. It shall be unlawful to maintain a swimming pool which is not fenced in accordance with the terms of this Chapter. 
D.  Conformity with Other Building and Zoning Regulations. Any fence or wall erected for the purpose of complying with this Chapter shall conform to all other zoning regulations of the City, provided further that no swimming pool shall be constructed where protective fencing required will be in conflict with other zoning regulations. 
E.  Compliance for Final Approval. All plans for construction of swimming pools shall show compliance with the requirements of this Title. No water shall be placed in said pool, and final inspection and approval shall be withheld until all requirements are in compliance with this Title. 
(Ord. No. 598)  
30.86.180 - Temporary Buildings, Structures, and Storage Units. 
A.  Temporary Buildings, Structures, and Storage Units Incidental to Construction. 
1.  During construction pursuant to an active Building Permit, a lot in any zone may be used for the on-site storage of building materials used in the construction project, and for on-site temporary construction buildings or structures for temporary office use during construction, including temporary roll-on units, or storage of construction tools and equipment provided such buildings and structures are not used for overnight occupancy. 
2.  All temporary construction buildings, structures, and storage shall be removed immediately upon completion or abandonment of the project. For the purpose of Section 30.86.180, abandonment shall mean the discontinuance of construction activity for a period of 30 consecutive days or more with no reasonable efforts demonstrated to resume construction. 
3.  No additional permit shall be required, except that a Minor Temporary Use Permit shall be obtained in accordance with Section 30.73.020 prior to the establishment of any temporary construction buildings, structures, and materials storage if located off-site at a separate location from the construction project. 
B.  Temporary Storage Units. 
1.  Temporary storage units are portable storage containers that do not have a permanent foundation or footing; that are not designed or used for human occupancy; and that are intended to provide for temporary storage of goods that are incidental and subordinate to the existing use of the property. 
2.  Temporary storage units are not a permitted primary use in any zone, unless the Planning Commission determines that the use is similar to an allowable use in the zone, conforms to the description and purpose of that zone, and is not detrimental to the welfare of the community. 
3.  Temporary storage units may be permitted as an accessory use to the primary use located on-site in accordance with the following: 
a.  A temporary storage unit shall be permitted for a maximum of four instances per year limited to a maximum of 15 consecutive days per instance and a maximum of 60 days total per calendar year per property. 
b.  The size of a temporary storage unit, or the combined total of multiple temporary storage units on a lot at one time, shall not exceed a maximum of 10 feet wide by 10 feet high by 20 feet long. 
c.  Temporary storage units are exempt from Chapter 23.08 (Design Review) and the screening requirements in Section 30.86.140. 
d.  Temporary storage units shall be located in accordance with the following: 
i.  Shall not be located within steep slopes, wetlands, sensitive biological resources or other environmentally sensitive habitat area; and 
ii.  Shall not interfere with the safe visibility and circulation of vehicles, bicycles or pedestrians within the adjacent public right-of-way; and 
iii.  Shall not be located within the public right-of-way unless authorized by an Encroachment Permit obtained in accordance with Chapter 23.28. 
4.  Section 30.86.180 shall not apply to the following: 
a.  Temporary storage units, including portable sheds, that are located within an enclosed yard area and that are screened from view from the adjacent public right-of-way; and 
b.  Storage units that are granted approval for a longer duration by the Design Review Board and/or City Council. 
(Ord. No. 949 , § 1, 7-1-2019)  
30.86.185 - Minimum Workspace Area for Employees/Calculation of the Maximum Number of Employees Allowed in a Business Space. 
A.  All business establishments shall be designed and operated so as to be in compliance with the City of Del Mar Municipal Code with respect to the Occupancy Standards of the latest edition of the Uniform Building Code (UBC). 
B.  In addition to compliance with the UBC, all business establishments shall be designed and operated in a manner such that an average of at least 125 square feet of space is available for each employee working in the business space, with such average calculated in accordance with the provisions of this Section. 
C.  To determine the average space available for each employee being provided by a business, the total square foot area of the business space (excluding restrooms) shall be divided by the maximum number of employees working in the business at any one time. 
D.  To determine the figure of the maximum number of employees that may work in the business space at any one time, the total business space of an establishment shall be divided by the minimum workspace area per employee required by this Section; 
E.  For purposes of this Section only of the DMMC, "Employee" shall include all persons employed by the business and all managers, owners and operators of the business and all independent contractors who are working at the business space at the time of calculation of the figure of the Maximum Number of Employees. 
F.  For purposes of this Section only of the DMMC, "business space" shall include all of the enclosed square footage of the building, and/or that portion of the building, in which the business is located, including workspace and storage areas, corridors but excluding restrooms. For purposes of this Section only, the calculation of business space shall not include the common areas of a multi-occupancy building such as elevators, stairwells and hallways, and shall also not include the common areas and restrooms used by more than one tenant/employer of the building. 
G.  A the request of the Director of Planning and Community Development, the operator of a business shall be required to provide a record of the figure of the maximum number of employees that may work in the business space at any one time. That required figure shall be used by the City for determination of compliance with this Section. 
(Ord. No. 814)  
30.86.190 - Tennis Courts. 
Tennis court lights may be constructed within any zone, providing, however, that a Conditional Use Permit has first been approved by the City Planning Commission or City Council on appeal, and that said tennis court lights and the use of said tennis court lights and the use of said tennis courts and appurtenances abide by all conditions and restrictions imposed thereon. To protect the privacy of neighboring properties, said conditions may include, but not be limited to, restrictions on lighting, height, and location of and hours of play.  
30.86.200 - Yards. 
Notwithstanding yard and setback requirements established for each zone, the following provisions shall apply: 
A.  Reserved. 
B.  Panhandle Lots and Lots Which Lack Street Frontage. The front yard of panhandle lots and lots which lack street frontage shall include all of the access strip connecting the main body of the lot from the street, plus the front yard setback required by the zone in which the property is located. Said front yard setback distance shall be measured from the property line which is most nearly perpendicular to the access strip and whose prolongation would divide the access strip from the main body of the lot. The rear property line, and yard requirements therefrom, shall be that property line most opposite the front property line as described herein. Side yards for panhandle lots and lots which lack street frontage shall be applied as required by the zone in which the property is located, but in no event shall such side yards on residentially zoned property be less than ten feet in width. 
C.  One-story, Detached Accessory Buildings. Except in the R1-40, R1-14, and R1-10 zones, a detached, one-story, accessory building may disregard rear yard requirements if such accessory building is not more than 500 square feet in area and not more than 30 feet in length on any one side. The 500-square foot maximum shall be calculated based on the total square footage of the accessory building, regardless of any exemptions from floor area ratio (FAR) that might otherwise apply pursuant to the provisions of this Title. Such buildings, as herein described, may also disregard side yard requirements if placed entirely within the rear 30 percent of the lot or back of the front 70 feet of the lot. One-story, accessory portions of the living units may also disregard side and rear yard requirements if the location and size of such accessory portions of living units meet the criteria as specified and limited herein, provided there is no direct access from the accessory portion to the interior of the living unit. 
D.  Side and Rear Yards Adjacent to Alleys. Where an alley ten feet or greater in width abuts a side yard or rear yard, one-half the width of such alley, up to a maximum of ten feet, may be applied to the required amount of side or rear yard. 
E.  One-Story Garages Within Natural Embankments. One-story garages located entirely within at least six-foot-high, natural embankments and so maintained may disregard the side and rear yard requirements, providing, however, that no portion of the roof parapet, handrail, or other appurtenance is more than three feet, six inches above the roof of the garage and that no portion of the roof is more than one foot above the first floor level of the existing or proposed buildings on the site of which said garage is proposed. 
F.  Building Sites Less Than 2,000 Square Feet in Area. The required side and rear yards may be reduced by an amount equal to 20 percent of the required amount on any existing lot of less than 2,000 square feet in area, provided the buildings or structures erected thereon are not more than one story in height. 
G.  Street Side Yards on Corner Lots. On corner lots, a side yard is required adjacent to the side street at least equal to one-half of the setback normally required on the front of the lot, but in no event shall such side yard be less than the side yard required by the zone in which the property is located. 
H.  Reserved. 
I.  Yards Between Buildings. The required yard or other open space around an existing structure, or which is hereafter provided around any structure for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this Chapter, shall not be considered as providing a yard or open space for any other structure, existing or proposed. Yards between detached dwelling units shall in no event be less than six feet. 
J.  Yards for Below-Grade Structures. Yard requirements shall be waived in buildings or structures placed entirely underground, provided, however, the building or structure is designed to allow the installation and maintenance of landscaping pursuant to this Chapter. 
K.  Landscaping. All portions of any front yard or side yard abutting a street, except for driveways, walks, fish ponds and decorative bodies of water, as provided in Subsection M.4., shall be landscaped with trees, shrubs, flowers, or other plant materials, planter boxes (subject to the setback/height provisions applicable to fences contained within this division), or rock gardens; and shall be permanently maintained in a neat, attractive, and orderly manner. In no case shall boats, trailers, trucks, campers or the like be stored or parked in any required front or side yard abutting a street, nor shall any storage of any materials whatsoever be permitted in said yards. 
L.  Setbacks. No building, structure, or parking area shall be constructed or maintained on any lot or parcel which abuts a street for which there has been dedicated only a portion of its required width, when such required width has been determined by the City Council and is shown on maps on file with the City; unless such building, structure, or parking area is set back from the street centerline a distance equal to the sum of the required yard setback and one-half of the required width of the street. 
M.  Yard Projections. Every required front, side, and rear yard shall be open and unobstructed from the ground to the sky unless otherwise provided: 
1.  Fences and walls as specified and limited under this Chapter may project into the yards otherwise required by this Chapter; 
2.  Architectural projections (such as cornices, belt course, sills, eave projections, and awnings) without enclosing walls or screening may project into a required yard not more than two feet, provided the required interior side yard is not reduced to less than two feet six inches, and any required yard abutting a street is not reduced to less than five feet zero inches. 
3.  Open, unenclosed decks not covered by a roof may project into the required rear yard or interior side yard, providing, however, that said decks are constructed at existing grade elevation, or in no event higher than 18 inches above the lower of the natural or finished adjoining grade within a required side yard or 30 inches above the lower of the natural or finished adjoining grade within a required rear yard. 
4.  Bodies of water, when provided with safety fencing as may be required by this Chapter, may project into required yards as follows: 
a.  Decorative bodies of water, including without limitation, fish ponds, may project into any required yard, so long as the body of water is not designed for use or used by humans entering said body of water. 
b.  Swimming pools and spas may project into any required rear or interior side yard. 
5.  Solar retrofit installation, solar energy collectors, storage tanks and equipment, solar greenhouses, and/or other solar equipment appurtenant to a solar energy system may project into a required front, rear, and side yard setback area, subject to approval by the Design Review Board following a Board finding that there is no suitable alternative. 
6.  Air conditioning condensers and pool/spa mechanical equipment may project into a required side yard or rear yard setback area, subject to Design Review approval, when the issuing authority for the Design Review Permit finds that location in the side or rear yard, combined with the provision of sound attenuation measures, would provide the most suitable placement so as to minimize noise and visual impacts to neighboring properties. All mechanical equipment and associated screening/sound attenuation improvements shall provide a minimum five-foot setback from the adjacent property line or from any walls/fencing located on or near the adjacent property line. 
7.  Permanent landscape accessory structures, such as barbeques, fireplaces/fire pits, above-grade fountains and benches, which measure not more than 48 square feet in area (footprint) or six feet in height, may project into required rear yard setback areas, but shall be subject to Design Review approval. 
8.  Lightwells measuring not more than four feet in width (perpendicular to the building wall), and not more than 20 feet in length (parallel to the building wall), and which are no deeper than 28 inches above the finished floor may project into a required side yard or rear yard setback area, provided that: 
a.  Lightwells that project into sideyard or backyard setbacks of 5(five) feet or less shall have a hinged grate covering the lightwell opening. The grating shall be capable of supporting the weight of a 200 pound person yet be able to be opened by someone of minimal strength with no special knowledge; or 
b.  Uncovered lightwells protected by a vertical safety barrier (fence or railing) shall be located to provide a minimum five-foot setback from the adjacent property line or from any walls/fencing located on or near the adjacent property line. 
(Ord. No. 571; Ord. No. 581; Ord. No. 615; Ord. No. 658; Ord. No. 724; Ord. No. 788)  
30.86.205 - Supportive Housing and Transitional Housing. 
Supportive Housing and Transitional Housing, as defined in this Title, are permitted uses in any zone in which residential uses are allowed and shall be subject to the same regulatory standards and review processes applicable to other residential uses allowed in the same zone in which they are proposed and located. 
(Ord. No. 893)  
30.86.210 - Utility Undergrounding. 
All new service connections of electrical, communication, CATV or other similar distribution service wires and/or cables necessary or desirable in connection with permanent new construction shall be placed underground unless the total costs of such new construction, as determined by the Building Department, does not exceed $7,500.00.  
30.86.220 - Zoning Amendments. 
A.  The City Council may amend, supplement or change the regulations and zones herein or subsequently established after recommendation thereupon by the Planning Commission, and after public hearings as required by law. An amendment, supplement or change may be initiated by resolution of the City Council or the Planning Commission or by petitioning of the owners of the subject property. 
B.  When an amendment to this Chapter or map is initiated, it shall be on a form prescribed by the Planning Commission, accompanied by such data and information as may be prescribed so as to assure the fullest practicable presentation of the facts for the permanent record. Upon filing of such form and required data and information, a public hearing shall be conducted pursuant to the provisions of this Code and State law. The Planning Commission shall hear the request and shall either continue the matter to allow additional testimony, studies, surveys, or investigations as it deems appropriate, or following hearing and recommendation by the Planning Director, shall by resolution, approve or deny the subject request based on findings presented in Subsection C. Any such resolution to approve or deny an amendment to this Chapter shall be in the form of a recommendation to the City Council, except that any denial shall be final unless appealed to the City Council pursuant to the provisions of this Code and State law. Within ten days after taking action to recommend approval of an amendment to this Chapter, the Planning Commission shall transmit a written copy of that recommendation for approval, together with the findings and other matters as may be related to the request, to the City Council. Upon receipt of said recommendation for approval, or upon receipt of a timely appeal of a denial, the City Council shall hold at least one public hearing pursuant to the provisions of this Code and State law and thereafter act on the request pursuant to the findings required by Subsection 30.86.220.C. 
C.  Required Findings to Grant. Each determination to grant or recommend the granting of an amendment to this Chapter shall be supported by written findings of fact showing specifically how the determination meets the following criteria and requirements: 
1.  That there are changed conditions since the previous zoning became effective to warrant other or additional zoning; 
2.  That the granting of such zoning will be in the interest or furtherance of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare, and will not adversely affect the established character of the surrounding neighborhood, nor be injurious to other properties in the vicinity in which the rezoned property is located; 
3.  That the granting of such zoning conforms to the general purpose, planned use, and intent of the adopted Community Plan, or any ordinance, regulation, or plan in effect to implement said Community Plan. 
D.  Planning Commission Denial Final Unless Appealed. A Planning Commission denial of a request for amendment to this Chapter shall be final and the City Council shall take no further action thereon, except that said denial may be appealed pursuant to the appeal provisions of this Code and State law. Failure to appeal within the time period specified in this Code shall result in termination of the case. 
E.  City Council Action Final; Referral of Changes to the Planning Commission. The action by the City Council on the application for amendment shall be final and conclusive except that if the decision is contrary to the recommendation of the Planning Commission, the City Council shall request a further report of the Planning Commission before it makes its decision final. Failure of the Planning Commission to act within forty days of receipt of notice of the City Council's request shall automatically make the City Council's decision final. 
F.  Conditions on Zone Amendments. When it is found necessary for the preservation of the health, safety and general welfare of the public, the orderly development of the City, and the implementation of the Community Plan, the City Council or Planning Commission may require as a condition precedent to a change of zone initiated by property owners, the dedication of property or the installation of facilities either on-site or off-site as may be deemed necessary to protect the public investment and to make the affected properties suitable for the uses permitted by the amendment, supplement, or change in regulations or district. The facilities or matters so required shall be completed or reasonable guarantees acceptable to the City shall be provided for their completion prior to the adoption of any such amendment, supplement or change in regulations or district. 
G.  Effective Date of Zone Amendments. An amendment to this Chapter or map as may be approved by the City Council shall, unless otherwise excepted, become effective thirty days after adoption of said amendment. 
H.  Reapplications. No application from one or more owners of property, for zoning or rezoning the same property or essentially the same parcel of land which has been denied by the City Council, shall be accepted by the Planning Commission within twelve months of such denial; provided however, that the City Council may permit the processing of such application by the affirmative vote of the majority of its members.  
30.86.230 - Reasonable Accommodation. 
A.  Purpose. It is the policy of the City of Del Mar to provide reasonable accommodation in regulations and procedures to ensure equal access to persons with disabilities to housing or commercial or industrial facilities and to facilitate the development of housing for persons with disabilities. This Section is based on requirements of Federal and State housing laws, including the Federal Americans with Disabilities Act, the Federal Fair Housing Act and the California Fair Employment and Housing Act, and implements the Housing Element of the City's General Plan. The purpose of this Section is to provide a procedure under which a person with disabilities, or a property owner of commercial or industrial uses, may request a reasonable accommodation in the application of zoning regulations in order to secure equal access to housing or commercial or industrial facilities, and outlines a process for decision makers to act upon such requests. This Section is intended for all uses, and within all zoning designations, and is distinct from the requirements for a variance. The City also recognizes the importance of sustaining and enhancing the community, as articulated in the City's Community Plan, and will consider whether the requested reasonable accommodation would result in an undue burden to the City or a fundamental alteration of City policies. 
B.  Definitions. 
Person with Disabilities and Reasonable Accommodation shall have the same meaning as those stated in Chapter 30.04 (Definitions). 
C.  Applicability. The provisions of this Section apply to all uses that will be used by a person with disabilities. In order to make housing and commercial or industrial facilities accessible to a person with disabilities, any person may request a reasonable accommodation, or exception to the City's Zoning Code regulations, in accordance with this Section. 
D.  Application and Review Procedure. 
1.  Applicant. Any person who requests reasonable accommodation, based on the disability of residents or users, in the application of a land use or zoning law which may be acting as a barrier to fair housing and access opportunities, may submit an application. The applicant may be the person with the disability, or his or her representative, or a developer of housing or commercial or industrial facilities for the purpose of accommodating persons with disabilities. 
2.  Application. An Administrative Design Review (ADR) application shall be filed with the Planning and Community Development Director, or his or her designee. In addition to completion of the ADR application, the applicant shall include: 
a.  Basis for the claim, such as a medical certification, that the person on whose behalf the accommodation is sought is disabled; or 
b.  Explanation of why the reasonable accommodation is necessary to make the specific housing or commercial facility accessible to the person with disabilities. 
c.  Other relevant information as requested by the Planning and Community Development Director, or his or her designee, in order to make the required findings. 
3.  Noticing. The application noticing shall be consistent with Subsection 23.08.035.B. (Administrative Design Review) of the DMMC. 
4.  Findings. Any decision on an application under this Section shall be supported by written findings addressing the criteria set forth below. An application under this Chapter for a reasonable accommodation shall be granted if all of the following findings are made: 
a.  The housing or commercial facility, which is the subject of the request, will be used or occupied by a person with disabilities. 
b.  Due to the physical attributes of the subject property or the structures on site, the requested reasonable accommodation is necessary to make the specific housing or commercial facility accessible to a person with disabilities under the Federal Fair Housing Act, the California Fair Employment and Housing Act, and the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). 
c.  The requested reasonable accommodation would not create an undue financial or administrative burden for the City. 
d.  The requested reasonable accommodation would not require a fundamental alteration in City's land use and zoning ordinances, programs or policies. In making this finding, the decision-making body may consider, but its consideration is not limited to, the following factors: 
i.  Whether the proposed changes to the subject property and structures, would adversely impact the health, safety or use of adjacent properties or the City right-of-way. 
ii.  Whether any reasonable alternatives have been identified that would provide an equivalent level of benefit without requiring a reasonable accommodation or exception to the City's applicable rules, standards and practices. 
5.  Conditions of Approval. In granting a request for reasonable accommodation, the reviewing authority may impose conditions to ensure that the reasonable accommodation complies with the findings required by this Chapter. Conditions may also be imposed to ensure that any removable structures or physical design features that are constructed or installed in association with the reasonable accommodation be removed once those structures or physical design features are no longer necessary in order to accommodate a person with disabilities. The reviewing authority may require the recordation of the conditions of approval, or its equivalent. 
6.  Determination. A determination timeframe on the application request shall be made consistent with Subsections 23.08.035.B., C., and D. (Administrative Design Review) of the DMMC. 
7.  Appeals. The appeal process shall be made consistent with Subsections 23.08.035.B., C., and D. (Administrative Design Review) of the DMMC. 
(Ord. No. 917 , § 2, 9-19-2016)  
Chapter 30.90 - DENSITY BONUS 
 
30.90.010 - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this Chapter to increase the production of housing for a wide range of residential needs in the community, including housing for very-low, low- and moderate-income households and for seniors. It is also the purpose of this Chapter to accommodate a wide range of housing consistent with the goals, objectives, and policies expressed by the City in the Del Mar Community Plan, including its Housing Element component. Finally, it is also the purpose of this Chapter is to establish procedures for implementing State density bonus requirements, as set forth in California Government Code §§ 65915—65918, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 759; Ord. No. 887)  
30.90.020 - Definitions. 
For purposes of applying the provisions of this Chapter, the following terms shall be defined as set forth below: 
Affordable Housing Agreement shall mean an agreement made between an applicant for a Density Bonus Project and the City regarding the provision and monitoring of any affordable housing unit(s) authorized and required within the Density Bonus Project. 
Affordable housing cost shall have the same meaning as defined in Sections 50052.5 and 50053 of the California Health and Safety Code, as may be amended. 
Affordable housing unit shall mean a residential dwelling within a Density Bonus Project which will be rented or sold at rates affordable to very low-income households, lower-income households, moderate-income households or senior citizens in accordance with this Chapter and with Section 65915 of the California Government Code. 
Applicant shall mean any person, firm, partnership, association, joint venture, corporation, or any entity or combination of entities which seeks to develop a Density Bonus Project pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter. 
Child-care facility shall mean a child day-care facility, other than a family day-care home, including, but not limited to, infant centers, preschools, extended day-care facilities, and school-age child-care centers. 
Common interest development shall mean a condominium project, as defined in Section 1351 of the California Civil Code, or a Planned Unit Development, as defined in Subsection 1351(k) of the Civil Code, as may be amended. 
Concession(s)/incentive(s) shall mean a modification(s) to a City development standard, or other regulatory provision applied by the City to a Density Bonus Project, in order to reduce the development costs of the Density Bonus Project so as to make it financially feasible to offer a portion of its residential units as affordable housing. The concessions(s)/incentive(s) which may be authorized by the City for such purposes include, but are not limited to: the reduction of site development standards or zoning code requirements, as specified in this Chapter; approval of mixed-use zoning in conjunction with the housing development; or any other regulatory incentive which would result in identifiable, financially sufficient, and actual cost reductions that are offered in addition to a density bonus. As used in this Chapter, the term "Concession(s)/Incentive(s)" shall not require the City to provide direct financial incentives for the Housing development, including the granting of publicly-owned land or the waiver/reduction of fees or dedication requirements. 
Density bonus shall mean an increase in the number of residential units allowed on a property above the otherwise maximum allowable residential density assigned to the property per the underlying Del Mar zoning ordinance classification and/or land use element of the Del Mar Community Plan. 
Density Bonus Unit shall mean a residential dwelling unit authorized as a part of a Density Bonus Project pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter. 
Density Bonus Project shall mean a development consisting of five or more residential units that qualifies for a density bonus pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter. 
Development standard shall mean the site or construction standards applicable to development of a property per the underlying Del Mar zoning ordinance classification and/or land use element of the Del Mar Community Plan. 
Director shall mean the Director of the City of Del Mar Department of Planning and Community Development. 
First-Time Home Buyer shall mean a person who has not held an ownership interest in a principal residence in the three years immediately prior to the purchase of a Density Bonus Unit, as defined in this Chapter. 
Housing development shall mean a project with five or more residential units, including a housing project that qualifies as a common interest development. "Housing development" shall also include either: 1) a project to substantially rehabilitate and convert an existing commercial building to residential use; or 2) substantial rehabilitation of an existing multifamily dwelling, as defined in Subdivision (d) of California Government Code § 65863.4, as may be amended, where the result of the rehabilitation would be a net increase in the number of available residential units. 
Household shall mean one person living alone or two or more persons sharing a residential dwelling. 
Lower-Income Household shall mean a household whose gross income is 80 percent or less of the San Diego County median income, adjusted for household size, computed pursuant to California Health and Safety Code §§ 50079.5 and 50052.5, as may be amended. 
Maximum allowable density shall mean the maximum number of residential units allowed on a property per the underlying Del Mar zoning ordinance classification and/or land use element of the Del Mar Community Plan. 
Median Income shall mean the median income for San Diego County, as published by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). 
Moderate-income household or persons and families of moderate income shall mean a household whose gross income does not exceed 120 percent of the San Diego County median income, adjusted for household size, computed pursuant to California Health and Safety Code § 50052.5, as may be amended. 
Resale Control shall mean a resale restriction placed on a residential unit(s) by which the price of such unit(s) and/or the age or income of the purchaser will be restricted to ensure affordability and occupancy by very-low or low-income households or by senior households, as authorized and required by the City of Del Mar as part of a Density Bonus Project. 
Senior Citizen Housing Development shall mean a residential development constructed, substantially rehabilitated or renovated, and having at least 35 dwelling units designated and restricted for rental or purchase by senior citizens in compliance with the requirements of Section 51.3 of the California Civil Code. "Senior citizen housing development" shall also include a mobile home park that limits residency based on age requirements for housing for older persons pursuant to Section 798.76 of the Civil Code, as may be amended. 
Specific adverse impact shall, in accordance with California Government Code §65589.5, mean a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions for which there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact without rendering the housing development unaffordable to low- or moderate-income households. 
Term of Affordability shall mean the duration for which a residential unit is restricted to lease or sale at an affordable rate pursuant to an Affordable Housing Agreement, as defined in this Chapter. 
Total Units shall mean the number of dwelling units that would be allowed on a property per the underlying Del Mar zoning ordinance classification and/or land use element of the Del Mar Community Plan, with such figure identified exclusive of a density bonus, as defined in this Chapter. 
Unit Type shall mean a dwelling unit with a defined floor area and a designated number of bedrooms. 
Very-Low Income Household shall mean a household whose gross income is 50 percent or less of the San Diego County median income, adjusted for household size, computed pursuant to California Health and Safety Code §§ 50079.5 and 50052.5, as may be amended. 
(Ord. No. 759; Ord. No. 887)  
30.90.030 - Density Bonus Eligibility. 
A.  In order to be considered eligible for a density bonus and any associated incentive available per this Chapter, a new housing development must include the construction of five or more dwelling units and must meet one or more of the following criteria: 
1.  Five percent of the total residential units to be constructed will be designated and restricted for rental or sale to very low-income households; or 
2.  Ten percent of the total residential units to be constructed will be designated and restricted for rental or sale to lower income households; or 
3.  The housing development qualifies as a senior citizen housing development, as defined in this Chapter; or 
4.  The housing development qualifies as a Common Interest Development, as defined in this Chapter, in which ten percent of the total residential units will be designated and restricted for rental or sale to moderate income households. 
(Ord. No. 759; Ord. No. 887)  
30.90.040 - Specified Density Bonus Percentages. 
A.  The amount of the density bonus to which the applicant for a Density Bonus Project is entitled shall vary according to the percentage of affordable units in the Density Bonus Project that are devoted as affordable housing units, as specified in this Section. 
B.  For housing developments that provide units for very low-income households, the amount of the density bonus shall be calculated as shown in the following table: 
Percentage of Units Devoted to Very Low-Income Households 	Density Bonus 
Percentage 
5 	20 
6 	22.5 
7 	25 
8 	27.5 
9 	30 
10 	32.5 
11 	35 (maximum) 
 
For housing developments that provide units for lower income households, the amount of the density bonus shall be calculated as shown in the following table: 
Percentage of Units Devoted to 
Lower-Income Households 	Density Bonus 
Percentage 
10 	20 
11 	21.5 
12 	23 
13 	24.5 
14 	26 
15 	27.5 
17 	30.5 
18 	32 
19 	33.5 
20 	35 (maximum) 
 
D.  For housing developments meeting the criteria of either a senior citizen housing development or qualified mobile home park, as each is defined in this Chapter, the density bonus shall be 20 percent. 
E.  For housing developments that provide units for Moderate-Income households, as defined in this Chapter, the amount of the density bonus shall be calculated as shown in the following table: 
Percentage Units Devoted to 
Moderate-Income Households 	Density Bonus 
Percentage 
10 	5 
11 	6 
12 	7 
13 	8 
14 	9 
15 	10 
16 	11 
17 	12 
18 	13 
19 	14 
20 	15 
21 	16 
23 	18 
24 	19 
25 	20 
26 	21 
27 	22 
28 	23 
30 	25 
31 	26 
32 	27 
33 	28 
35 	30 
36 	31 
37 	32 
38 	33 
39 	34 
40 	35 
 
F.  An applicant may elect to accept a lesser percentage of density bonus than that to which they are entitled under this Chapter. 
G.  All density bonus calculations resulting in a fractional number shall be rounded upwards to the next whole number. 
H.  The granting of a density bonus shall not be interpreted, in and of itself, to require an amendment to the Del Mar Community Plan or Del Mar Zoning Code. 
I.  The application and review process for authorization of a density bonus shall be as for review of a Density Bonus Project, as set forth in this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 759; Ord. No. 887)  
30.90.050 - Density Bonus Concession(s)/Incentive(s). 
A.  An applicant for a Density Bonus Project may submit a request for the City to grant a specific concession(s)/incentive(s) for the development of the project where the applicant contends that the granting of the concession(s)/incentive(s) is necessary in order to make the inclusion of affordable housing units in the Density Bonus Project financially feasible. 
B.  Where an applicant for a Density Bonus Project makes a request for the granting of a concession(s)/incentive(s), the applicant shall be responsible for providing detailed information supporting how the requested concession(s)/incentive(s) would result in actual, identifiable, financially-feasible cost reductions for the housing development commensurate with a determination that authorization of the affordable units in the Density Bonus Project is necessary in order to develop the Density Bonus Project and its restricted units. 
C.  The requested concession(s)/incentive(s) shall be authorized by the City unless the City Council, as part of its review of the associated application for the Density Bonus Project, makes written findings based on substantial evidence in the administrative record for the application, that either: 
1.  The granting of the concession(s)/incentive(s) is not necessary in order to make it financially feasible for the applicant to construct the Density Bonus Project and its affordable housing units; or 
2.  Implementing the requested concession(s)/incentive(s) would have a specific adverse impact on the public health and safety or physical environment of the community. 
D.  The number of concessions/incentives that may be granted by the City for development of a Density Bonus Project shall be based on the following parameters: 
1.  One concession/incentive may be granted for a Density Bonus Project that includes designation of at least ten percent of the total units at rental or sales rates affordable to lower-income households; or at least five percent of the total units affordable to very low-income households; or, when located in a common interest development, designation of at least ten percent of the total units affordable to persons and families of moderate income. 
2.  Two concessions/incentives may be granted for a Density Bonus Project that includes designation of at least 20 percent of the total units at rental or sales rates affordable to lower-income households; or at least ten percent of the total units affordable to very low-income households; or, when located in a common interest development, designation of at least 20 percent of the total units affordable to persons and families of moderate income. 
3.  Three concessions/incentives may be granted for a Density Bonus Project that includes designation of at least 30 percent of the total units at rental or sales rates affordable to lower-income households; or at least 15 percent of the total units affordable to very low-income households; or, when located in a common interest development, designation of at least 30 percent of the total units affordable to persons and families of moderate income. 
E.  For the purposes of this Section, the concessions/incentives that may be granted for a Density Bonus Project include, but are not limited to the following: 
1.  Expedited processing of the project application(s) through the Del Mar review processes. 
2.  A reduction of the Del Mar project application review/processing fees at a reduction percentage commensurate with the percentage of affordable units included in the project. 
3.  An increase over the Zoning Code Floor Area Ratio development standards applicable to the property on which the Density Bonus Project is proposed. 
4.  An increase over the Zoning Code Lot Coverage development standards applicable to the property on which the Density Bonus Project is proposed. 
5.  Approval of mixed-use zoning in conjunction with the housing project if the City Council, in its review of a proposed Density Bonus Project, determines that inclusion of the commercial, office, industrial, or other land uses would result in identifiable, sufficient, and actual cost reductions that would make it financially feasible for the applicant to construct a Density Bonus Project with restricted housing units and if the commercial, office, industrial, or other land uses are compatible with the housing project and the existing or planned development in the area where the project will be located. 
6.  Any other regulatory incentive which the City Council, in its review of a proposed Density Bonus Project, determines would result in identifiable, sufficient, and actual cost reductions that would make it financially feasible for the applicant to construct a Density Bonus Project with restricted housing units provided at the density and rental/sales affordability rates specified in this Chapter. 
F.  This Section shall not be deemed to limit or require the provision of direct financial incentives for the Density Bonus Project, including the provision of publicly-owned land, by the City or the waiver of fees or dedication requirements. Nor shall any provision of this Section require the City to grant an incentive or concession found to have a specific adverse impact. 
(Ord. No. 759; Ord. No. 887)  
30.90.060 - Land-Donation Density Bonus. 
A.  When an applicant for a tentative map, subdivision map, parcel map, or other residential development proposes to donate land to the City as provided for in this Section, the applicant shall be entitled to a 15 percent density bonus increase above the otherwise maximum allowable residential density for the development property as specified in the underlying Del Mar zoning ordinance classification and/or land use element of the Del Mar Community Plan. 
B.  An applicant shall be eligible for the increased density bonus for donation of land pursuant to the provisions of this Section, provided the City, as part of its review of the associated Density Bonus Project, is able to make all the following findings: 
1.  The developable acreage and zoning classification of the land being donated are sufficient to permit construction of units affordable to very low-income households in an amount not less than ten percent of the number of residential units of the proposed development. 
2.  The donated land is at least one acre in size or of sufficient size, and has a zoning designation and adequate public facilities and infrastructure to accommodate the development of at least 40 units of affordable housing. 
3.  The donated land is within or immediately adjacent to the boundary of the proposed development or, subject to written City approval, within one-quarter mile of the boundary of the proposed development. 
C.  The donated land will be transferred in fee title to the City or to a housing developer approved by the City. 
D.  The donated land will be transferred no later than the date of approval of the final subdivision map, parcel map, or date of approval of the residential development application. 
E.  The donated land and the very low-income units constructed on the land will be subject to a deed restriction ensuring continued affordability of the units consistent with this Chapter, with such recordation to occur at the time of dedication. 
F.  The density bonus for donation of land pursuant to this Section shall be as shown in the following table: 
Percentage Very Low-Income Units (Based upon maximum density allowed on donated property) 	Density Bonus 
Percentage 
10 	15 
11 	16 
12 	17 
13 	18 
14 	19 
15 	20 
16 	21 
17 	22 
18 	23 
19 	24 
20 	25 
21 	26 
22 	27 
23 	28 
24 	29 
25 	30 
26 	31 
27 	32 
28 	33 
29 	34 
30 (maximum) 	35 (maximum) 
 
G.  The density bonus provided for the donation of land shall be in addition to any increase in density available per this Chapter, up to a maximum, combined density increase of 35 percent. 
H.  Nothing in this Section shall be construed to enlarge or diminish the City's authority to require an applicant to donate land as a condition of development of a Density Bonus Project. 
(Ord. No. 759; Ord. No. 887)  
30.90.070 - Density Bonus for Child-Care Facilities. 
A.  When an applicant proposes to construct a Density Bonus Project that includes affordable units and also includes a child-care facility to be located on the same property or immediately adjacent to the site of the Density Bonus Project, the applicant shall be eligible to one of the following: 
1.  An additional density bonus in the form of bonus square footage for the residential units of the Density Bonus Project in an amount equal to or greater than the amount of square footage of the child care facility; or 
2.  Another concession/incentive as identified in this Chapter, which the City Council, in its review of a proposed Density Bonus Project, determines would result in identifiable, sufficient, and actual cost reductions that would make it financially feasible for the applicant to construct a Density Bonus Project with restricted housing units and the proposed child-care facility. 
B.  A Density Bonus Project that is eligible and is granted authorization for one of the bonuses or concessions/incentives identified in this Section shall be subject to all of the following parameters and limitations: 
1.  The child-care facility shall remain in operation for a period of time that is equal to or longer than the period of time during which the restricted units of the Density Bonus Project are required to remain available at affordable rates pursuant to this Chapter and the terms and conditions of the approved Density Bonus Project; and 
2.  Of the children who attend the child-care facility, the percentage of children of very low-income households, lower-income households, or moderate-income households shall be equal to or greater than the corresponding percentage of the affordable restricted units, as specified in the approved Density Bonus Project. 
C.  Notwithstanding any requirement of this Section, the City shall not be required to grant a density bonus or concession/incentive for a child-care facility if it is determined, based upon substantial evidence, that there is already an adequate amount of child-care facilities serving the varying income levels of the community. 
D.  The application and review process for a density bonus or concession/incentive for a child-care facility shall be the same as established in this Chapter for the review of an application for a Density Bonus Project. 
(Ord. No. 759; Ord. No. 887)  
30.90.080 - Density Bonuses and Mitigation Measures for Condominium Conversions. 
Refer to Del Mar Municipal Code Chapter 24.21 Dedication: Affordable Housing Assistance. 
(Ord. No. 759; Ord. No. 887)  
30.90.090 - Density Bonus Project—Application Procedure. 
A.  Prior to the submittal of any formal application for a Density Bonus Project, an applicant may submit a preliminary proposal to the Planning and Community Development Department for a review and determination of the proposed Density Bonus Project's eligibility and compliance with the provisions of this Chapter. 
B.  In addition to the City's other development application submittal requirements, an application for a Density Bonus Project shall include all of the following information: 
1.  A written statement specifying the density bonus or concession(s)/incentive(s) requested, and the number, type, location, size and construction schedule of all dwelling units, both affordable and market rate; 
2.  Any other information deemed necessary by the Director to determine compliance with the provision of this and other Chapters of the Del Mar Municipal Code. 
C.  The Planning Director shall evaluate the submitted application materials related to any requested concession(s)/incentive(s) for a Density Bonus Project. The Planning Director may retain a consultant to review the submitted financial report. The cost of such consultant services shall be borne by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 759; Ord. No. 887)  
30.90.100 - Same—Application Submittal Requirements. 
A.  An application for a Density Bonus Project, including any request for an associated concession(s)/incentive(s), shall be submitted in writing to the Director. 
B.  The application shall include materials sufficient to address all of the following: 
1.  A site plan showing total number of units, number and location of affordable housing units, and number and location of proposed density bonus units. 
2.  The level of affordability of affordable housing units and proposals for ensuring affordability. 
3.  A description of any requested concession(s) or incentive(s), waivers or modifications of development standards, or modified parking standards. The application shall include evidence that the requested concession(s)/incentive(s) would result in actual, identifiable, financially-feasible cost reductions for the housing development to an extent commensurate with a determination that authorization of the affordable units in the Density Bonus Project is necessary in order to develop the Density Bonus Project and its restricted units 
4.  If a density bonus concession(s)/incentive(s) is requested in connection with a proposed land donation, the application material shall show the location of the land to be dedicated and shall provide evidence of compliance with the density bonus land donation parameters of this Chapter. 
5.  If a density bonus concession/incentive is requested for a child care facility, the application material shall show the location and square footage of the child care facility and shall provide evidence of compliance with the child-care facility density bonus parameters of this Chapter. 
C.  An application for a Density Bonus Project shall be accompanied by a fee established by resolution of the City Council to recover the City's administrative costs for processing of the application. 
(Ord. No. 759; Ord. No. 887)  
30.90.110 - Issuing Authority and Review Process for a Density Bonus Project. 
A.  The City Council shall serve as the issuing authority for an application for a Density Bonus Project and any related request for a density bonus or concession(s)/incentive(s). 
B.  Upon receipt, the application for a Density Bonus Project shall be routed to each City Department for comment and suggested conditions and a determination as to whether the application is complete. After receipt of comments and suggested conditions, the Director shall cause the application to be placed on the first available agenda of the City Council. 
C.  A staff report shall be prepared for the City Council. 
D.  The City Council shall take action to approve, conditionally approve, or deny the application, based on the standards of review contained in this Chapter. The City Council may also continue the application, as deemed necessary, in order to gain additional information to be used as the basis for making a determination on the application. 
E.  The City Council shall attach such conditions to its approval of a Density Bonus Project or any associated request for a concession(s)/incentive(s), as deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this and other Chapters of the Del Mar Municipal Code. 
F.  All other required permits and authorizations for a Density Bonus Project, including, but not limited to a Design Review Permit, shall be processed in accordance with the Del Mar Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 759; Ord. No. 887)  
30.90.120 - Provision of Public Notice for Application Review. 
A.  Public notice of application for a Density Bonus Project shall contain the date, place, and time set for the scheduled City Council review of the application. The required notice shall also include all of the following: 
1.  The number assigned to the application; 
2.  A description of the proposed Density Bonus Project and its location; and 
3.  A brief description of the purpose of the City Council review and of the review process applicable to the proposal. 
B.  Notice of an application for a Density Bonus Project shall be provided as follows: 
1.  Published once in a newspaper of general circulation within the City; 
2.  Mailed to all owners of real property within 300 feet of the location of the proposed Density Bonus Project, with ownership as identified on County Tax Assessors' rolls; and 
3.  Posting at City Hall and on the City's web site by staff and posting at the site of the proposed Density Bonus Project, using a notification card provided by the City. 
(Ord. No. 759; Ord. No. 887)  
30.90.130 - Terms for Continued Affordability Rental and Sales Rates. 
A.  If a Density Bonus Project receives (only) a density bonus, the restricted units shall be conditioned to remain restricted for a minimum of 30 years for affordable rental and sales rates to lower or very low-income households or to senior households, at the rate identified in the approved Density Bonus Project. The 30-year duration shall commence from the date of issuance of the Project's Certificate of Occupancy. 
B.  Applicants receiving authorization for a Density Bonus Project shall, to the extent allowed by law, use best efforts to offer priority for the rental or purchase of the affordable restricted units to persons who have lived or been employed in the City for the 12 months immediately prior to the City's approval of the Density Bonus Project. 
(Ord. No. 759; Ord. No. 887)  
30.90.140 - Affordable Housing Agreement. 
A.  Where a density bonus has been granted pursuant to this Chapter, the applicant for the Density Bonus Project shall execute an Affordable Housing Agreement with the City. The Agreement shall be recorded against the deed for the property on which the Density Bonus Project will be located and shall be binding on future owners and assigns of the property. 
B.  The Affordable Housing Agreement shall describe the number, type, size and location of all units in the Density Bonus Project, along with the types, size and location of the restricted units. The required Agreement shall also include a construction schedule for the restricted units. It shall also include any other information deemed necessary by the City to make a determination of the applicant's compliance with the terms and conditions of the approved Density Bonus Project and the provisions of this Chapter. 
C.  The restricted units shall be constructed concurrently with, or prior to, the construction of non-restricted units. 
D.  Unless otherwise deemed appropriate by the City, the restricted units shall be dispersed throughout the Density Bonus Project, rather than clustered in any segmented area. 
E.  The restricted units shall be composed of a percentage mix of the unit types and sizes corresponding to that of the non-restricted units. 
F.  The restricted units shall be comparable with the non-restricted units in terms of their design, architectural appearance, building materials and finished quality. 
(Ord. No. 759; Ord. No. 887)  
30.90.150 - Requirement for Affordable Housing Agreement. 
A.  All restricted affordable housing units in a Density Bonus Project shall be occupied by the household type and for the duration specified in the Affordable Housing Agreement required by this Chapter and identified in the City Council approval of the Density Bonus Project. 
B.  The applicant for a Density Bonus Project shall be responsible for obtaining and verifying information with respect to the qualifications of prospective and current tenants or unit purchasers, including, but not limited to, information relating to their incomes and eligibility. 
C.  To ensure compliance with the Affordable Housing Agreement, the applicant shall maintain a list of qualified applicants for the duration of the restricted units and shall allow the Director access to such information upon reasonable request and notice. 
D.  The applicant shall submit Annual Reports to the Director, certifying that the restricted affordable housing units are occupied by the household types specified in the Affordable Housing Agreement. The Annual Reports shall include the number of persons and income levels for each household in the restricted units. 
E.  Subject to the approval by the Director, the permittee of a Density Bonus Project shall have the option to use a qualified third party to perform the review of income qualifications required per the Affordable Housing Agreement. 
(Ord. No. 759; Ord. No. 887)  
30.90.160 - Administrative Fees for Review of Density Bonus Applications and Follow-up Compliance Reviews. 
A.  At the discretion of the Planning Director, the City may contract with another entity to administer the affordable housing unit rental and sales provisions of this Chapter. 
B.  The Planning Director shall establish the amount of fees to be charged to the permittee of a Density Bonus Project to recover the City's administrative costs of monitoring and ensuring the Project's compliance with the provisions of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 759; Ord. No. 887)  
30.90.170 - Penalty for Noncompliance with Affordable Housing Agreement. 
If one or more the terms of the Affordable Housing Agreement are deemed by the Director to have been violated, the applicant shall pay the City of Del Mar liquidated damages in the minimum sum of $5,000.00 for each restricted affordable housing unit that is in violation of the Affordable Housing Agreement. The damage fees specified herein shall be applicable for each month of violation. Any unpaid liquidated damages may be recorded by the City against the deed for the property of the Density Bonus Project as a Notice of Violation of the Affordable Housing Agreement. In addition to the liquidated damages specified herein, if a very-low income or lower-income household in a restricted unit is charged a rent that exceeds the rent specified in the Affordable Housing Agreement, the applicant shall pay to the affected tenant, the difference in the rent charged and the allowable rent for the months that the tenant was overcharged. If a restricted unit is rented to a household with an income exceeding that specified in the Affordable Housing Agreement, the liquidated damages shall apply along with a requirement that the first vacant, non-restricted unit shall be designated and restricted for rental to a household that qualifies under the Affordable Housing Agreement. If subsequent violations occur, additional fees and or penalties may be applied by the City. This Section shall not limit the City from using other remedies to cure the violation, as are available under the law. 
(Ord. No. 759; Ord. No. 887)  
30.90.180 - Requirements for Owner-Occupied Housing. 
A.  The first-time home buyer shall verify, on a form provided by the Planning Department, that the restricted unit being purchased is for use as the buyer's principal residence and that the buyer is a lower-income household, very-low income household or a senior household. If the restricted unit ceases to function as the owner's principal residence, it shall be sold according to the requirements of the resale controls of this Chapter and the Affordable Housing Agreement for the Density Bonus Project. If evidence is presented to the Director that the owner is unable to continuously occupy the restricted unit due to illness or incapacity, the Director may approve rental of the restricted unit to another very-low income household, lower-income household or senior household. 
B.  The resale controls shall include limits on the resale price of a restricted unit and on the income of the new buyer. The resale price of a restricted unit shall be limited to the original price of the restricted unit, plus a factor of appreciation equal to the annual increase in the median income, plus the appraised value, at time of sale, of any documented capital improvements. In addition, when an owner sells a restricted unit, the sale shall be to a very low-income household, lower-income household, or senior household, as specified in the Affordable Housing Agreement for the Density Bonus Project. 
C.  Resale controls shall be recorded as a part of the declaration of covenants, conditions, and restrictions on the restricted unit(s). The resale controls shall remain in effect for the term of affordability required under the Density Bonus Project's Affordable Housing Agreement. 
D.  The following transfers of title or any interest therein are not subject to the provisions of this Section, provided, however, that the resale controls shall continue to run with the land following such transfers: transfers by gift, devise, or interstate succession to the owner's spouse or children, and transfers of title to a spouse as part of a dissolution of marriage proceeding or in conjunction with marriage. 
(Ord. No. 759; Ord. No. 887)  
Chapter 30.91 - ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS 
 
30.91.010 - Purpose. 
Accessory Dwelling Units (ADUs) provide independent living facilities that are separate from the primary dwelling unit on the property. Chapter 30.91 is intended to facilitate the development of ADUs and Junior Accessory Dwelling Units (JrADUs) in accordance with California Government Code Sections 65852.150, 65852.2, and 6.5852.22. ADUs and JrADUs are a valuable type of lower cost, long term rental housing stock that can help the City meet its goal to provide a greater range of housing options in residential zones. 
(Ord. No. 932 , § 34, 10-2-2017)  
30.91.020 - Zones Where Accessory Dwelling Units are Permitted. 
A.  An Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU) is permitted subject to the development regulations in Section 30.91.040, only on residential property that is developed with an existing single dwelling unit within one of the following zones: 
1.  Very Low Density Residential Zone (R1-40). 
2.  Modified Low Density Residential Zone (R1-14). 
3.  Low Density Residential Zone (R1-10). 
4.  Low Density-Beach Residential Zone (R1-10B). 
5.  Medium Density Single-Family Residential Zone (R1-5). 
6.  Medium Density Single-Family Residential Zone-Beach (R1-5B). 
7.  Medium Density Single-Mixed Residential-East (RM-East). 
8.  Medium Density Mixed Residential-West (RM-West). 
9.  Medium Density Mixed Residential-Central (RM-Central). 
10.  High Density Mixed Residential (R-2). 
11.  Residential-Commercial Zone (RC). 
12.  Carmel Valley Precise Plan Specific Plan (CVPP). 
B.  A Junior Accessory Dwelling Unit (JrADU) within the walls of an existing single dwelling unit, subject to the development regulations in Section 30.91.050, is permitted on property located within one of the following single dwelling unit zones: 
1.  Very Low Density Residential Zone (R1-40). 
2.  Modified Low Density Residential Zone (R1-14). 
3.  Low Density Residential Zone (R1-10). 
4.  Low Density-Beach Residential Zone (R1-10B). 
5.  Medium Density Single-Family Residential Zone (R1-5). 
6.  Medium Density Single-Family Residential Zone-Beach (R1-5B). 
7.  Carmel Valley Precise Plan Specific Plan (CVPP). 
C.  Development of an ADU or JrADU pursuant to Chapter 30.91 is not considered to exceed the allowable density of the parcel on which it is located. 
(Ord. No. 932 , § 35, 10-2-2017)  
30.91.030 - Process for Approval of an Accessory Dwelling Unit. 
A.  Within 120 days of submittal of a complete application for an Accessory Dwelling Unit Permit (ADU), administrative approval shall be granted by the Director of Planning and Community Development for an ADU Permit submitted in accordance with the procedure in Subsection A.1. or a Junior Accessory Dwelling Unit (JrADU) request submitted in accordance with Subsection A.2. 
1.  ADU Submittal Requirements. In addition to the general application and permit fees for planning and engineering review as applicable, the applicant shall submit the following to demonstrate compliance with Section 30.91.040 to the satisfaction of the Planning and Community Development Director: 
a.  A site plan with proposed setbacks fully dimensioned for all existing and proposed structures on the project site, and calculations indicating the square footage of the lot, structure (existing and proposed), and the percentage of lot coverage. 
b.  At least four elevations with proposed height fully dimensioned showing all facade openings and exterior finishes. 
c.  A floor plan containing an attest or proof of compliance with the floor area ratio requirement for the underlying zone. 
d.  Information regarding available water and sewer utility easements, services, and connections and whether the existing primary residence has an automatic residential sprinkler system. 
e.  Standard notes printed on the construction plans prior to building permit approval, including the following statement: 
The ADU shall not be sold or otherwise conveyed separate from the primary dwelling unit. The property owner shall reside on the property in either the primary dwelling unit or in the ADU. If rented, the term for rental shall be 30 consecutive days or greater (except in the RC zone). 
f.  A certification of height, setback, and floor area compliance prior to framing inspection. 
g.  A construction-phase parking and equipment/materials storage plan 
h.  Any additional information as necessary to demonstrate the proposed ADU is exempt from discretionary review (see Subsection D.). 
2.  JrADU Submittal Requirements. In addition to the general application and permit fee, the applicant for a JrADU shall submit the following to demonstrate compliance with Section 30.91.050 to the satisfaction of the Planning and Community Development Director: 
a.  A site plan with setbacks fully dimensioned for all existing structures on the project site to demonstrate the site is developed with a single dwelling unit and that there is no existing ADU on-site. 
b.  A floor plan to demonstrate compliance with Section 30.91.050 requirements for a bedroom, efficiency kitchen, separate exterior entry, interior connection to the primary dwelling unit, and the bathroom the JrADU will have access to. 
B.  Upon submittal of a permit application, the applicant and City shall post a courtesy notice of application at the project site and at City Hall for the public to view in accordance with the City's standard development procedure. 
C.  Prior to development or occupancy of an ADU or JrADU, the applicant shall obtain all construction-related permits as applicable pursuant to Chapter 23.04 (Building Construction General Provisions). 
D.  Notwithstanding the provisions of this Code, development of a JrADU designed in accordance with Section 30.91.050 shall be exempt from the requirement to obtain a discretionary permit in all cases. A request for an ADU designed in compliance with Section 30.91.040 shall be exempt from discretionary review as follows: 
1.  Exempt from a Design Review Permit (Chapter 23.28) in all zones including the Carmel Valley Precise Plan. 
2.  Exempt from a Land Conservation Permit (Chapter 23.33) where proposed grading complies with the following: 
a.  The proposed alteration of the existing grade elevation is 18 inches or less; 
b.  The proposed alteration of the existing grade elevation is temporary and would be replaced with the ADU structure and the grade restored within 18 inches of the original grade elevation; 
c.  Any proposed excavation to fill less than 25 cubic yards; or 
d.  Development of the ADU involves a maximum of 50 cubic yards of combined grading cut and/or fill and a maximum alteration of the existing or natural grade elevation of the property by no more than 36 inches, and no grading occurs during the time period November 15 to March 31. 
3.  Exempt from a Floodplain Development Permit (Chapter 30.56) where located in the Floodplain Overlay Zone and the following apply: 
a.  ADU will be located entirely within the walls of an existing structure; or 
b.  ADU will be located in a structure that is designed as follows: 
i.  The lowest floor (including basement) will be elevated at or above the base flood elevation; 
ii.  The structure will be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; 
iii.  Construction materials will be resistant to flood damage; and 
iv.  All plumbing, electrical, heating, ventilation, and air conditioning equipment will be designed to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
4.  Exempt from a Conditional Use Permit (Chapter 30.74) where: 
a.  Located in the Bluff Slope and Canyon Overlay Zone, and the ADU will be set back at least 20 feet from the top of a steep slope and at least ten feet from the bottom of a steep slope per Section 30.52.070; or 
b.  Located in the Coastal Bluff Overlay Zone, and the ADU will be constructed primarily above grade, and set back at least 40 feet from the top edge of a coastal bluff per Section 30.55.080. 
5.  Coastal Development Permit Requirement (Chapter 30.75). 
a.  California Government Code Section 65852.2 provides that the Accessory Dwelling Unit statutes do not supersede or in any way alter or lessen the effect or application of the California Coastal Act, except that the City shall not be required to hold public hearings for Coastal Development Permit applications for ADUs. 
b.  The following are exempt from a Coastal Development Permit, except where a permit is otherwise required pursuant to Subsection D.5.c.: 
i.  The ADU will be contained entirely within or directly attached to an existing single dwelling unit. 
ii.  Minor changes to an existing residential structure are proposed to construct an ADU consistent with Section 30.91.040 that will not involve the removal or replacement of major structural components (e.g. roofs, exterior walls, or foundations) and will have no potential to adversely impact coastal resources pursuant to the Chapter 3 policies of the Coastal Act. 
c.  An administrative Coastal Development Permit in accordance with Subsection 30.75.080.E. shall be obtained for an ADU where: 
i.  A previously issued Coastal Development Permit requires a new Coastal Development Permit or an amendment be processed for any changes to the approved development or for future development or uses of the site as a condition of approval. 
ii.  The ADU will be located between the first public road and the sea or within 300 feet of a beach or the mean high tide line and will increase the interior floor area by ten percent or more or increase the height by more than ten percent. 
d.  A Coastal Development Permit required by Subsection D.5.c. shall be processed in accordance with the following procedures: 
i.  In order to approve the ADU, the Planning Director shall make a finding that the proposed development is consistent with the requirements of the certified Local Coastal Program, and where applicable, the public access and recreation policies of the Coastal Act, except that no public hearing shall be required. 
ii.  Public notice shall be provided for Coastal Development Permit applications in accordance with Section 30.75.120. 
iii.  Once a final decision of approval or denial is issued by the Planning Director, the notice of final action shall be provided within seven days to the Executive Director of the Coastal Commission and to any interested parties who requested notice in writing in accordance with Section 30.75.100. 
iv.  If the ADU qualifies as appealable development pursuant to Chapter 30.75, the Planning Director's decision to approve a Coastal Development Permit may be appealed to the Coastal Commission within ten calendar days in accordance with Section 30.75.110. 
E.  No Variances shall be granted for an ADU or a JrADU. 
F.  The City shall maintain a record of all ADUs and JrADUs issued permits for reporting to the State of California. 
(Ord. No. 932 , § 36, 10-2-2017)  
30.91.040 - Accessory Dwelling Unit Development Regulations. 
A.  An Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU) that is designed to meet all of the requirements in this Section shall be issued a permit in accordance with Section 30.91.030. 
B.  A maximum of one ADU is permitted per lot that is developed with an existing single dwelling unit in a zone identified in Section 30.91.020. An ADU shall not be permitted on a lot with a JrADU, duplex, three or more dwelling units, or non-residential development. 
C.  If the ADU would not be contained within an existing structure, the lot size shall meet the minimum lot size of the zone. 
D.  The ADU shall be designed and operated in compliance with the regulations of the zone as a residential use that is subordinate to the primary dwelling unit on the property. 
E.  The ADU may be rented, but shall not be sold or conveyed separately from the primary dwelling unit on the property, nor shall authorization be granted for a condominium conversion of an ADU. 
F.  The property owner shall reside on the property in either the primary dwelling unit or in the ADU. 
G.  If rented, the term for rental of an ADU shall be 30 consecutive days or greater; except that in the RC zone, an ADU may be rented without such a limit. 
H.  The interior floor space within the surrounding exterior walls of the ADU (calculated from the inside face of wall studs) shall not exceed 550 square feet in size. For the purpose of this section, all interior floor space of the ADU shall count towards the maximum 550 square feet regardless of whether or not it meets the City's definition of gross floor area. 
I.  The applicant shall demonstrate that the area of interior floor space of the ADU (as calculated per Subsection H.) when combined with the gross floor area of the existing development does not exceed the maximum floor area ratio for the applicable zone. Any existing floor area that is repurposed for the ADU shall be counted only one time towards the total floor area. 
J.  The ADU shall be composed of the same or similar architectural style, details, colors, roof pitch, building materials, and exterior lighting as the primary single dwelling unit on the property. 
K.  The ADU shall have a separate exterior entry from the primary dwelling unit. 
1.  The ADU shall be limited to the first story or basement level unless the ADU would be located within an existing structure with existing access above the first story level. 
2.  The ADU entry shall not be required to have a pathway connection to the street. 
L.  The maximum building height of any new building construction or expansion of an existing structure for the ADU shall not exceed 14 feet. 
M.  All outdoor lighting of an ADU shall be shielded and directed downward and away from neighboring properties and/or public rights-of-way. 
N.  The ADU shall comply with the required setbacks of the applicable zone, except that an existing legal non-conforming structure located within the setback, such as a garage or accessory building, may be converted to an ADU and maintain the non-conforming setback, unless a greater setback is needed for compliance with the building and safety standards of the California Building Code and California Fire Code. In all cases, the ADU shall comply with the required coastal bluff setback in the Coastal Bluff Overlay Zone. 
O.  Where an existing garage is demolished or converted to an ADU, the replacement off-street parking required for the primary dwelling unit shall be provided on the premises and may be located in the setback, may be covered or uncovered, and may be tandem or accessible by mechanical lift (if the mechanical lift is designed within a garage). 
P.  The ADU shall provide one off-street parking space (covered or uncovered), unless one of the following parking exemptions applies in which case no parking is required: 
1.  The ADU would be located within the existing primary dwelling unit. 
2.  The ADU would be located within an existing accessory building on the property. 
3.  The ADU would be located on a property within one-half mile of public transit, including a bus route, train station, or paratransit service, if applicable. 
4.  The ADU would be located in an architecturally and historically significant historic district or on a property listed in the California Register of Historic Places. 
5.  The ADU would be located on a property within one block of a designated car share parking location. 
Q.  ADUs are required to comply with the same building and safety requirements as the primary dwelling unit in accordance with the California Building Code and California Fire Code. Special construction standards that would not otherwise apply to the single dwelling unit as a whole shall not be required. 
R.  An automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall not be required for an ADU if the existing primary dwelling unit does not contain such a system. 
S.  ADUs shall not be considered new residential uses for the purposes of calculating utility connection fees. 
1.  State law provides for a new or separate utility connection fee to be required for an ADU that is not contained within the existing primary dwelling unit or within an existing accessory building. The connection fee shall be proportionate to the burden of the ADU based on the ADU size and number of plumbing fixtures. 
2.  Conversion of floor space to an ADU within an existing structure with the appropriate meter size shall not be subject to new water and sewer connection fees. 
T.  The primary scenic view protections from a primary living area identified under Chapter 23.08 shall be limited to space within the primary dwelling unit that meets such definitions and in no case shall apply to an ADU. 
U.  An exterior wall heater or air conditioning unit is permitted for an ADU. Any additional accessory mechanical equipment or exterior building features that are not otherwise required by this Section or for a dwelling unit per the California Building Code shall be subject to Administrative Design Review in accordance with Section 23.08.035, which shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
1.  Roof eaves or architectural projections that overhang the face of the ADU building wall more than 24 inches. 
2.  An attached deck, carport, or other outdoor covered area with a finished floor 
V.  ADUs shall not be located on a beach, in a wetland, seaward of the mean high tideline, in an environmentally sensitive habitat area, within a required coastal bluff setback, or in an area designated as highly scenic in the certified Local Coastal Program; and shall not involve significant alteration of landforms per Coastal Act Section 13250 or the expansion or construction of water wells or septic systems. 
W.  Within the Carmel Valley Precise Plan Specific Plan area, ADUs shall be limited to location within an existing residence on one of the following lots: Lots 3-9, 11-17, or 20-29. 
X.  The owner of an ADU shall provide information to the City annually upon request for reporting to the State as to whether during the prior 12 months the ADU was rented to a tenant qualifying as low income, rented to a tenant qualifying as moderate income, occupied but not rented, or unoccupied. 
(Ord. No. 932 , § 37, 10-2-2017)  
30.91.050 - Junior Accessory Dwelling Unit Development Regulations. 
A.  A Junior Accessory Dwelling Unit (JrADU) is a small dwelling unit that is no more than 500 square feet in size and contained entirely within, and accessory to, an existing habitable Single Dwelling Unit pursuant to the regulations in this Section and California Government Code Section 65852.22. 
B.  A JrADU that is designed to meet all of the requirements in this Section shall be issued a permit in accordance with Section 30.91.030. The City is preempted by State Law from requiring any type of discretionary review or public hearing prior to approval. 
C.  A maximum of one JrADU is permitted per lot developed with a single dwelling unit and located in a residential zone that allows JrADUs as identified in Section 30.91.020. A JrADU shall not be permitted on a lot with an Accessory Dwelling Unit or multiple dwelling units. 
D.  A JrADU shall be constructed entirely within the existing walls of a single dwelling unit and shall include the following: 
1.  An existing bedroom; 
2.  A separate exterior entry and an interior connection to the primary dwelling unit; 
3.  An efficiency kitchen with a sink (maximum waste line diameter one and one-half inches), a cooking facility with appliances that do not require electrical service of more than 120 volts, or use natural or propane gas, and a food preparation counter and storage cabinets that are reasonable to the size of the unit; and 
4.  Access to a bathroom within the JrADU or the primary dwelling unit. 
E.  The following shall apply to the required separate exterior entry from the primary dwelling unit for a JrADU: 
1.  The JrADU shall be limited to the first story or basement level unless the required exterior entry access above the first story level is existing. 
F.  The property owner shall reside on the property in either the primary dwelling unit or in the JrADU, unless the property is owned by a governmental agency, land trust or housing organization. 
G.  The JrADU may be rented, but shall not be sold or conveyed separately from the primary dwelling unit, nor shall authorization be granted for a condominium conversion of a JrADU. If rented, the term for rental shall be 30 consecutive days or greater; except that in the RC zone, a JrADU may be rented without such a limit. 
H.  Prior to issuance of a permit for a JrADU on private property, the owner shall record a deed restriction with the County Recorder and file the recorded deed restriction with the City, acknowledging the applicable use limitations that shall run with the land. The deed restriction shall include the following text: 
1.  The subject property is developed with a Junior Accessory Dwelling Unit (JrADU) contained entirely within the walls of a primary dwelling unit pursuant to Government Code Section 65852.2 and this Chapter. 
2.  This deed restriction identifies use limitations that shall be enforceable against the property owner and all successors in interest. 
3.  The property owner shall reside on the property in either the primary dwelling unit or in the JrADU. 
4.  The JrADU may be rented for periods of 30 consecutive days or greater, but shall not be sold or conveyed separately from the primary dwelling unit. 
5.  The JrADU shall be 500 square feet maximum in size. 
6.  The JrADU shall provide independent living facilities which shall include a separate exterior entry, an interior connection to the primary dwelling unit, and an efficiency kitchen with a sink (maximum waste line diameter one and one-half inches), a cooking facility with appliances that do not require electrical service of more than 120 volts or use natural or propane gas, and a food preparation and storage cabinets; and access to a bathroom within the JrADU or the primary dwelling unit. 
I.  Parking shall not be required for the JrADU. 
J.  A JrADU shall not be considered a separate or new dwelling unit for the purpose of any fire or life safety regulation. Fire or life safety requirements that apply to a single dwelling unit may be applied to the structure as a whole inclusive of the JrADU. Special construction standards that would not otherwise apply to the single dwelling unit as a whole shall not be required for the JrADU. 
K.  A new automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall not be required for development of a JrADU. 
L.  A primary dwelling unit with the appropriate meter size shall not be subject to new water and sewer connection fees for conversion of existing floor space to a JrADU. 
M.  The primary scenic view protections from a primary living area identified under Chapter 23.08 shall be limited to space within the Primary Dwelling Unit that meets such definitions and in no case shall apply to a JrADU. 
N.  The owner of a JrADU shall provide information to the City annually upon request for reporting to the State as to whether during the prior 12 months the JrADU was rented to a tenant qualifying as low income, rented to a tenant qualifying as moderate income, occupied but not rented, or unoccupied. 
(Ord. No. 932 , § 38, 10-2-2017)  
Chapter 30.98 - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 
 
30.98.010 - Violations of Title Constitute Nuisances; Abatement of Same. 
A.  Any building or structure erected, constructed, altered or maintained and/or any use or occupation of property contrary to the provisions of this Chapter shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance, and any failure, refusal or neglect to obtain a permit as required by the terms of this Chapter shall be prima facie evidence of the fact that a nuisance has been committed in connection with the erection, construction, alteration or maintenance of any building or structure erected, constructed, altered or maintained, used or occupied contrary to the provisions of this Chapter. 
B.  The City Attorney shall, upon order of the City Council, immediately commence necessary proceed-ings for the abatement, removal and/or enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law. All of the remedies provided for in this Chapter shall be cumulative and not exclusive.  
30.98.020 - Unauthorized Change to Approved Plans Constitute Violation. 
Building permits issued on the basis of plans and applications approved by the City authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in such approved plans and applications, and any other use, arrangement or construction at variance with that authorized shall be deemed a violation of this Chapter, and punishable as provided herein.  
30.98.030 - Enforcement Officer. 
It shall be the responsibility of the City Manager to enforce the provisions of this Chapter. This responsibility may be delegated to the Planning Director.  
30.98.040 - Enforcement Procedures. 
If the enforce-ment officer shall find that any of the provisions of this Chapter are being violated, he/she shall cause to be notified in writing the person responsible for such violation, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. The enforcement officer shall further order discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings or structures; removal of illegal buildings or structures or of additions, alterations or structural changes thereto; discontinuance of illegal work being done; and/or shall take other action as may be necessary to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of, the provisions of this Chapter. 
Failure to attain compliance with this Chapter after following the procedures as set forth herein shall cause the matter to be set for a public hearing before the City Council. Following said hearing, the City Council may refer the matter to the City Attorney for litigation as may be necessary to affect compliance with the provisions of this Chapter held to be in violation.  
30.98.050 - Complaints of Violation. 
Whenever a violation of this Title occurs or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a complaint in regard thereto. All such complaints shall be in writing and signed by the complainant and shall fully state the location of the alleged violation, the cause of the complaint and basis thereof. Upon receipt of a complaint, the enforcement officer shall cause an investigation of the alleged violation and take action thereon as provided by this Chapter.  
30.98.060 - Penalties. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of the regulations contained in this Title shall be guilty of an infraction or a misdemeanor, as charged in the discretion of the City, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished at the discretion of the Court. 
(Ord. No. 542) 
