Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Title 2 ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL
Title 3 REVENUE AND FINANCE
Title 4 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Title 5 BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Title 6 HEALTH AND SANITATION
Title 7 SUBDIVISIONS
Title 8 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
Title 9 ZONING
Title 10 ANIMAL CONTROL, WELFARE AND LICENSING REQUIREMENTS
Title 11 PEACE, MORALS AND SAFETY
Title 12 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Title 13 PARKS AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES
Title 14 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Title 15 WATER AND SEWERS
Title 16 (Reserved)

Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 1.01 CODE ADOPTED
Chapter 1.04 CITY SEAL
Chapter 1.08 CITATIONS IN LIEU OF IMMEDIATE ARRAIGNMENT
Chapter 1.10 ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS

Chapter 1.01 CODE ADOPTED
1.01.001 Declaration of Purpose.
        The City Council finds that it is desirable and in the public interest to establish a Municipal Code in order to provide a scheme of organization for the classification and grouping of Ordinances which the Council may adopt. The Council intends on adopting ordinances of a general and permanent nature to provide for their placement in accordance with the scheme of the Code. This will provide the user with a convenient and logical compilation of the Ordinances of the City.

 

1.01.002 Establishment of Municipal Code.
        This Code shall be known as the “Dana Point Municipal Code.” It shall be sufficient to refer to this Code as the Dana Point Municipal Code in any prosecution for the violation of any provision of this Code. It shall also be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, or repealing provisions of this Code as an addition or amendment to, or a repeal of the Dana Point Municipal Code, or any portion thereof.

 

1.01.003 Contents of Code.
        The Dana Point Municipal Code shall consist of all Ordinances adopted by the City Council which are of a general and permanent nature. An ordinance relating to any of the following subject matters is not considered an ordinance of general and permanent nature and need not be included within the Municipal Code:

        (a)    The naming of streets or roads;

        (b)    Granting, altering, or withdrawing franchises;

        (c)    Levying real property taxes;

        (d)    Calling an election;

        (e)    Annexation proceedings;

        (f)    Interim zoning measures;

        (g)    Zoning or rezoning a particular parcel of property;

        (h)    Such other Ordinances of a special or particular subject matter which the Council considers inappropriate to a compilation of laws of a general and permanent nature.

 

1.01.004 Outline of Code.
        (a)    The Ordinances of the City which are of a general and permanent nature shall be organized and grouped according to subject matter.

        (b)    Ordinances which are adopted from time to time shall be classified and organized under the following scheme of titles:

        (1)    General Provisions

        (2)    Administration and Personnel

        (3)    Revenue and Finance

        (4)    Miscellaneous Regulations

        (5)    Business Regulations

        (6)    Health and Sanitation

        (7)    Subdivisions

        (8)    Buildings and Construction

        (9)    Planning and Zoning

        (10)  Animals

        (11)  Peace, Morals, and Safety

        (12)  Vehicles and Traffic

        (13)  Parks and Recreational Facilities

        (14)  Streets and Sidewalks

        (15)  Water and Sewers

        (16)  Redevelopment Agency

 

1.01.005 Maintenance of Code.
        At least three copies of this Code, duly certified by the City Clerk, shall be maintained on file in the Office of the City Clerk as official copies of this Code. Additional copies of this Code shall be distributed to the departments of the City as prescribed by the City Manager.

        Duly certified copies of each Ordinance making a change in this Code shall be filed in the Office of the City Clerk in books for such purpose, duly indexed for ready reference.

        At least semi-annually the City Clerk shall cause the loose leaf pages of this Code in which changes have been made to be reproduced, including a notation as to the Ordinance number and the date on which such change was adopted. Such reprinted pages shall be distributed in order that the loose leaf copies of this Code, prepared for the use and convenience of the officers and employees of the City and the general public, may be brought up to date.

 

1.01.010 Interpretation of Code and Other Ordinances.
        The provisions of this Code and all proceedings under it are to be construed to effect its purposes and to promote justice.

        All the provisions of this Code and all other City Ordinances shall be interpreted to refer to the appropriate or designated officer or office of the City, and whether an ordinance, uniform code, statute, or other matter which is adopted by reference refers to any department, officer, employee, inspection, police, or other functions, unless the context requires otherwise, all references shall be to the appropriate or designated office, officer, department, agency, employee, or function of the City, or to the person or agency performing the function for the City.

 

1.01.011 Adoption of Certain Provisions of the Codified Ordinances of the County of Orange; Transitional Language.
        City Ordinance No. 90-07 adopted the Codified Ordinances of the County of Orange wherever said Codified Ordinances did not conflict with the provisions of the Dana Point Municipal Code. Said Codified Ordinances shall remain in full force and effect following the adoption of the City’s Municipal Code unless there is a similar or conflicting provision adopted by the City on that subject. Certain provisions of the Codified Ordinances of the County of Orange, County documents or County Resolutions which were adopted by reference pursuant to Ordinance No. 90-07 reflect the County governmental structure and contain references to officials, official titles, commissions, and other designations which are not a part of the structure of the City’s government. In order to effectively and intelligently administer the Codified Ordinances of the County of Orange, County documents, and the County Resolutions, it is the purpose of this Section to provide for the substitution of the appropriate City official, title, or designation in the Codified Ordinances of the County of Orange, County documents and County Resolutions. Accordingly, the following amendments are made to the Codified Ordinances of the County of Orange, County documents, and County Resolutions referenced herein and adopted herein:

        (a)    Unless the context otherwise clearly indicates, whenever “Board of Supervisors” or “Board” is used in the Codified Ordinances of the County of Orange, County documents, or County Resolutions, it shall mean the Dana Point City Council.

        (b)    Whenever “County” is used in the Codified Ordinances of the County of Orange, County documents, or County Resolutions, it shall mean the geographical limits of the City of Dana Point unless a different geographical area is clearly indicated by the context.

        (c)    Whenever “County,” “County of Orange,” or “unincorporated territory of the County of Orange” is used, it shall mean the City of Dana Point unless a geographical area is clearly indicated by the context.

        (d)    Whenever “Planning Commission” is used in the Codified Ordinances in the County of Orange, County documents, or County Resolutions, it shall mean the Planning Commission of the City of Dana Point.

        (e)    Whenever “Subdivision Committee” or “Committee” is used in the Codified Ordinances of the County of Orange, County documents, or County Resolutions, it shall mean the Dana Point Planning Commission.

        (f)    Whenever “Director of Environmental Management Agency” or “Director” is used in the Codified Ordinances of the County of Orange, County documents, or County Resolutions, it shall mean the Dana Point Director of Community Development.

        (g)    Whenever “Zoning Administrator” is used in the Codified Ordinances of the County of Orange, County documents, or County Resolutions, it shall mean the Dana Point Director of Community Development.

        (h)    Whenever the Codified Ordinances of the County of Orange, County documents, or County Resolutions, refer to any other officer, office, official title, or designation, the reference shall be interpreted to mean that a similar office, title, or designation in the governmental structure in the City, as determined by the City Manager, or if there is no equivalent office, title, or designation, then the City Manager may delegate the responsibility to the official or employee of his/her choosing. (Added by Ord. No. 91-07, 03/26/91)

 

1.01.020 Effect of Code on Past Actions and Obligations.
        Neither the adoption of this Code or any portion thereof, nor the repeal by this Code of any Ordinance previously in effect in the City or within the territory currently comprising the City, shall in any manner affect the prosecution for the violation of any ordinance, which violation was committed prior to the effective date of this Code, nor be construed as a waiver of any license fee or penalty due and unpaid under such Ordinances on such effective date, nor be construed as affecting any of the provisions of such ordinances relating to the collection of any such license fee or penalty or the penal provisions applicable to any violation of such Ordinances, nor to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit required to be posted, filed, or deposited pursuant to any ordinances, and all vested rights and obligations pertaining to such ordinances shall continue in full force and effect.

 

1.01.030 Partial Invalidity.
        If any Chapter, Section, sentence, clause, or portion of this Code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof.

 

1.01.040 Territorial Limitation.
        This Code shall refer only to the omission or commission of acts within the territorial limits of the City of Dana Point and that territory outside of the City over which the City has jurisdiction or control by virtue of the Constitution, or any law, or by reason of ownership or control of property.

 

1.01.050 Local Signification.
        All references in this Code to places, acts, persons, or things and all else in relation to this Code shall be construed to mean that the same are applicable to this City, whether the City is mentioned in each particular section or not.

 

1.01.100 Rules of Construction.
        Unless the provisions of this Code otherwise specifically provide, or the context of this Code indicates to the contrary, the general provisions, rules of construction, and definitions set forth in the following sections of this Chapter shall govern the construction of this Code.

 

1.01.110 Effect of Headings.
        The Title, Chapter, Article, and Section headings contained in this Code shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify, or in any manner affect the scope, meaning, or intent of the provisions of any Title, Chapter, Article, or Section of this Code.

 

1.01.120 Meaning of “Section” and “Subsection.”
        “Section” shall mean a section of this Code, unless some other source is specifically set forth. “Subsection” shall mean a subsection of the section in which the term occurs, unless some other section is expressly set forth.

 

1.01.130 Acts by Deputies.
        Whenever a power is granted to, or a duty is imposed upon, a public officer or employee, the power may be exercised or the duty may be performed by a deputy of such officer or employee or by a person otherwise duly authorized pursuant to law or Ordinance, unless this Code expressly provides otherwise.

 

1.01.140 “Writing.”
        “Writing” includes any form of recorded message capable of comprehension by ordinary visual means. Whenever any notice, report, statement, or record is required or authorized by this Code, such notice, report, statement, or record shall be made in writing in the English language, unless this Code expressly provides otherwise.

 

1.01.150 References to Ordinances: Application to Amendments.
        Whenever any reference in this Code is made to an ordinance, the reference shall apply to such Ordinance of the City, unless this Code expressly provides otherwise. Whenever any reference is made to any portion of this Code or to any Ordinances of this City, the reference shall apply to all amendments and additions to this Code.

 

1.01.160 Statute of Limitations.
        When a limitation or period of time prescribed in any existing ordinance or statute for acquiring a right or barring a remedy, or for any other purpose, has begun to run before this Code goes into effect, the time which has already run shall be deemed a part of the time prescribed as such limitation.

 

1.01.170 Definitions.
        As used in this Code, unless a different meaning is apparent from the context or is specified elsewhere in the Code:

        (a)    “Calendar year” shall mean from January 1 through December 31 of any given year.

        (b)    “City” shall mean the City of Dana Point.

        (c)    “City Manager” shall mean the appointed official of the City who occupies the position of chief administrative officer of the City.

        (d)    “Council” shall mean the City Council of the City of Dana Point.

        (e)    “Council Member” shall mean a person duly elected to the Council.

        (f)    “County” shall mean the County of Orange.

        (g)    “Fiscal year” shall mean from July 1 of any given year through June 30 of the following year.

        (h)    “Gender.” The masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter genders.

        (i)     “Goods” shall mean and include wares and merchandise.

        (j)     “May” shall be permissive.

        (k)    “Month” shall mean a calendar month, unless otherwise specially expressed.

        (l)     “Number.” The singular number shall include the plural, and the plural number shall include the singular.

        (m)”Oath” shall include affirmation.

        (n)    “Official time standard.” Wherever certain hours are named in this Code, they shall mean Standard Time or Daylight Saving Time as may be in current use in the City.

        (o)    “Operate” shall mean and include carrying on, keeping, conducting, or maintaining.

        (p)    “Owner” applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant, tenant in common, or joint tenant of the whole or a part of such building or land.

        (q)    “Person” shall include any person, firm, company, corporation, partnership, association, public corporation, City (except the City of Dana Point), the County of Orange, any district in the County of Orange, the State of California, or the United States of America, or any department, agency or political subdivision of the above, unless this Code expressly provides otherwise.

        (r)    “Personal property” shall include money, goods, chattels, things in action, and evidences of debts.

        (s)    “Police” shall mean the agency which performs the appropriate law enforcement function for the City. “Police Chief,” “Chief of Police,” or “Chief of Police Services,” shall mean the head of the agency or division which at the time involved has responsibility for performing the police function for, or within, the City.

        (t)     “Property” shall include real and personal property.

        (u)    “Quarterly” where used to designate a period of time, shall mean the first three calendar months of any given year or succeeding period of three calendar months.

        (v)    “Real property” shall include land, tenements, and hereditaments.

        (w)   “Sale” shall include any sale, exchange, barter, or offer for sale.

        (x)    “Shall” shall be mandatory.

        (y)    “State” shall mean the State of California.

        (z)    “Street” shall include all streets, highways, avenues, boulevards, alleys, courts, places, squares, or other public ways in the City which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so designated in any law of the State.

        (aa)  “Tenant or occupant” applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.

        (ab)  “Tense.” The present tense shall include the past and future tense, and the future tense shall include the present tense.

        Words and phrases not defined in this Code shall be construed according to the approved usage of the language, or, when appropriate, by reference to definitions contained in State or Federal law.

 

1.01.200 Violation of Municipal Code—Misdemeanor.
        It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this Code or the provisions of any Code adopted by reference by this Code or any provision of any ordinance of the City not included within this Code. Any person violating any such provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this Code or any Code adopted by reference by this Code or any other City Ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, unless such violation is specifically designated as constituting an infraction. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this Code, or any provision of any Code adopted by reference by this Code, or of any other City Ordinance, is committed, continued, or permitted by such person, and may be punished accordingly.

 

1.01.210 Aiding and Abetting.
        Whenever any act or omission is made unlawful by this Code, it shall include causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering, or concealing the fact of such act or omission.

 

1.01.220 Punishments.
        (a)    Any conviction of a misdemeanor under the provisions of this Code shall be punishable by a fine of not more than One Thousand Dollars ($1,000), or by imprisonment in the County jail for a period not exceeding six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

        (b)    Any conviction of an infraction under the provisions of this Code shall be punishable for a first conviction by a fine of not more than One Hundred Dollars ($100), for a second conviction within a period of one year by a fine of not more than Two Hundred Dollars ($200), and for a third or any subsequent conviction within a period of one year by a fine of not more than Five- Hundred Dollars ($500).

        Any provision or requirement of this Code or of any Code adopted by reference by this Code or of any Ordinance of the City not included within this Code, the violation of which or the failure to comply with which is designated as an infraction, shall be prosecutable as a misdemeanor upon a third violation within a period of one year and each violation thereafter of the same provision by the same individual within a period of one year.

        Any violation expressly declared to be punishable, in the discretion of the court by either a fine, or by a fine or imprisonment, or both, shall become an infraction for all purposes under any of the following circumstances:

        (1)    Where a judgment imposes a punishment of a fine not exceeding One Hundred Dollars ($100) in the case of a first offense; or

        (2)    When the court grants probation to a defendant without the imposition of a sentence and, at the time of granting probation, or on application of the defendant or probation officer thereafter, the court declares the offense to be an infraction; or

        (3)    When the City Attorney or any deputy district attorney files in a court having jurisdiction over misdemeanor offenses a complaint specifying that the offense is an infraction.

 

1.01.230 Imprisonment in County Jail.
        Imprisonment for violation of any City Ordinance shall be in the County Jail. Any person convicted of any criminal offense related to an arrest shall pay to the City any criminal justice administration fee imposed on the City by the County of Orange. (Ord. 94-20, 11/22/94)

 

1.01.235 Administrative Citation.
        In addition to other penalties and procedures provided by law, upon a finding by the city official vested with the authority to enforce various provisions of this Code that a violation exists, he or she may issue an administrative citation pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 1.10. (Added by Ord. 00-05, 10/10/00)

 

1.01.240 Violations Public Nuisances.
        (a)    In addition to other penalties provided by law, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any provision of this Code or any Code adopted by reference by this Code or any Ordinance of the City not included within this Code, or any such threatened violation, shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be summarily abated as such by the City.

        (b)    Any such violation or threatened violation as referred to in Subsection (a), or any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of any Code adopted by reference by this Code, or of the provisions of any other City Ordinance, shall be deemed a public nuisance which may be abated by the City Attorney in a civil judicial action.

 

1.01.250 Nuisances: Recovery of Abatement Expenses.
        (a)    Whenever any person creating, causing, committing, or maintaining a public nuisance, as referred to in Section 1.01.240 of this Chapter, or other public nuisance, as defined under State law or other ordinances or regulations, has been given notice, by or on behalf of the City Attorney or by any other City officer, employee, or policing agent authorized to give such notice, to abate such nuisance or cease and desist from continuing such nuisance or violation of law, and such person fails, refuses, or neglects to comply with the notice within the time specified therein, or if such a time is not specified, then within a time reasonably sufficient to enable such compliance, such noncomplying person shall be liable to the City for any and all costs and expenses to the City involved in thereafter abating the nuisance and in obtaining compliance with or enforcing the law as referred to or encompassed within said notice.

        (b)    Costs and expenses, as referred to in Subsection (a) of this Section, may include, but are not limited to, any and all direct costs and expenses related to such things as personnel salaries and benefits, operational overhead, rent, interest, fees for experts or consultants, legal costs or expenses, including attorneys’ fees, claims against the City arising as a consequence of the nuisance or violation, and procedures associated with collecting moneys due hereunder.

        (c)    The provisions of Subsection (a) of this Section shall also apply to any person who received a notice, as specified therein, abated the nuisance or violation, but subsequently allowed or was responsible for a recurrence of the nuisance or violation.

        (d)    The liability of any person for the payment of the costs and expenses provided for in Subsection (a) of this Section may be waived in whole or in part by the City Attorney in any case wherein he or she determines, in his or her sole discretion, that the failure or refusal of such persons to comply with the notice therein involved was based upon a good faith and bona fide issue of law or fact specially involved in the circumstances of the case. Any determination or decision of the City Attorney in this regard shall be final and conclusive and shall not be subject to appeal as prescribed in Chapter 2.04 of Title 2 of this Code.

        (e)    Money due to the City pursuant to this Section may be recovered in an appropriate civil action. Alternatively, such liability may be enforced by special assessment proceedings against the parcel of land upon which the nuisance existed, which proceedings may be conducted in a manner substantively similar to proceedings described in Sections 39574 et seq. of the California Government Code relating to weed abatement assessments.

 

1.01.260 Violation of Administrative Provisions.
        The violation of, or the failure or omission to perform in accordance with, any administrative provision of this Code by any officer or employee of the City shall generally not be considered a criminal act, but may be deemed a failure to perform the duties or to observe the rules or regulations of the department, office, commission, or board within the meaning of the civil service ordinances and rules and regulations of the City, if applicable.

 

1.01.290 Public Hearing Notices/Content.
        (a)    All posted or mailed notices of public hearings to be conducted by the City Council, Planning Commission, or any other body of the City, shall contain the following:

 

        “Any petition for judicial review of a decision of the Dana Point City Council, (Planning Commission or other body as appropriate) is controlled by the statute of limitations provisions set forth in Sections 2.50.010 and 2.50.020 of the Dana Point Municipal Code and Sections 1094.5 and 1094.6 of the California Code of Civil Procedure. Any action or proceeding to attack, review, set aside, or void any decision of the Dana Point City Council (Planning Commission or other body as appropriate) is controlled by Section 2.50.010 and Section 2.50.020 of the Dana Point Municipal Code. In any such action or proceeding seeking judicial review of, which attacks or seeks to set aside, or void any decision of the Dana Point City Council (Planning Commission or other body as appropriate) shall be limited to those issues raised at the hearing as provided in Chapter 2.50 of the Dana Point Municipal Code. Copies of the procedures for the conduct of City Council public hearings are available from the City Clerk.”

 

        (b)    All published notices of public hearings to be conducted by the City Council, (Planning Commission or other appropriate body), shall contain the following:

 

        “If you wish to challenge the above in court, the challenge will be limited only to those issues you or someone else raised at the public hearing or in written correspondence delivered to the City Clerk at, or prior to, the public hearing described in this notice, and must be commenced within the time limits specified in Chapter 2.50 of the Dana Point Municipal Code.”

 

 

1.01.292 Three Hundred (300) Foot Radius for Mailed Notice Amended to be Five Hundred (500) Foot Radius.
        Whenever notice is required to be mailed to all real property owners and/or residents within three hundred (300) feet of the real property for which a public hearing is required by this Code, any City Ordinance, Code adopted by reference, City Resolution, State law, Federal law, or administrative regulation, for purposes of complying with this Section, the same shall be read as requiring the mailed notice to be provided to all property owners/residents within a five hundred (500) foot radius of the subject project or real property. This Section shall not require mailed notice if published notice is authorized in lieu thereof by State law. (Ord. 91-1, 1/8/91)

 

1.01.300 Notices—Service.
        Whenever a notice is required to be given, or may be given, under any provision of this Code or any provision of any Code adopted by reference by this Code or any provision of any Ordinance or Resolution of the City not included within this Code, such notice may be given as herein provided. Unless different or special provisions are otherwise specifically made in this Code or in some other applicable enactment, any such notice may be given either by personal delivery thereof to the persons to be notified, or by deposit in the United States mail in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to such person to be notified, at the person’s last known residence or business address as the same appears in the public records or other records pertaining to the matters to which such notice is directed. Service by mail shall be deemed to have been completed at the time of deposit in the post office or in the official receptacle thereof.

 

1.01.310 Notices—Proof.
        Proof of giving any notice may be made by the certificate of any officer or employee of this City or by the affidavit or declaration under penalty of perjury of any person over the age of eighteen years, which shows service in conformity with this Code or other provision of law applicable to the subject matter concerned.

Chapter 1.04 CITY SEAL
1.04.010 Adoption.
        The corporate seal for the City is hereby adopted and approved. The Seal shall contain the name of the City and date of incorporation and shall appear substantially as follows:

 



 

1.04.015 Seal; Insignia; Custody and Use of.
        The City Clerk shall have custody and charge of the City Seal and such other insignia that may from time to time be adopted pursuant to this Code. Except as provided by this Code, any seal, insignia or other symbol officially adopted for use by the City of Dana Point shall not be affixed to any instrument without the special warrant of the Clerk therefor. (Added by Ord. 93-01, 1/12/93)

 

1.04.020 Approval of Use by City Employees and Officials.
        The City Council hereby approves the use of the City Seal and insignia by City employees and elected or Council appointed public officials in connection with the performance of their duties as City employees and officials. Such use shall include the placement on City vehicles, equipment, business cards, stationery and the City Flag. The City Council hereby specifically prohibits the use of the City Seal and insignia by city officials, candidates for City offices, or political campaign committees for purposes of any political campaign advertising, materials, literature, letters or brochures. (Added by Ord. 93-01, 1/12/93)

 

1.04.030 Approval of Other Uses.
        The City Council hereby reserves the right to approve other uses of the City Seal and insignia by minute order so long as such use shall promote the interests of the City. (Added by Ord. 93-01, 1/12/93)

 

1.04.040 Use of the City Seal; Prior Approval Required.
        Use of the City Seal, insignia, or other officially adopted symbol, by any person, corporation or organization shall be subject to the prior approval of the City Manager and the conditions herein provided. (Added by Ord. 93-01, 1/12/93)

 

1.04.050 Criteria for Use.
        The City Manager is authorized to permit the use of the City Seal by any person, corporation or organization (“Applicant”) which meets all of the following criteria:

        1.     The use of the City Seal or any cut, facsimile or reproduction of said Seal at an event or activity which is for City, local civic, local cultural, local charitable or other local nonprofit purpose.

        2.     The Applicant agrees not to use the City Seal for commercial or other purposes not allowed above.

        3.     The Applicant pays a fee, if applicable and where set by resolution of the City Council.

        4.     Samples shall be submitted of all documents, goods and other materials upon which the City Seal is to be used and objective evidence of good quality and workmanship is submitted so that the use of the City Seal on said items does not discredit or impair the integrity of the Seal in any manner.

        5.     The Applicant shall grant to the City the right, at all reasonable times, to inspect any item upon which the City Seal is used in order that the City may verify that the City Seal is being used correctly in an unadulterated form.

        6.     Permission to use the City Seal shall not be assignable. (Added by Ord. 93-01, 1/12/93)

 

1.04.060 Breach of Criteria.
        If the Applicant breaches any of the criteria set forth above, the City may serve written notice of such breach upon the Applicant with request to cure or take appropriate affirmative action in good faith to cure the breach within thirty (30) days of the date of the notice. In the event the Applicant fails to cure the breach to the satisfaction of the City, the City may terminate the user’s permission to use the City Seal and take all steps reasonably necessary to restrain the improper use of the City Seal. (Added by Ord. 93-01, 1/12/93)

 

1.04.070 Penalties.
        Any person or persons violating the provisions of Sections 1.04.010 through 1.04.050 shall be guilty of an offense chargeable as a misdemeanor and subject to punishment in accordance with Section 1.01.200 of this Code. Each and every day during any portion of which the provisions of Sections 1.04.010 through 1.04.050 are violated, shall constitute a separate offense and may be punished accordingly. (Added by Ord. 93-01, 1/12/93)

Chapter 1.08 CITATIONS IN LIEU OF IMMEDIATE ARRAIGNMENT
1.08.010 Notice to Appear in Lieu of Arrest.
        In any case in which a person is arrested for a violation of any provision of this Code and does not demand to be taken before a magistrate, such person may, in lieu of being taken before a magistrate, be issued a written notice to appear in court and then may be released, pursuant to and in accordance with the procedures prescribed by California Penal Code Section 853.6 et seq.

 

1.08.050 Issuance of Citations by Designated Officers and Employees.
        Officers and employees of the City who have the discretionary duty to enforce a statute or ordinance may, pursuant to Section 836.5 of the California Penal Code and subject to the provisions of this Section, arrest a person without a warrant whenever any such officer or employee has reasonable cause to believe that the person to be arrested has committed an offense in the officer’s or employee’s presence which he or she has the discretionary duty to enforce, and to issue a notice to appear, and to release such person on his or her written promise to appear in court, pursuant to Section 853.6 of the Penal Code. No officer or employee shall be allowed by his or her superior to exercise the arrest and citation authority conferred in this Section unless such officer or employee is within a classification of City officers and employees designated by Resolution of the City Council to exercise such arrest and citation authority as to specified violations. Any such officer or employee shall be appropriately 
instructed to deposit executed citations or notice with the police department for filing with the court, after review for legal sufficiency.

Chapter 1.10 ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS
1.10.010 Legislative Purpose and Applicability.
        (a)    The City Council hereby finds that there is a need for an alternative method of enforcing violations of this Code. The City Council further finds that an appropriate and alternative method of enforcement for violations is an Administrative Citation Program as authorized by Government Code Section 53069.4.

        (b)    The procedures for the imposition, enforcement, collection, and administrative review of civil fines established in this Chapter shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, any criminal, civil or other legal remedy established by law and available to the City to address violations of this Code.

        (c)    The purpose of issuing civil citations pursuant to this Chapter is to encourage voluntary and complete compliance with the provisions of this Code in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Dana Point; to provide a method of holding parties responsible when they fail or refuse to comply with the provisions of this Code; and to minimize the expense and delay where the otherwise sole remedy is to pursue responsible parties in the civil or criminal justice system.

        (d)    Use of this Chapter shall be at the sole discretion of the City. (Added by Ord. 00-05, 10/10/00; amended by Ord. 09-07, 8/24/09)

 

1.10.020 Definitions.
        The following definitions shall apply to the use of these terms, words, and phrases for the purposes of this Chapter. The singular shall also imply the plural:

        “Administrative citation” or “citation” shall mean a written notice to a responsible party that a violation of this Code has occurred and an assessment of civil fines issued by an enforcement officer of the City.

        “City Manager” shall mean the City Manager of the City of Dana Point or designee.

        “Code” shall mean the Dana Point Municipal Code or any ordinance adopted by the Dana Point City Council, including but not limited to the Subdivision Code, the Zoning Code, the Building Code, and all Uniform Codes or other codes or regulations of the State of California or the County of Orange duly adopted by reference or otherwise applicable to the City of Dana Point.

        “Continuing violation” shall mean either (1) a particular violation of the Code continuing for more than twenty-four (24) hours without correction or abatement, or (2) a repeated, consecutive violation of the same offense without intervening days.

        “Director” shall mean the Director of the Community Development Department of the City of Dana Point or designee.

        “Enforcement officer” shall mean any officer, agent or employee of the City designated by the City Manager to have the authority and responsibility to enforce certain provisions of this Code.

        “Hearing officer” shall mean an impartial individual designated by the City Manager in accordance with Section 1.10.100 to determine the civil liability of a person receiving an administrative citation.

        “Notice of violation” shall mean a written notice to a responsible party that a violation of this Code has occurred and a warning that an administrative citation assessing fines will be issued unless the violation is ceased and abated.

        “Responsible party” shall mean any individual who is (1) the owner, tenant, lessee, or occupant of real property, or (2) the owner, majority stock holder, general partner, or authorized agent of any business, company, or entity, or (3) the parent or the legal guardian of any person under the age of eighteen (18) years, who causes or maintains a violation of this Code. (Added by Ord. 00-05, 10/10/00; amended by Ord. 09-07, 8/24/09)

 

1.10.030 Administrative Citation Authority.
        (a)    Any responsible party violating, causing or maintaining a violation of any provision of this Code may be issued an administrative citation by an enforcement officer assessing a civil fine as provided in this Chapter. A responsible party to whom a citation is issued shall be liable for and shall pay to the City the fine or fines described in the citation when due.

        (b)    Any enforcement officer of the City, upon determining that a provision of this Code which he or she is charged to enforce has been violated, has the authority to issue an administrative citation to any responsible party. Pursuant to this authority, the enforcement officer shall attempt to determine the appropriate responsible party(ies) for each violation.

        (c)    Each and every day a violation of this Code exists constitutes a separate and distinct offense and will be subject to a separate fine. A single citation may charge a violation for one or more days on which a violation exists, and for violation of one or more Code sections. Continuing violations shall automatically accrue fines beginning on the date the citation is issued until the abatement of the offense is properly verified in accordance with Section 1.10.080.

        (d)    The owner of any premises within the City has the responsibility for keeping such premises free of violations related to the use or condition of the property. The owner of such premises is a responsible party and shall be separately liable for violations committed by tenants or occupants relative to the use or condition of the property. (Added by Ord. 00-05, 10/10/00; amended by Ord. 09-07, 8/24/09)

 

1.10.040 Warnings for Certain Continuing Violations and Responsible Parties.
        (a)    The enforcement officer may, in his or her discretion, issue a notice of violation to a responsible party where such party did not personally cause the violation and is unaware that the violation is occurring in a manner or place which would render the party responsible. Such notice of violation shall serve as a written warning of responsibility and require immediate action by the responsible party to cease and abate the violation. The notice of violation shall specify a date by which the violation can reasonably be ceased and abated. If, after said correction period following the written warning, the violation is not ceased or abated, the enforcement officer may issue an administrative citation assessing fines in accordance with this Chapter.

        (b)    In accordance with Government Code Section 53069.4, no responsible party shall be assessed a civil fine under this Chapter for a continuing violation pertaining to building, plumbing, electrical, zoning, or other structural, design or land use regulation without first receiving a warning and reasonable opportunity to correct or otherwise remedy the violation.

        (1)    In such circumstance, the enforcement officer shall issue a notice of violation requiring cessation or abatement of the violation within a stated period of time prior to the assessment of civil fines. The stated period available to correct the violation prior to assessment of fines shall be appropriate to the violation as determined by the enforcement officer, but in no event less than five (5) calendar days.

        (2)    If, after the correction period stated in the notice of violation, the violation is not ceased or abated, the enforcement officer may issue an administrative citation assessing fines accruing on each day the violation exists without abatement in accordance with Section 1.10.080.

        (c)    Any responsible party cited for a continuing violation may petition the Director of Community Development for an extension of time to correct the violation so long as the petition is received before the end of the correction period. The Director may at his or her discretion grant an extension of time to correct the violation if the responsible party has supplied sufficient evidence showing that the correction cannot reasonably be made within the stated period.

        (d)    The notice procedures of this Section shall not apply in the instance of a violation that poses immediate danger to public health or safety. (Added by Ord. 00-05, 10/10/00; amended by Ord. 09-07, 8/24/09)

 

1.10.050 Service Procedures.
        The enforcement officer may issue a notice of violation and/or administrative citation in accordance with this Chapter on a form approved by the City Manager to a responsible party in one of the following manners:

        (a)    Personal Service. In any case where an Administrative Citation is issued:

        (1)    The enforcement officer may attempt to locate and personally serve the responsible party and obtain the signature of the responsible party on the administrative citation.

        (2)    If the responsible party served refuses or fails to sign the administrative citation, the failure or refusal to sign shall not affect the validity of the citation or of subsequent proceedings.

        (b)    Service of Citation by Mail. If the enforcement officer is unable to locate the responsible party, the administrative citation shall be mailed to the responsible party by certified mail, postage prepaid with a requested return receipt. Simultaneously, the citation may be sent by first class mail. If the citation is sent by certified mail and the certification is returned unsigned, then service shall be deemed effective pursuant to first class mail, provided the citation sent by first class mail is not returned.

        (c)    Service of Citation by Posting Notice. If the enforcement officer does not succeed in personally serving the responsible party, or by certified mail or regular mail, the enforcement officer shall post the administrative citation on any real property within the City in which the City has knowledge that the responsible party has a legal interest, and such posting shall be deemed effective service. (Added by Ord. 00-05, 10/10/00; amended by Ord. 09-07, 8/24/09)

 

1.10.060 Contents of Citation.
        Each administrative citation shall at a minimum contain the following information:

        (a)    Name of the person who is charged as a responsible party for the violation;

        (b)    Date, approximate time, and address or definite description of the location where the violation(s) was observed;

        (c)    The Code sections or conditions violated and a description of the violation(s);

        (d)    Date on which citation is issued;

        (e)    Whether the offense is a continuing violation which shall accrue fines until properly ceased and abated;

        (f)    An order to the responsible party to immediately correct the violation(s) and an explanation of the consequences of failure to correct the violation(s);

        (g)    The amount of the fine for the violation(s), including the amount due for the initial violation and any prospective daily fine for failure to abate the violation (if applicable to a continuing violation);

        (h)    An explanation of how the fine shall be paid and the time period by which it shall be paid;

        (i)     An explanation of how the abatement of the violation can be properly verified (if applicable);

        (j)     Identification of rights of appeal, including the time within which the citation may be contested and the place to obtain a request for hearing form to contest the administrative citation;

        (k)    The name and signature of the enforcement officer and if possible the signature of the responsible party; and

        (l)     Notice that the violation is a nuisance and that collection of unpaid fines and/or nuisance abatement costs can be enforced as an assessment or lien against the property where the violation occurs, that unpaid assessments can result in the property being sold after three (3) years by the County Assessor, and that assessments and liens for the fine can be contested at an administrative hearing. (Added by Ord. 00-05, 10/10/00; amended by Ord. 09-07, 8/24/09)

 

1.10.070 Amount of Civil Fines.
        (a)    The amount of the fines for violating particular provisions of this Code shall be set in a schedule of fines adopted by resolution by the City Council. The schedule may include escalating fine amounts for repeat violations occurring within specified periods of time.

        (b)    The schedule of fines shall specify the amount of late payment penalty owed for any fine not paid when due.

        (c)    Where no amount is specified by resolution of the City Council, the following fines shall apply:

        (1)    A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day for a first violation;

        (2)    A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) per day for a second violation of the same ordinance or permit within one (1) year from the date of the first violation;

        (3)    A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day for each additional violation of the same ordinance or permit within one (1) year from the date of the first violation;

        (4)    Late charges shall be imposed for fine payments made after the fine payment due date. The late charge shall be calculated at a rate of twenty-five percent (25%) of the fine, and will be imposed in addition to any outstanding fine. (Added by Ord. 00-05, 10/10/00; amended by Ord. 09-07, 8/24/09)

 

1.10.080 Satisfaction of Administrative Citation.
        (a)    Upon receipt of a citation, the responsible party must do the following:

        (1)    Pay the fine to the City within thirty (30) calendar days from the issuance date of the administrative citation. All fines assessed shall be payable to the City. Payment of a fine shall not excuse or discharge the failure to correct the violation(s) nor shall it bar further enforcement action by the City.

        (2)    Cease and Abate the Violation(s). If the offense is a continuing violation and the responsible party fails to properly cease and abate, fines shall accrue for each day until the abatement is properly verified. Additionally, subsequent administrative citations may be issued for the same violation(s). The amount of the fine for failure to correct the violation shall increase at a rate specified in this chapter or by resolution.

        (b)    At any time following thirty (30) calendar days after the issuance of the citation, the City may deliver a collection bill to the responsible party requiring payment for all outstanding amounts owed for the violation, including the amount due for the initial violation and any accrual of daily fines from the date the citation was issued to the date the abatement of the offense is properly verified (if applicable) plus any appropriate late payment charge, less any amount remitted pursuant to Subsection (a) of this Section.

        (c)    The abatement of a continuing violation must be verified by an enforcement officer of the City. The responsible party shall contact the phone number designated on the citation and schedule an inspection by an enforcement officer. Fines shall accrue until the abatement is verified, by the enforcement officer.

        (d)    The City may refuse to issue, extend, or renew a permit, license, entitlement, or other approval for any property or person that is the subject of an unpaid delinquent fine, interest, penalty, lien, or assessment.

        (e)    Any permit, license, entitlement, or land use approval issued by the City may be subject to suspension or revocation of the permit, license, entitlement, or land use approval if an unpaid fine, interest, penalty, lien or assessment remains delinquent for a period of more than thirty (30) days. (Added by Ord. 00-05, 10/10/00; amended by Ord. 09-07, 8/24/09)

 

1.10.090 Request for Administrative Hearing.
        (a)    Any person receiving an administrative citation may contest the citation by completing a request for hearing form and returning it to the City within fifteen (15) calendar days after the issuance date of the administration citation. Any request for hearing must be accompanied by an advance deposit of the fine assessed by the citation for the initial violation, unless waived by Subsection (c) of this Section. Any administrative citation fine which has been deposited shall be refunded if it is determined, after a hearing, that there was no violation(s) as charged in the administrative citation.

        (b)    A request for hearing shall not postpone or avoid the requirement of a responsible party to abate a violation nor toll the daily fines accruing for a continuing violation until the abatement of the offense is properly verified. In the event the hearing officer upholds the citation, the responsible party shall be liable for the total fines accrued from the issuance of the citation to the date the abatement is properly verified unless reduced by the hearing officer.

        (c)    A person seeking an administrative hearing may request a hardship waiver of the fine deposit by filing with the Director a completed form provided by the Director which must be signed under penalty of perjury. The request must be submitted along with the request for hearing. The person requesting the waiver bears the burden of establishing that he or she does not have the financial ability to make the deposit. The request will be decided by the Director within ten (10) calendar days from date the request is received, and the Director’s decision is final. The applicant shall be notified by telephone, facsimile, writing, or in person of the decision on the request. The filing of a request for hardship waiver does not extend the time to file for an administrative hearing or pay the civil fine when due. If the request for hardship waiver is denied, an administrative hearing shall not be scheduled until and unless the fine deposit is paid within fifteen (15) calendar days following the Director’s determination on the request for hardship waiver.

        (d)    Failure to submit a timely and complete request for hearing shall terminate a person’s right to contest the citation and result in a failure to exhaust administrative remedies, and the order of the citation shall serve as a final determination and conclusive evidence of the named responsible party’s liability for the citation.

        (e)    The Director shall set a hearing before the hearing officer on a date that is not less than fifteen (15) and not more than sixty (60) calendar days from the date that the request for hearing is filed in accordance with the provisions of this Section. The person requesting the hearing shall be notified of the date, time and place set for the hearing at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the date of the hearing, and be given any additional written reports filed concerning the violation that are provided to the hearing officer. (Added by Ord. 00-05, 10/10/00; amended by Ord. 09-07, 8/24/09)

 

1.10.100 Hearing Procedure.
        (a)    The City Manager shall designate a hearing officer for the administrative citation hearing. The hearing officer shall not be a City employee with supervisory powers over anyone in the City Department which issued the citation. The employment, performance evaluation, compensation and benefits of the hearing officer, if any, shall not be directly or indirectly conditioned upon the amount of administrative citation fines upheld by the hearing officer.

        (b)    No hearing to contest an administrative citation before a hearing officer shall be held unless and until a request for hearing form has been completed and submitted and, the fine has been deposited in advance, unless waived in accordance with Section 1.10.090.

        (c)    The hearing officer shall only consider evidence that is relevant to whether the violation(s) occurred and whether the responsible party has caused or maintained the violation(s) of this Code on the date(s) specified in the administrative citation.

        (d)    The person contesting the administrative citation shall be given the opportunity to testify and present witnesses and evidence concerning the administrative citation.

        (e)    Unless requested in advance by the person contesting the administrative citation, neither the enforcement officer nor any other representative of the City shall be required to attend hearing, provided that any such appearance may be made at the discretion of the enforcement officer or City Manager.

        (f)    The failure of any recipient of an administrative citation to appear at the administrative citation hearing shall constitute a forfeiture of the fine and a failure to exhaust the administrative remedies, and the order of the citation shall be a final determination.

        (g)    The administrative citation and any additional documents submitted by the enforcement officer to the hearing officer shall constitute prima facia evidence of the violation and the respective facts contained in those documents.

        (h)    If the enforcement officer submits an additional written report concerning the administrative citation to the hearing officer for consideration at the hearing, then a copy of this report also shall be served by certified mail on the person requesting the hearing at least five (5) calendar days prior to the date of the hearing.

        (i)     Any document or evidence which either party intends on using at the hearing shall be exchanged at least five (5) calendar days prior to the date of the hearing. The hearing officer shall have discretion not to consider any evidence that was not exchanged pursuant to this provision.

        (j) At least ten (10) calendar days prior to the hearing, the recipient of an administrative citation shall be provided with copies of the citations, reports and other documents submitted or relied upon by the enforcement officer. No other discovery is permitted. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply.

        (k)    The hearing officer may continue the hearing and request additional information from the enforcement officer or the recipient of the administrative citation prior to issuing a written decision. (Added by Ord. 00-05, 10/10/00; amended by Ord. 09-07, 8/24/09)

 

1.10.110 Administrative Hearing Decision.
        (a)    After considering all of the testimony and evidence submitted at the hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a written decision within ten (10) calendar days after the hearing to uphold or deny the administrative citation and shall list in the decision the reasons for that decision. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final.

        (b)    If the hearing officer determines that the administrative citation should be upheld, then the fine amount on deposit with the City shall be retained by the City. If the citation is upheld, the responsible party shall be further liable for any balance of fines owed from the date of issuance of the citation to the date that the abatement is verified, or as otherwise determined by the hearing officer.

        (c)    If the hearing officer determines that the administrative citation should be canceled, the City shall promptly refund the amount of the deposited fine.

        (d)    The recipient of the administrative citation shall be served with a copy of the hearing officer’s written decision in the manner prescribed by Section 1.10.050 of this Chapter. (Added by Ord. 00-05, 10/10/00; amended by Ord. 09-07, 8-24-09)

 

1.10.120 Right to Judicial Review.
        Any person aggrieved by an administrative decision of a hearing officer on an administrative citation may obtain review of the administrative decision by filing a petition for review with the Orange County Superior Court in accordance with the timelines and provisions set forth in California Government Code Section 53069.4. (Added by Ord. 00-05, 10/10/00; amended by Ord. 09-07, 8/24/09)

 

1.10.130 Collection of Unpaid Fines.
        (a)    The City at its discretion may pursue any and all legal and equitable remedies for the collection of unpaid fines and penalties and the further abatement or enforcement of any violation of this Code. Pursuit of one remedy does not preclude the pursuit of any other remedies until the total fines and penalties owed by a person under this Chapter have been collected.

        (b)    Any violation of this Chapter shall constitute a nuisance. To compel code compliance, the City may seek to abate the nuisance and collect the costs incurred by means of a nuisance abatement lien and/or special assessment against the property where the violation occurred. Any unpaid delinquent civil fines and penalties may be recovered as part of any such lien or special assessment against the property of the responsible party where the violation occurred pursuant to Government Code Sections 38773.1 and 38773.5.

        (c)    To pursue an abatement of a code violation as a nuisance and recover the costs, including any delinquent civil fines and penalties, as an abatement lien, the City Manager may at his or her discretion request the County Recorder to record notice of the lien and take any other necessary action to enforce collection of this lien.

        (d)    To pursue an abatement of a code violation as a nuisance and recover the costs as a special assessment, including any delinquent civil fines and penalties, the City Manager may at his or her discretion send to the County Tax Collector a notice of the abatement costs and/or delinquent fines and penalties, requesting that these sums be collected as an assessment against the responsible party’s property where the violation occurred. The City Manager may also take any other steps necessary to enforce collection of this assessment, including the recording of a Notice of Assessment against the property involved. The assessment shall be imposed on the date the citation is issued to the responsible party and becomes effective upon the recording of a notice of assessment by the County Recorder.

        (e)    The City Manager may utilize the procedures of this Section to collect delinquent civil fines and penalties by means of an abatement lien and/or special assessment provided the amount of the delinquent fines and penalties totals two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or more and has been delinquent for sixty (60) calendar days or more. The City Manager may pursue these remedies whether or not the City is pursuing any other action to terminate an ongoing code violation that was the basis for the fine.

        (f)    A responsible party may contest the amount and/or validity of any lien or assessment for a civil fine at any administrative hearing he or she requests concerning the violation. Pursuit of such an objection by a responsible party is necessary to exhaust the administrative remedies concerning a legal challenge to the validity of any such lien or assessment. (Added by Ord. 00-05, 10/10/00; amended by Ord. 09-07, 8/24/09)

 

1.10.140 Notices.
        (a)    The administration citation and all notices to be given by this Chapter shall be served on the responsible party in accordance with Section 1.10.050 of this Chapter, where applicable.

        (b)    Failure to receive any notice specified in this Chapter does not affect the validity of proceedings conducted hereunder. (Added by Ord. 00-05, 10/10/00; amended by Ord. 09-07, 8/24/09)

Title 2 ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL
Chapter 2.04 COUNCIL
Chapter 2.05 ELECTIONS
Chapter 2.06 BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS—GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 2.07 PLANNING COMMISSION
Chapter 2.08 CITY MANAGER
Chapter 2.10 CITY CLERK
Chapter 2.12 DIRECTOR OF FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT
Chapter 2.15 CITY TREASURER
Chapter 2.16 CITY ATTORNEY
Chapter 2.20 EMERGENCY ORGANIZATION
Chapter 2.50 JUDICIAL REVIEW, ADMINISTRATIVE MANDAMUS, STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS
Chapter 2.55 HOLIDAYS OBSERVED BY THE CITY
Chapter 2.60 PERSONNEL SYSTEM

Chapter 2.04 COUNCIL
2.04.010 Time of Regular Meetings.
        The regular meetings of the City Council shall be held on the first and third Tuesday of each month at the hour of 5:00 p.m. The City Council may recess the meeting and reconvene at 6:00 p.m. Public hearings shall be set for and held at 6:00 p.m. at regular City Council meetings. (Amended by Urgency Ord. 91-03, 2/13/91; Ord. 91-06, 3/12/91; Ord. 97-04, 8/26/97; Ord. 02-16, 11/26/02; Ord. 02-17, 12/12/02; Ord. 03-02, 1/9/03; Ord. 03-03, 1/22/03; Ord. 07-01, 2/6/07; Ord. 08-10, 12/2/08; Ord. 11-06, 11/14/11)

 

2.04.020 Place of Regular Meetings.
        The regular meetings of the City Council shall be held at a location to be designated by Resolution of the City Council.

 

2.04.023 Definitions, Open Meeting Compliance.
        For the purposes of this Chapter, the definitions of “legislative body,” “regular meeting,” and “special meeting” as set forth in Section 54950 et seq., of the Government Code of the State of California shall apply. (Ord. 91-1, 1/8/91)

 

2.04.024 Seventy-Two Hour Notice.
        At least seventy-two (72) hours before a regular meeting, any legislative body of the City of Dana Point, or its designee, shall post an agenda containing a brief general description of each item of business to be transacted or discussed at the meeting. The agenda shall specify the time and location of the regular meeting and shall be posted in a location that is freely accessible to members of the public. No action shall be taken on any item not appearing on the posted agenda; provided, however, nothing in this Section shall disallow the legislative body to take action on items of business not appearing on the posted agenda and under any of the conditions set forth at Section 54954.2(b) of the Government Code of the State of California. (Ord. 91-1, 1/8/91)

 

2.04.025 Public Comments Provided at Regular Meetings.
        Every agenda for regular meetings of any legislative body of the City of Dana Point shall provide an opportunity for members of the public to directly address the legislative body on items of interest to the public that are within the subject matter jurisdiction of the legislative body, provided that no action shall be taken on any item not appearing on the agenda unless the action is otherwise authorized by Government Code Section 54954(b). The legislative body may adopt reasonable regulations to ensure that the intent of this Section is carried out, including, but not limited to, regulations limiting the total amount of time allocated for public testimony on particular issues and for each individual speaker. (Ord. 91-1, 1/8/91)

 

2.04.026 Special Meetings, Call.
        A special meeting may be called at any time by the presiding officer of the legislative body, or by a majority of the members of the legislative body, by delivering personally or by mail written notice to each member of the legislative body and to each local newspaper of general circulation, radio, or television station requesting notice in writing. The notice shall be delivered personally or by mail and shall be received at least twenty-four (24) hours before the time of the meeting as specified in the notice. The call and notice shall specify the time and place of the special meeting and the business to be transacted. No other business shall be considered at these meetings by the legislative body. The written notice may be dispensed with as to any member who at or prior to the time the meeting convenes files with the clerk or secretary of the legislative body a written waiver of notice. The waiver may be given by telegram. The written notice may be dispensed with as to any member who is actually present at the meeting at the time it convenes. Notice shall be required pursuant to this Section regardless of whether any action is taken at the special meeting. The call and notice shall be posted at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the special meeting in a location that is freely accessible to members of the public. (Ord. 91-1, 1/8/91)

 

2.04.027 Emergency Meetings, Exceptions.
        In the case of an emergency situation involving matters upon which prompt action is necessary due to the disruption or threatened disruption of public facilities, a legislative body may hold an emergency meeting without complying with either the twenty-four (24) hour notice requirement or the twenty-four (24) hours posting requirement of Government Code Section 54956 or both the notice and posting requirement. For the purposes of this Section, “emergency situation” means any of the following:

        (a)    Work stoppage or other activity which severely impairs public health, safety, or both, as determined by a majority of the members of the legislative body.

        (b)    Crippling disaster which severely impairs public health, safety, or both, as determined by a majority of the members of the legislative body.

        However, each local newspaper of general circulation and radio or television station which has requested notice of special meetings pursuant to Government Code Section 54956 shall be notified by the presiding officer of the legislative body, or designee thereof, one (1) hour prior to the emergency meeting by telephone and all telephone numbers provided in the most recent request of such newspaper or station for notification of special meetings shall be exhausted. In the event that telephone services are not functioning, the notice requirements of this Section shall be deemed waived, and the legislative body or designee of the legislative body shall notify such newspapers, radio stations, or television stations of the fact of the holding of the emergency meeting, the purpose of the meeting, and any action taken at the meeting as soon after the meeting as possible.

        Notwithstanding Government Code Section 54957, the legislative body shall not meet in closed session during a meeting called pursuant to this Section.

        All special meeting requirements as prescribed in Government Code Section 54956 shall be applicable to a meeting called pursuant to this Section, with the exception of the twenty-four (24) hour notice requirement.

        The minutes of a meeting called pursuant to this Section, a list of persons who the presiding officer of the legislative body, or designee of the legislative body, notified or intended to notify, a copy of the roll call vote, and any actions taken at the meeting shall be posted for a minimum of ten (10) days in a public place as soon after the meeting as possible. (Ord. 91-1, 1/8/91)

 

2.04.028 Enforcement.
        The provisions of this Chapter shall be enforceable pursuant to the provisions of Government Code Sections 54960 through 54960.5, as said Sections may be amended. (Ord. 91-1, 1/8/91)

 

2.04.030 Improper Conduct at Meeting.
        Any person using profane, vulgar, loud, or boisterous language at any meeting or otherwise interrupting the proceedings, who refuses to be seated or keep quiet when ordered to do so by the Mayor or other presiding officer of the Council, is guilty of a misdemeanor.

 

2.04.040 Council Meetings—Rules of Order and Debate.
        (a)    Presiding Officer May Debate and Vote. The Mayor or in the Mayor’s absence such other member of the Council as may be presiding may move, second, and debate from the chair, subject only to such limitations of debate as are by these rules imposed on all members and shall not be deprived of any of the rights and privileges of a Member of the Council by reason of acting as the presiding officer.

        (b)    Conduct of Speaker. Every member desiring to speak shall address the chair, and upon recognition by the presiding officer, shall confine him or herself to the question under debate, avoiding all personalities and indecorous language.

        (c)    Interruptions. A member, once recognized, shall not be interrupted when speaking unless it be to call said member to order or as herein otherwise provided. If a member, while speaking, be called to order, said member shall cease speaking until the question of order be determined, and, if in order, he or she shall be permitted to proceed.

        (d)    Motion to Reconsider. A motion to reconsider any action taken by the Council may be made only on the day such action was taken. Such motion must be made by one on the prevailing side but may be seconded by any member and must be made during the meeting at which the action is taken. A motion to reconsider shall have precedence over all other motions, and/or over a member having the floor; a reconsideration motion shall be debatable. Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent any member of the Council from making or remaking the same or other motion at a subsequent meeting of the council when said issue is on the noticed Council meeting agenda.

        (e)    Rules of Order. The presiding officer shall state every question coming before the Council, announce the decision of the Council on all subjects and decide all questions of order. Questions of order are, however, subject to an appeal to the Council, in which event a majority vote of the Council shall govern and conclusively determine said question of order. Robert’s Rules of Order, if used, shall only be used as a guide and is not conclusive authority on any question of order or procedure. (Ord. 90-02, 1/23/90)

 

2.04.041 Approved Minutes As Official Record of Proceedings.
        (a)    Approval of Minutes. Unless the reading of the minutes of a Council Meeting is requested by a Member of the Council, such minutes may be approved without reading if the City Clerk has previously furnished each Member with a copy thereof. Minutes shall be approved by voice or roll call vote.

        (b)    Designated as Official Record. The approved written minutes constitute the official record of City Council proceedings and actions and are superior to any other record, memorial or writing of said proceedings and actions.

        (c)    Recorded Audio and Video Retention. Whenever a video of City Council or other City Commission/Committee meeting is created by the City and is available for viewing through the City’s website, said audio/video shall be kept permanently.

        (d)    Audio and Video Accessibility to the Public. Recorded audio and videos of City meetings will be available for public review through the City’s website www.danapoint.org. Members of the public may request a duplicate copy of recorded City meetings by contacting the City Clerk’s office. Fees for duplication of audio/videos of City meetings shall be in accordance with rates established in the City’s Schedule of Service Fees.

        (e)    Subsections (a) through (d) shall apply to the minutes of the meetings of any City board, commission, committee, task force, or agency after the board, commission, committee, task force, or agency and the City Council have approved the same. The City Clerk, and every board, commission, committee, task force, or agency secretary or clerk shall cause any audio tape made of the proceedings to assist in the preparation of the minutes to be destroyed in accordance with Government Code Section 34090.7.

        (f)    The provisions of this Section shall apply to all minutes and tapes which have been approved by the body conducting the meeting and by the City Council. (Ord. 90-02, 1/23/90; amended by Ord. 91-1, 1/8/91; Ord. 93-15, 10/26/93; Ord. 99-02, 2/9/99; Ord. 17-04, 10/3/17)

 

2.04.050 Council Compensation.
        The compensation for City Council members shall be a seven hundred eighteen dollars and thirty-five cents ($718.35) per month stipend. (Amended by Ord. 90-6, 4/24/90; Ord. 99-08, 8/1/99; Ord. 02-05, 3/26/02)

 

2.04.051 Reimbursement.
        With prior approval of the City Council, each member of the Council shall receive reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of official duties for the City, pursuant to the provisions of Section 36514.5 of the California Government Code.

 

2.04.052 Council Auto Allowance.
        The auto allowance for each member of the Council shall be two hundred seventy-five dollars ($275.00) per month. The amount of the auto allowance available to City Council members may be adjusted by Resolution of the City Council. (Added by Ord. 99-10, 8/10/99; amended by Ord. 02-05, 3/26/02)

 

2.04.053 Council Health and Welfare Benefits.
        (a)    An optional monthly health and welfare benefit shall be conferred on each City Council member that has assumed office prior to December 1, 2006. The amount of the optional monthly health and welfare benefit and the categories of health and welfare benefits available to City Council members may be adjusted by resolution of the City Council and shall reflect the amount received by City department heads.

        (b)    Each City Council Member that has assumed office after December 1, 2006 shall be eligible to enroll in the City’s monthly group health and life insurance plans at their sole option and at their sole expense. The categories of health and life insurance plans made available to said City Council Members shall reflect the health and life insurance plans made available to City department heads. (Added by Ord. 99-09, 8/10/99; amended by Ord. 01-05, 8/28/01; Ord. 02-05, 3/26/02; Ord. 06-12, 12/13/06)

 

2.04.060 Commission Appointments.
        Unless otherwise specifically provided in this Code or by State law, all City board and commission appointments, except for ex officio members where applicable, shall be made by the City Council.

 

2.04.100 Appeals to Council.
        (a)    Except when an appeals procedure is otherwise specifically set forth in this Code, any person excepting to the denial, conditional approval, suspension, or revocation of a permit, license or other approval applied for or held by him or her pursuant to any provision of this Code, or to any administrative decision made by any official of the City, if the denial, conditional approval, suspension, or revocation of such permit, license or approval, or the determination of such administrative decision involves the exercise of administrative discretion or personal judgment exercised pursuant to any provision of this Code, may appeal in writing to the Council by filing with the City Clerk a written notice of such appeal.

        (b)    No appeal may be taken to any such administrative decision made by an official of the City pursuant to any provision of this Code unless such decision has been first taken up with the department head concerned and with the City Manager, and each such official has not adjusted the matter to the appellant’s satisfaction.

        (c)    No right of appeal to the Council from any administrative decision made by an official of the City pursuant to any provision of this Code shall exist when such decision is ministerial and thus does not involve the exercise of administrative discretion or personal judgment, whether the administrative decision involves the denial, conditional approval, suspension, or revocation of a permit, license, approval, or any other administrative decision. There shall be no such right of appeal with regard to law enforcement activities involving State law.

 

2.04.110 Notice of Appeal—Time Limit—Contents.
        (a)    No notice of appeal shall be acted upon unless filed within ten (10) days after service of written notice of the determination appealed from, provided that if such notice of determination has not been served in writing the appellant may, within ten (10) days after being apprised of such determination, demand service of written notice thereof, and shall have ten (10) days following such service in which to file the notice of appeal.

        (b)    The notice of appeal shall set forth: (1) the specific action appealed from; (2) the specific grounds of the appeal; and (3) the relief or action sought from the City Council. In the event any notice of appeal fails to set forth any information required by this Section, the City Clerk shall return the same to the appellant with a statement of the respects in which it is deficient, and the appellant shall thereafter be allowed five (5) days in which to perfect and refile the notice of appeal.

        (c)    Except in those instances where an appeal is filed by the City Manager or other public official pursuant to official duties, the written notice of appeal from the determination of an administrative official or from an administrative body of the City, as the case may be, shall be accompanied by such fee as may be established by Resolution of the City Council.

 

2.04.120 Appeals—Hearings—Notices.
        (a)    Upon the timely filing of a Notice of Appeal in proper form, and the payment of the requisite appeal fee, the City Clerk shall schedule the matter for de novo hearing promptly before the City Council at a subsequent regular meeting and shall cause notice thereof to be given to the appellant not less than five (5) days prior to such hearing, unless such notice is waived in writing by the appellant. The City Clerk shall also cause a copy of the Notice of Appeal to be transmitted to the official or body whose decision the appeal relates. (Amended by Ord. 89-19, 7/27/89)

        (b)    If two (2) or more members of the City Council file with the City Clerk, within the time for the filing of an appeal as set forth in Subsection 2.04.110(a) of this Chapter, written requests to have a decision of the Planning Commission brought to the City Council for review, the City Clerk shall schedule the matter for Council consideration at the earliest possible date. The filing of such two (2) written requests shall constitute, for all purposes, an appeal brought pursuant to this Subsection shall not require payment of the appeal fee required by Code Section 2.04.110(c) of this Code.

 

2.04.130 Appeals—Hearings—Procedure.
        (a)    The City Council may limit participation at the hearing to those parties directly interested, or may allow participation by the public. Such public participation, however, shall only occur when the Council deems the same necessary to further the public interest. If a hearing is ordered open to public participation, notice thereof shall be given by publishing notice of the same in a newspaper of general circulation in the City not less than five (5) days prior to the date of such hearing, and by such other means as the City Council deems necessary.

 

        (b)    At the time of consideration of the appeal by the City Council the appellant shall be limited to a presentation on the specific grounds of appeal and matters set forth in his or her notice of appeal and shall have the burden of establishing cause why the decision appealed from should be altered, reversed, or modified. The Council may continue the matter from time to time; and at the conclusion of its consideration may affirm, reverse, or modify the decision appealed from and may take any action which might have been legally taken in the first instance by the official or body from whose action the appeal has been taken. In ruling on the appeal, the finding and action of the Council shall be final and conclusive in the matter.

Chapter 2.05 ELECTIONS
2.05.010 Municipal Election Consolidation.
        Pursuant to Section 36503.5 of the California Government Code, general municipal elections, which would otherwise be held on the second Tuesday in April of even-numbered years or on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in March of odd-numbered years, shall be consolidated with the statewide general election on the first Tuesday after the first Monday of November in each even-numbered year. (Added by Ord. 89-6, 1/11/89; amended by Ord. 94-11, 8/23/94; Ord. 04-04, 7/28/04)

 

2.05.050 Campaign Finance Reforms, Purpose.
        The purpose of this Chapter is to advance compelling City interests by limiting large contributions from single sources to candidates for City Council and by imposing reporting and accounting procedures for local campaigns. The City’s interests are to provide a representative government which is accessible to all citizens to deter corruption and the appearance of corruption caused by the coercive influence of large financial contribution on candidates’ positions, and to inform the electorate as to the sources and uses of political contributions and as to campaign expenditures. (Added by Ord. 91-10, 5/14/91; amended by Ord. 04-04, 7/28/04)

 

2.05.052 Definitions.
        For the purposes of this Chapter, unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the definitions set forth in Chapter 2 of Title 9 of the Government Code of the State of California (commencing at Section 82000) (the Political Reform Act, as amended by Proposition 34) shall govern the construction, meaning, and application of words and phrases used in this Chapter. (Added by Ord. 91-10, 5/14/91; amended by Ord. 04-04, 7/28/04)

 

2.05.054 Application to City Council Elections Only.
        This Chapter shall apply solely to municipal elections for positions on the Dana Point City Council and not to other elected offices within the City. (Added by Ord. 91-10, 5/14/91; amended by Ord. 04-04, 7/28/04)

 

2.05.056 Contribution Limitations.
        (a)    Contributions. No person shall make, and no candidate for elective office, or campaign treasurer, shall solicit or accept any contribution which would cause the total amount contributed by that person to that candidate, including contributions or loans to all political committees or broad-based political committees controlled by the candidate, to exceed four hundred fifty dollars ($450.00) for any election. The limit set forth in this Subsection shall be adjusted every two (2) years by resolution of the City Council pursuant to Section 2.05.058, Adjusting for Cost of Living Changes, herein.

        (b)    Loans. No person shall make, and no candidate for elective office, or campaign treasurer, shall solicit or accept any loan which would cause the candidate, including loans to all political committees or broad-based political committees controlled by the candidate, to exceed four hundred fifty dollars ($450.00) for any election. The limit set forth in this Subsection may be adjusted every two (2) years by resolution of the City Council pursuant to Section 2.05.058, Adjusting for Cost of Living Changes, herein.

        (c)    Anonymous Contributions. No person shall make an anonymous contribution or contributions to a candidate, political committee or broad-based political committee or any other person totaling one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more for any election period. An anonymous contribution of one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more received by a candidate or such a committee shall not be kept by the intended recipient, but instead shall be paid promptly to the California Secretary of State for deposit in the General Fund of the state. This limit on single source anonymous contributions shall not be adjusted except for relevant changes in state law.

        (d)    Extension of Credit. No person shall extend credit, and no candidate for elective office, or campaign treasurer, or political committee or broad-based political committee controlled by the candidate shall solicit or accept any extension of credit which will extend beyond ninety (90) days from the date upon which the debt is incurred by the candidate, or political committee controlled by the candidate. (Added by Ord. 91-10, 5/14/91; amended by Ord. 04-04, 7/28/04)

 

2.05.058 Adjusting for Cost of Living Changes.
        (a)    Adjustment. The campaign contribution limits and the campaign expenditure limits set forth in Sections 2.05.056 and 2.05.068, respectively, shall be adjusted in February at two (2) year intervals beginning in 1998 by the City Clerk to reflect annual changes in the Consumer Price Index (CPI) over the previous two (2) year period. The City Clerk shall use the annual percent change in the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers (CPI-U) in the selected local area of Los Angeles - Anaheim - Riverside, CA, to determine the appropriate rate of increase. The City Clerk shall compute the adjustment for each year separately, adding the adjustment for each year to the prior year’s limit and then rounding the total adjusted amount for the two (2) year period. The new limit representing the rounded total adjustments for the previous two (2) year period shall be presented to the City Council for approval by resolution.

        (b)    Rounding of Section 2.05.056 Amounts. If the total adjusted limit under Section 2.05.056 for the two (2) year period ends in a digit between one and four (4), then the limit shall be rounded down to the next lowest multiple of ten (10). If the final adjusted limit for the two (2) year period ends in a digit between five (5) and nine (9), then the limit shall be rounded up to the next highest multiple of ten (10).

        (c)    Rounding of Section 2.05.068 Amounts. If the last two (2) digits of the total adjusted limit under Section 2.05.068 for the two (2) year period is a number between one and forty-nine (49), then the limit shall be rounded down to the next lowest multiple of one hundred (100). If the last two (2) digits of the total adjusted limit for the two (2) year period is a number between fifty (50) and ninety-nine (99), then the limit shall be rounded up to the next highest multiple of one hundred (100). (Added by Ord. 91-10, 5/14/91; amended by Ord. 96-03, 3/12/96; Ord. 04-04, 7/28/04)

 

2.05.062 Commercial Loans.
        The provisions of this Chapter regarding loans shall not apply to loans made by a commercial lending institution in the lender’s regular course of business on terms available to members of the general public and for which the loan recipient is personally liable. (Added by Ord. 91-10, 5/14/91; amended by Ord. 04-04, 7/28/04)

 

2.05.064 Campaign Disclosure.
        (a)    Campaign Bank Account. The notice and filing requirements of Government Code Sections 81000 et seq. regarding the campaign bank account, shall also be made to the City Clerk at the same time and in the same manner as reporting is made to the Fair Political Practices Commission for the State of California.

        (b)    Committee Registration. Every political committee and broad-based political committee involved in a municipal election which files campaign reports shall file also with the City Clerk in the same for, content, and procedure as set forth in Government Code Section 81000 et seq. (Added by Ord. 91-10, 5/14/91; amended by Ord. 04-04, 7/28/04)

 

2.05.066 Duties of City Clerk.
        The City Clerk shall administer the provisions of this Chapter. In addition to other duties required of the City Clerk under the terms of this Chapter, the City Clerk shall:

        (a)    Supply appropriate forms and manuals prescribed by the California Fair Political Practices Commission (FPPC). These forms and manuals shall be furnished to all candidates and committees, and to other persons required to file reports.

        (b)    Determine whether required documents have been filed and, if so, whether they conform on their face with the requirements of this Chapter and state law.

        (c)    Notify promptly all persons and known committees who have failed to file a document in the form and at the time required by state law, and promptly notify a person, candidate, campaign treasurer, political committee or broad-based political committee of any violations of this Chapter. The Clerk shall inform the person, candidate, campaign treasurer, political committee or broad-based political committee that they shall have two (2) weeks to correct the violation, after which the violation shall be made known to the City Council, other candidates, and be made available as a public record.

        (d)    Compile and maintain a current list of all statements or parts of statements filed with the City Clerk’s office pertaining to each candidate and each measure.

        (e)    Monitor reports and statements filed by candidates and committees supporting or opposing candidates for City Council as required by state law and this Chapter.

        (f)    Adjust the campaign contributions and expenditure limit each January to reflect the Consumer Price Index change for the prevailing twelve (12) month period. (Added by Ord. 91-10, 5/14/91; amended by Ord. 04-04, 7/28/04)

 

2.05.070 Violation—Penalty.
        Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter relating to campaign contributions and disclosure is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to punishment in accordance with Section 1.01.200 of this Code. (Added by Ord. 91-10, 5/14/91; amended by Ord. 04-04, 7/28/04)

 

2.05.080 Purpose of Term Limits.
        The purpose of term limits on members of the City Council is to encourage qualified candidates to seek public office and limit the powers of incumbency by placing limits on the number of consecutive terms which members of the City Council may serve. (Added by Ord. 92-05, 6/23/92; amended by Ord. 96-08, 5/14/96; Ord. 04-04, 7/28/04)

 

2.05.082 Limitation on Consecutive Terms for Council Members.
        No person shall be elected as a member of the City Council for more than two (2) full consecutive terms and no person who has been a member for more than two (2) years of a term to which he or she was appointed shall be elected to the City Council for more than one (1) further consecutive term. (Added by Ord. 92-05, 6/23/92; amended by Ord. 96-08, 5/14/96; Ord. 04-04, 7/28/04)

 

2.05.084 Operative Date of Term Limits.
        Pursuant to California Government Code Section 36502, the provisions of Sections 2.05.080 and 2.05.082 shall not become operative unless they are submitted to the voters of the City at a regularly scheduled election and a majority of the votes cast on the question favor the adoption of the proposal. If a majority of the votes cast are in favor of the adoption of Dana Point Municipal Code Sections 2.05.080 and 2.05.082, then the provisions of these sections shall apply prospectively from the date of the election. (Added by Ord. 92-05, 6/23/92; amended by Ord. 96-08, 5/14/96; Ord. 04-04, 7/28/04)

 

2.05.085 By-District Electoral System.
        Pursuant to California Government Code Section 34886 and the schedule established in Section 2.05.087 of this Chapter, beginning in November 2018, members of the City Council shall be elected on a by-district basis from five (5) single-member Council Districts. The City’s by-district electoral system shall be conducted in accordance with California Government Code Section 34871, subdivision (a). (Added by Ord. 18-03, 5/15/18)

 

2.05.086 Establishment of City Council Electoral Districts.
        (a)    Pursuant to Section 2.05.085 of this Chapter, members of the City Council shall be elected on a by-district basis, as that term is defined in California Government Code Section 34871, subdivision (a), from the five (5) Council Districts described as follows, which shall continue in effect until they are amended or repealed in accordance with law:

        (1)    Council District 1 shall comprise all that portion of the City reflected on Exhibit A.

        (2)    Council District 2 shall comprise all that portion of the City reflected on Exhibit A.

        (3)    Council District 3 shall comprise all that portion of the City reflected on Exhibit A.

        (4)    Council District 4 shall comprise all that portion of the City reflected on Exhibit A.

        (5)    Council District 5 shall comprise all that portion of the City reflected on Exhibit A.

        (b)    Members of the City Council shall be elected in the electoral districts established by this Section and subsequently reapportioned pursuant to applicable State and Federal law.

        (c)    Except as provided in Subsection (d) herein, and notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter, once this Chapter is fully phased in, each member of the City Council elected to represent a district must reside in that district and be a registered voter in that district, and any candidate for City Council must live in, and be a registered voter in, the district in which he or she seeks election at the time nomination papers are issued, pursuant to California Government Code Section 34882 and Elections Code Section 10227. Termination of residency in a district by a member of the City Council shall create an immediate vacancy for that Council District unless a substitute residence within the district is established within thirty (30) days after the termination of residency.

        (d)    Notwithstanding any other provision of this Section, and consistent with the requirements of California Government Code Section 36512, the members of the City Council in office at the time the Ordinance codified in this Chapter takes effect shall continue in office until the expiration of the full term to which he or she was elected and until his or her successor is qualified. At the end of the term of each member of the City Council, that member of the City Council’s successor shall be elected on a by-district basis in the districts established in this Section and as provided in this Chapter.

 

EXHIBIT A



(Added by Ord. 18-03, 5/15/18)

 

2.05.087 Election Schedule.
        Except as otherwise required by California Government Code Section 36512, the members of the City Council shall be elected from Council Districts 1, 2, and 3 beginning at the General Municipal Election in November 2018, and every four (4) years thereafter, as such Council Districts shall be amended. Members of the City Council shall be elected from Council Districts 4 and 5 beginning at the General Municipal Election in November 2020, and every four (4) years thereafter, as such Council Districts shall be amended. (Added by Ord. 18-03, 5/15/18)

Chapter 2.06 BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS—GENERAL PROVISIONS
2.06.010 Commissions Established.
        There shall be established within the City a Planning Commission. The City Council may establish by Resolution such other boards or commissions as it deems necessary. (Amended by Ord. 09-01, 2/9/09)

 

2.06.020 Number of Members.
        Unless otherwise specifically provided by the City Council, each board or commission shall consist of five (5) members. (Amended by Ord. 09-01, 2/9/09)

 

2.06.030 Qualifications.
        Unless otherwise specifically provided by law, or by Ordinance or Resolution of the City Council, all members of boards and commissions of the City shall, at all times during their incumbencies, be bona fide residents and, with the exception of the Dana Point Youth Board, be registered voters of the City. No member of any board or commission shall be a City employee, nor shall any person be a member of more than one (1) board or commission at any one (1) time. (Amended by Ord. 00-02, 2/22/00; Ord. 09-01, 2/9/09)

 

2.06.040 Applications.
        The City Clerk shall maintain all applications submitted to the City for board or commission positions for a period of two (2) years. (Amended by Ord. 09-01, 2/9/09)

 

2.06.050 Appointment.
        Members of each board and commission shall serve at the pleasure of the City Council and shall be appointed, and may be removed, by a majority of the City Council. The Chairperson of the board or commission shall be selected by a majority of the membership of that board or commission. (Amended by Ord. 93-11, 5/25/93; Ord. 07-07, 4/3/07; Ord. 09-01, 2/9/09)

 

2.06.060 Term.
        (a)    The term of each board or commission member, other than the Youth Board members, shall be four (4) years with staggered terms.

        (b)    The term of the Youth Board members shall be one (1) year and shall expire on the last day of August. Once appointed to the Youth Board, each board member may serve up to a maximum of two (2) terms. Once completing a maximum of two (2) terms as a Youth Board member, board members may continue to serve as a member at large.

        (c)    Planning Commissioner terms shall expire on the last day of March of the designated year or until such time as the City Council appoints a successor. The terms of all commissions and board members not otherwise specifically addressed in this section shall expire on June 30th of the designated year or until such time as the Council appoints a successor. (Amended by Ord. 93-11, 5/25/93; Ord. 94-18, 11/8/94; Ord. 00-02, 2/22/00; Ord. 01-04, 3/27/01; Ord. 06-01, 1/25/06; Ord. 07-07, 4/3/07; Ord. 09-01, 2/9/09; Ord. 10-10, 10/25/10; Ord. 11-04, 9/12/11)

 

2.06.070 Vacancies.
        If vacancies in any board or commission occur, such vacancy shall be filled in a manner determined by the City Council or shall remain vacant until the end of the term applicable to the vacant position. (Amended by Ord. 93-11, 5/25/93; Ord. 97-09, 9/9/97; Ord. 06-01, 1/25/06; Ord. 07-07, 4/3/07; Ord. 09-01, 2/9/09)

 

2.06.075 Vacancy Upon Acceptance of Other Elective or Appointive Office.
        Whenever a member of any City commission is appointed or elected to an office of another governmental agency and it is determined that such appointment or election creates a violation of the Incompatibility of Office Doctrine under applicable law, the office held by said member shall immediately and automatically be rendered vacant. (Added by Ord. 91-08, 4/23/91; amended by Ord. 09-01, 2/9/09; Ord. 09-02, 2/22/09)

 

2.06.080 Meetings/Quorum.
        The City Council shall establish meeting schedules for each board and commission by Resolution. A quorum of three (3) shall be required for the transaction of any business. A quorum of six (6) shall be required for any business undertaken by the Dana Point Youth Board. (Amended by Ord. 00-02, 2/22/00; Ord. 09-01, 2/9/09)

 

2.06.090 Absence from Meetings.
        Any Commission member that misses three (3) regular meetings in a calendar year shall be removed from office by a majority vote of the City Council. (Amended by Ord. 97-08, 9/9/97; Ord. 09-01, 2/9/09)

 

2.06.100 Compensation.
        Unless otherwise required by law, board and commission members shall receive no compensation, except that Planning Commission members shall receive a one hundred fifty dollar ($150.00) per month stipend. (Amended by Ord. 99-11, 8/10/99; Ord. 01-05, 8/28/01; Ord. 02-05, 3/26/02; Ord. 09-01, 2/9/09)

 

2.06.110 Health and Welfare Benefits and Auto Allowance.
        (a)    The Planning Commission members that have assumed office prior to December 1, 2006, shall receive monthly health and welfare benefits and monthly auto allowance as established by resolution of the City Council. The amount of the monthly health and welfare benefits shall reflect the amount received by non-exempt City employees.

        (b)    Each Planning Commission member that has assumed office after December 1, 2006, shall be eligible to enroll in the City’s monthly group health and life insurance benefit plans at their sole option and at their sole expense. The categories of health and life insurance plans made available to said Planning Commission members shall reflect the health and life insurance plans made available to non-exempt City employees. (Added by Ord. 02-05, 3/26/02; amended by Ord. 06-12, 12/13/06; Ord. 09-01, 2/9/09)

Chapter 2.07 PLANNING COMMISSION
2.07.010 Establishment of Planning Commission.
        Pursuant to Section 2.06.010 of the Dana Point Municipal Code, there is hereby established the “Dana Point Planning Commission.” The appointment and service of the members of said Commission shall be as set forth in Chapter 2.06 of the Municipal Code. (Amended by Ord. 09-01, 2/9/09)

 

2.07.011 Time and Place of Meetings.
        The regular meetings of the Planning Commission shall be held on the second and fourth Monday of each month at the Dana Point City Hall, 33282 Street of the Golden Lantern, Dana Point, California 92629. The starting time for regular meetings of the Planning Commission may be changed by resolution of the Planning Commission. (Amended by Ord. 90-05, 5/10/90; Ord. 93-17, 12/14/93; Ord. 94-01, 1/11/94; Ord. 07-01, 2/6/07; Ord. 08-10, 12/2/08; Ord. 09-01, 2/9/09; Ord. 10-01, 1/25/10; Ord. 11-06, 11/14/11)

 

2.07.012 Special Meetings.
        A special meeting may be called at any time by the Chairperson or by three (3) of the members of the Planning Commission by written notice to each member and to each person or entity entitled by law at least twenty-four (24) hours before the time of such special meeting as required under Government Code, Section 54956. (Amended by Ord. 09-01, 2/9/09)

 

2.07.013 Adjourned Meetings.
        The Planning Commission may continue or adjourn any meeting and public hearings to a time and place specified in the order of adjournment in accordance with those provisions set forth in Government Code Section 54955. (Amended by Ord. 09-01, 2/9/09)

 

2.07.014 Officers.
        The Commission shall select one (1) of its members to serve as Chairperson and a second to serve as Vice-Chairperson of the Commission. (Amended by Ord. 09-01, 2/9/09)

 

2.07.015 Effective Date of Commission.
        The Planning Commission shall be established as of April 4, 1989. (Amended by Ord. 89-4, 2/28/89; Ord. 09-01, 2/9/09)

Chapter 2.08 CITY MANAGER
2.08.010 Office Created—Term.
        The office of the City Manager is created and established. The City Manager shall be appointed by the City Council wholly on the basis of administrative and executive ability and qualifications. The City Manager shall hold office for and during the pleasure of the City Council.

 

2.08.020 Eligibility.
        No member of the City Council shall be eligible for appointment as City Manager until one year has elapsed after such Council Member has ceased to be a member of the City Council.

 

2.08.030 Compensation.
        The City Manager shall receive such compensation and expense allowances as the City Council shall from time to time determine, and such compensation shall be a proper charge against such funds of the City as the Council shall designate.

 

2.08.040 Expense Reimbursement.
        The City Manager shall be reimbursed for all actual and necessary expenses he or she incurs in the performance of his or her official duties, including those incurred when traveling on business pertaining to the City.

 

2.08.050 Designation of Acting City Manager.
        The City Manager, by letter filed with the City Clerk, shall designate a qualified City administrative officer to exercise the powers and perform the duties of City Manager during any temporary absence or disability of the City Manager.

 

2.08.060 Powers and Duties.
        The City Manager shall be the administrative head of the government of the City under the direction and control of the City Council except as otherwise provided in this Chapter. The City Manager shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all affairs of the City which are under his or her control. In addition to the general powers as administrative head of the City government, and not as a limitation thereon, the City Manager shall be expected to, and shall have the power to:

        (a)    Enforce all laws and ordinances of the City and to see that all franchises, contracts, permits, and privileges granted by the City Council are faithfully observed;

        (b)    Appoint, remove, promote, and demote any and all officers and employees of the City except elected officers, the City Attorney and the City Treasurer, subject to all applicable personnel rules and regulations which may be adopted by the City Council;

        (c)    Control, order, and give directions to all department heads who are subject to his or her appointment and removal authority and to subordinate officers and employees of the City under his or her jurisdiction through their department heads;

        (d)    Conduct studies and effect such organization and reorganization of offices, positions or units under his or her direction as may be indicated in the interest of efficient, effective, and economical conduct of the City’s business;

        (e)    Recommend to the City Council for adoption such measures and Ordinances as he or she deems necessary;

        (f)    Attend all meetings of the City Council unless excused therefrom by the Mayor individually or the City Council as a whole, except when his or her removal is under consideration;

        (g)    Prepare and submit the proposed annual budget and the proposed annual salary plan to the City Council for its approval;

        (h)    Keep the City Council at all times fully advised as to the financial condition and needs of the City;

        (i)     Make investigations into the affairs of the City and any department or division thereof and any contract or other obligation of the City; and further to investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the City government and in regard to the service maintained by public utilities in the City;

        (j)     Exercise general supervision over all public buildings, public parks, and all other public properties which are under the control and jurisdiction of the City;

        (k)    Have the same authority as the Mayor, as the convenience of the parties may dictate, to sign documents specified in Section 40602 of the California Government Code whenever such documents have been approved by the City Council for execution by Resolution, motion, minute order, or other appropriate action; and

        (l)     Perform such other responsibilities and exercise such other powers as may be delegated to him or her from time to time by ordinance or resolution or other official action of the City Council. (Amended by Ord. 08-01, 2/5/08)

 

2.08.070 Relations With Council.
        The City Council and its members shall deal with the administrative services of the City only through the City Manager, except for the purpose of inquiry, and neither the City Council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any subordinates of the City Manager. For purposes hereof, “inquiry” means any and all communications short of giving orders, directions, or instructions to any member of the administrative staff. Such staff members shall provide all information reasonably requested by any Council Member. The City Manager shall take orders and instructions from the City Council only when sitting in a duly convened meeting of the City Council and no individual Council Member shall give any orders or instructions to the City Manager. The City Council shall instruct the City Manager in matters of policy. Any action, determination, or omission of the City Manager shall be subject to review by the City Council. The City Council may not overrule, change, or modify any such action, determination, or omission except by the affirmative vote of at least three members of the City Council.

 

2.08.080 Departmental Cooperation.
        It shall be the duty of all subordinate officers, the City Attorney, and City Clerk to assist the City Manager in administering the affairs of the City efficiently, economically, and harmoniously.

 

2.08.090 Attendance at Commission Meetings.
        The City Manager may attend any and all meetings of the Planning Commission, and any other commission, board, or committee created by the City Council, upon his or her own volition or upon direction of the City Council. At any such meeting which the City Manager attends, he or she shall be heard by such commission, board, or committee as to all matters upon which he or she wishes to address the members thereof. The City Manager shall inform such commission, board, or committee as to the status of any matter being considered by the City Council pertaining to that body, and shall cooperate to the fullest extent with members of all commissions, boards, or committees appointed by the City Council.

 

2.08.100 Removal.
        The removal of the City Manager shall be effected only by a majority vote of the whole Council as then constituted, convened in a regular Council meeting.

 

2.08.110 Agreements With Council.
        Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as a limitation on the power or authority of the City Council to enter into any supplemental agreement with the City Manager delineating additional terms and conditions of employment not inconsistent with any provisions of this Chapter.

Chapter 2.10 CITY CLERK
2.10.010 Authority for Office.
        The office of the City Clerk is established pursuant to Section 36501 of the California Government Code.

 

2.10.015 Appointment.
        The City Clerk shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the City Manager. (Added by Ord. 08-02, 2/5/08)

 

2.10.020 Compensation.
        The City Clerk shall receive such compensation and expense allowance as the City Manager shall from time to time determine, and such compensation shall be a proper charge against such funds of the City as the City Manager shall designate. (Amended by Ord. 08-02, 2/5/08)

 

2.10.030 Functions.
        The City Clerk shall have all of the powers, duties, and responsibilities granted to and imposed upon the office of the City Clerk by the provisions of Chapter 2 of Part 3 of Division 3 of Title 4 of the Government Code of the State (commencing with Section 40800), other general laws of the State, the provisions of this Code, and the Ordinances and Resolutions of the City Council.

        The principal functions of the City Clerk shall be to:

        (a)    Attend all meetings of the City Council and be responsible for the recording and maintenance of a record of all the actions of the Council;

        (b)    Keep all Ordinances and Resolutions of the Council in such a manner that the information contained therein will be readily accessible and open to the public. The City Clerk shall attach to the original copy of each Ordinance a certificate which shall state the date the Ordinance was adopted and, as to an Ordinance requiring publication, that the Ordinance has been published or posted in accordance with law;

        (c)    Keep all records of the Council and of the office of the City Clerk in such manner that the information contained therein will be readily accessible and open to the public until such time as any of the records may be destroyed, or reproduced and the original destroyed, in accordance with State law;

        (d)    Serve as the official custodian of all City records;

        (e)    Be the custodian of the seal of the City;

        (f)    Prepare the Council agendas, in conjunction with and under the direction of the City Manager;

        (g)    Perform the duties prescribed by the California Elections Code in conducting municipal elections;

        (h)    Perform the duties imposed upon City Clerks by the California Political Reform Act;

        (i)     Be responsible for the publication of all official advertising for the City;

        (j)     Be responsible for the maintenance and distribution of the Municipal Code;

        (k)    Process all claims filed against the City and its officers, agents, or employees, pursuant to Chapters 1 and 2 of Part 3 of Division 3.6 of Title 1 of the California Government Code (commencing with Section 900) and Chapter 3.16 of Title 3 of this Code;

        (l)     Perform the financial and accounting duties imposed upon the City Clerk by Section 40802 through 40805 of the California Government Code; and

        (m)   Perform such other duties consistent with this Code as may be required of the City Clerk by the City Manager. (Amended by Ord. 08-02, 2/5/08)

Chapter 2.12 DIRECTOR OF FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT
2.12.010 Office Created.
        There is hereby created and established the Office of Director of Financial Management (“Director of Finance” for the purposes of Government Code Sections 37208, 37209, and 40802 through 40805.5).

 

2.12.020 Appointment.
        The Director of Financial Management shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the City Manager.

 

2.12.030 Bond Requirement.
        The Director of Financial Management shall furnish a corporate surety bond to be approved by the City Council in the same amount as that required of the City Clerk, and it shall be conditioned upon the satisfactory performance of the duties imposed upon the Director of Financial Management by statute, ordinance, or resolution. Any premium for such bond shall be a proper charge against the City of Dana Point.

 

2.12.040 Duties.
        The Director of Financial Management shall be the head of the Finance Department of the City, and shall:

        (a)    Have charge of the administration of the financial affairs of the City under the direction of the City Manager; and

        (b)    Compile the budget expense and income estimates for the City Manager; and

        (c)    Maintain a general accounting system for the City Government and each of its officers, departments, and agencies; and

        (d)    Supervise and be responsible for the disbursement of all moneys and audit of all expenditures to ensure that budget appropriations are not exceeded; audit all purchase orders before issuance to ensure that sufficient funds are appropriated and available; audit and approve before payment bills, invoices, payrolls, demands, or charges, against the City Government; and, with the advice of the City Attorney, when necessary, determine the regularity, legality, and correctness of such claims, demands, or charges, and prepare and submit to the City Council periodically a register of audited demands with his affidavit attached thereto as provided in the Government Code; and

 

        (e)    Submit to the City Council periodic statements of all receipts and disbursements in sufficient detail to show the exact financial condition of the City; and, at the end of each fiscal year, submit a complete financial statement and report; and

        (f)    Supervise the keeping of current inventories of all property of the City by all City departments, offices, and agencies; and

        (g)    Perform all the financial and accounting duties heretofore imposed upon the City Clerk, and the City Clerk shall be relieved of such duties, including all such duties imposed upon the City Clerk by Sections 40802 through 40805 of the Government Code of the State of California, and including all such duties imposed upon the City Clerk by Section 37208 of the Government Code with respect to the prepayment of demands. (Ord. 89-20 9/12/89)

Chapter 2.15 CITY TREASURER
2.15.010 Authority for Office.
        The office of the City Treasurer is established pursuant to Section 36501 of the California Government Code.

 

2.15.020 Compensation.
        The City Treasurer shall receive such compensation and expense allowance as the City Council shall from time to time determine, and such compensation shall be a proper charge against such funds of the City as the City Council shall designate.

 

2.15.030 Functions.
        The City Treasurer shall perform such duties as are prescribed by Sections 41000 through 41007 of the California Government Code and by any other provisions of law applicable to deposit, investment, and safekeeping of public funds of the City.

Chapter 2.16 CITY ATTORNEY
2.16.010 Office Created.
        The office of the City Attorney is hereby established. It shall consist of the City Attorney and such assistants as may be authorized by the Council. The City Attorney shall administer the office and be responsible for the successful performance of its functions. The City Attorney shall serve under the direct supervision and control of the Council as its legal advisor.

        The Council may retain or employ other attorneys, assistants, or special counsel as may be needed to take charge of any litigation or legal matters or to assist the City Attorney therein.

 

2.16.020 Compensation.
        The City Attorney shall receive such compensation and expense allowance as the City Council shall from time to time determine, and such compensation shall be a proper charge against such funds of the City as the City Council shall designate.

 

2.16.030 Functions.
        The functions of the office of the City Attorney shall be to:

        (a)    Advise the Council and all City officers in all matters of law pertaining to their offices;

        (b)    Furnish legal service at all meetings of the Council, except when excused or disabled, and give advice or opinion on the legality of all matters under consideration by the Council or by any of the boards and commissions or officers of the City;

        (c)    Prepare and/or approve all ordinances, resolutions, agreements, contracts, and other legal instruments as shall be required for the proper conduct of the business of the City and approve the form of all contracts, agreements, and bonds given to the City; and

        (d)    Perform such other legal duties as may be required by the Council or as may be necessary to complete the performance of the foregoing functions.

Chapter 2.20 EMERGENCY ORGANIZATION
2.20.010 General Purposes.
        The purposes of this Chapter are to provide for the preparation and carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property within the City in the event of an emergency or disaster; the direction of the emergency organization; and the coordination of the emergency functions of the City with the County and all other public agencies, corporations, organizations, and affected private persons. (Amended by Ord. 02-15, 11/26/02; Ord. 07-03, 3/6/07)

 

2.20.020 Definitions.
        As used in this Chapter:

        (a)    “Emergency” shall mean the actual or threatened existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within this City caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire flood, storm, epidemic, riot earthquake, or other conditions including conditions resulting from war or imminent threat of war, but other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy, which conditions are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment, and facilities for this City, requiring the combined forces of other political subdivisions to combat.

        (b)    “State of War Emergency” means a condition which exists immediately, with or without a proclamation thereof by the Governor, whenever this State or nation is attacked by an enemy of the United States, or upon receipt by the State of a warning from the Federal government indicating that such an enemy attack is probable or imminent.

        (c)    “State of Emergency” means the duly proclaimed existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within the State caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, earthquake, or other conditions, but other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy or conditions causing a State of War Emergency, which, by reason of magnitude are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment, and facilities of any single City, County, or City and County and require combined forces of a mutual aid region or regions to combat.

        (d)    “Local Emergency” means the actual or threatened existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within the City or County of Orange caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, earthquake, or other conditions, other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy, which are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment, and facilities of the City and require the combined forces of other political subdivisions to combat.

        (e)    Any other term or phrase used herein which is not defined herein but is defined within the Emergency Services Act, Government Code Section 8550, et seq., shall have the meaning ascribed therein. (Amended by Ord. 02-15, 11/26/02; Ord. 07-03, 3/6/07)

 

2.20.030 Disaster Council Membership.
        The City of Dana Point Disaster Council (“Disaster Council”) is hereby created and shall consist of the following:

        (a)    The Mayor, who shall be Chair;

        (b)    The Director of Emergency Services (“Director”), who shall be the City Manager and Vice-Chair;

        (c)    The Assistant Director of Emergency Services (“Assistant Director”);

        (d)    Such Chiefs of Emergency Services as are provided for in the current emergency plan of this City, adopted pursuant to this Chapter;

        (e)    Such representatives of civic, business, labor, veterans, professional, or other organizations having an official emergency responsibility, as may be appointed by the Director with the advice and consent of the City Council. (Amended by Ord. 02-15, 11/26/02; Ord. 07-03, 3/6/07)

 

2.20.040 Disaster Council Powers and Duties.
        It shall be the duty of the Disaster Council, and it is hereby empowered, to develop and recommend for adoption by the City Council, emergency and mutual aid plans and agreements and such ordinances and resolutions and rules and regulations as are necessary to implement such plans and agreements. The Disaster Council shall meet upon call of the chair or, in the chair’s absence from the City or inability to call such meeting, upon call of the vice-chair. The Disaster Council shall meet at least once per year, upon call of the chair or, upon call of the vice chair (in absence of the chair). (Amended by Ord. 02-15, 11/26/02; Ord. 07-03, 3/6/07; Ord. 16-03, 5/17/16)

 

2.20.050 Director and Assistant Director of Emergency Services.
        (a)    There is hereby created the office of Director of Emergency Services. The City Manager shall be the Director of Emergency Services.

        (b)    There is hereby created the office of Assistant Director of Emergency Service, who shall be appointed by the Director. (Amended by Ord. 02-15, 11/26/02; Ord. 07-03, 3/6/07)

 

2.20.060 Powers and Duties of the Director and Assistant Director of Emergency Services.
        The Director is hereby empowered to:

        (a)    Request the City Council to proclaim the existence of a Local Emergency if the Council is in session, or to issue such proclamation if the Council is not in session. Whenever a Local Emergency is proclaimed by the Director, the City Council shall take action to ratify the proclamation within seven (7) days thereafter or the proclamation shall have no further force or effect. The City Council shall review the necessity for continuing the Local Emergency no less frequently than every fourteen (14) days until the emergency is terminated.

        (b)    Request the Governor to proclaim a State of Emergency when, in the opinion of the Director, the locally available resources are inadequate to cope with the emergency.

        (c)    To, during the existence of a State of War Emergency or the proclaimed existence of a State of Emergency or a Local Emergency affecting the City:

        (1)    Control and direct the activities of the City’s emergency organization to accomplish the purposes of this Chapter;

        (2)    Use all City resources for the preservation of life and property and to reduce the effects of disaster;

        (3)    Resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise in disaster operations;

        (4)    Obtain supplies, equipment, and other resources found lacking and needed for the preservation of life and property by either binding the City for the fair value thereof or by commandeering the same;

        (5)    Direct cooperation between and coordination of services and staff of the emergency organization;

        (6)    Make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by any condition proclaimed an emergency as provided herein; provided; however, such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the City Council;

        (7)    Represent the City in all dealings with public or private agencies on matters pertaining to emergencies;

        (8)    Require performance of emergency services by any City officer or employee and, in the event of the proclamation of a State of Emergency in Orange County, or the existence of a State of War Emergency, to command the aid of as many citizens of the community as the Director deems necessary in the execution of the Director’s duties. Such persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits, and immunities as are provided by State and local laws for registered disaster service workers.

        (d)    In addition to the powers granted herein, the Director shall have such powers incidental to the performance of the Director’s duties as shall be necessary to allow the Emergency Plan to be effectively carried out, it being the intent of this Chapter that the enumerated powers herein are not limitations upon the Director’s powers.

        (e)    The Director of Emergency Services shall designate the order of succession to that office, to take effect in the event the Director is unavailable to attend meetings and otherwise perform his or her duties during an emergency. Such order of succession shall be approved by the City Council.

        (f)    The Assistant Director shall, under the supervision of the Director and with assistance of the Chief’s of Emergency Services, develop emergency plans and manage the emergency programs of the City; and have such other powers and duties as may be assigned by the Director. (Amended by Ord. 02-15, 11/26/02; Ord. 07-03, 3/6/07)

 

2.20.070 Emergency Organization.
        All officers and employees of this City, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency, and all groups, organizations, and persons who may by agreement or operation of law, including persons impressed into service under provisions of Section 2.20.060(d)(8) of this Code, be charged with duties incident to the protection of life and property in this City during such emergency, shall constitute the emergency organization of the City of Dana Point. (Amended by Ord. 02-15, 11/26/02; Ord. 07-03, 3/6/07)

 

2.20.075 Compliance with the California Emergency Services Act.
        The City of Dana Point Disaster Council shall comply with the California Emergency Services Act. (Added by Ord. 16-03, 5/17/16)

 

2.20.080 Emergency Plan.
        The Disaster Council shall be responsible for the development of the City of Dana Point Emergency Plan (“Emergency Plan”), which shall provide for the effective mobilization of all the resources of the City, both public and private, to meet any condition constituting a Local Emergency, State of Emergency, or State of War Emergency; and shall provide for the organization, powers and duties, services, and staff of the emergency organization. Such plan shall take effect upon adoption by resolution of the City Council. (Amended by Ord. 02-15, 11/26/02; Ord. 07-03, 3/6/07)

 

2.20.090 Orders by Members of Emergency Organization.
        During the existence of a State of War Emergency or of a proclaimed State of Emergency or Local Emergency affecting the City, each member of the City Disaster Council shall have authority to require that all persons within the City follow reasonable orders given by that member that are within the scope of that member’s functions in order to execute the Emergency Plan. The willful failure of any person to follow such reasonable order(s) is unlawful and a misdemeanor. (Amended by Ord. 02-15, 11/26/02; Ord. 07-03, 3/6/07)

 

2.20.100 Line of Succession for Council Members.
        The line of succession for the position of Mayor during a State of Emergency, State of War Emergency, Local Emergency, or other condition of disaster, unless otherwise ordered by the City Council, shall be Mayor pro tempore followed by the remaining City Council members in the order of their seniority, excluding standby successors who may have been appointed pursuant to Section 8638 of the California Government Code. (Amended by Ord. 02-15, 11/26/02; Ord. 07-03, 3/6/07)

 

2.20.110 Emergency Operating Centers.
        Unless exigencies render the same impossible or unduly hazardous to safety, the primary emergency operating center shall normally be maintained at the City Hall. (Amended by Ord. 02-15, 11/26/02; Ord. 07-03, 3/6/07)

 

2.20.120 Prohibited Acts During Emergencies.
        It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person, during a State of Emergency, State of War Emergency, Local Emergency, or other condition of disaster, to:

        (a)    Willfully obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the Disaster Council in the enforcement of any law or lawful rule, regulation or order issued pursuant to this Chapter, or in the performance of any duty imposed upon such Disaster Council member by virtue of this Chapter;

        (b)    Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule, regulation, or order issued pursuant to this Chapter if such act is of a nature as to give, or be likely to give, assistance to the enemy or to imperil life or property or to prevent, hinder or delay the defense or protection of persons or property; or

        (c)    Wear, carry, or display, without authority, any means of identification specified by any emergency services or disaster or civil defense agency of the Federal or State governments. (Amended by Ord. 02-15, 11/26/02; Ord. 07-03, 3/6/07)

 

2.20.200 Proclamation of Emergency—Additional Powers of the Director of Emergency Services.
        After the issuance of a proclamation of Local Emergency, the Director shall have the power to make, issue, and enforce rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by said emergency; provided, however, such rules and regulations shall be confirmed as soon as practicable by the City Council. In addition to those powers and duties set forth in Section 2.20.060, the Disaster Director is granted, but shall not be limited to, the following powers:

        (a)    Curfew. The Director may order a general curfew applicable to the entire City or such geographical areas thereof as deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety, welfare, and morals.

        As used herein “curfew” means a prohibition against any person or persons walking, running, loitering, standing, riding or motoring upon any alley, street, highway, public property or private property except as authorized by the owner, lessee or person in charge of such private property. Persons officially delegated to duty with reference to such civil emergency and representatives of news media, physicians, nurses, ambulance operators performing medical services, utility personnel maintaining essential public services, firefighters and law enforcement officers, and other such personnel as well as those specifically authorized by duly delegated authority are exempted from the foregoing curfew requirements.

        (b)    Business Closing. The Director may order the closing of any business establishments anywhere within the City, such businesses to include, but need not be limited to, those selling alcoholic beverages, gasoline, or firearms.

        (c)    Alcoholic Beverages. The Director may order that no person shall consume any alcoholic beverages in a public street or place which is publicly owned or in any other public or private area on which the consumption of such alcoholic beverages is found by the Director, on just cause, to precipitate a clear and present danger to the well-being of the community during the emergency;

        (d)    Weapons. The Director may order that no persons shall carry or possess any gun, bomb, fire bomb, knife, rock, or other such weapon or item, the use of which would tend to inflict great bodily harm on persons or damage to property;

        (e)    Street Closures. The Director may designate any public street, thoroughfare, or vehicular parking area closed to motor vehicles and pedestrian traffic during the course of such an emergency.

        The foregoing specific authorizations, and other such authorizations as may be deemed necessary during such emergencies, are declared to be imminently necessary for the protection of life and property during an emergency period. (Amended by Ord. 02-15, 11/26/02; Ord. 07-03, 3/6/07)

 

2.20.220 Penalty for Violation.
        Any person violating any provision of this Chapter, or executive order issued pursuant thereto, is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Amended by Ord. 02-15, 11/26/02; Ord. 07-03, 3/6/07)

Chapter 2.50 JUDICIAL REVIEW, ADMINISTRATIVE MANDAMUS, STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS
2.50.010 Judicial Review/Definitions; Time for Filing Petition; Records Request.
        (a)    As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have meanings as set forth below:

        (1)    “Decision” means a decision subject to review pursuant to Section 1094.5 of the Code of Civil Procedure, suspending, demoting, or dismissing an officer or employee; revoking or denying an application for a permit, license, or other entitlement; or denying an application for any retirement benefit or allowance.

        (2)    “Party” means an officer or employee who has been suspended, demoted, or dismissed; a person whose permit, license, or other entitlement had been revoked or suspended, or whose application for a permit, license, or other entitlement has been denied; or a person whose application for a retirement benefit or allowance has been denied.

        (b)    Judicial Review of any decision of the City of Dana Point, its City Council, or any commission, board, officer, or agent thereof, may be made pursuant to Section 1094.5 of the Code of Civil Procedure only if the petition for writ of mandate pursuant to said Section is filed within the time limits specified in this Chapter.

        (c)    Any such petition for a matter not involving a specific application or grievance shall be filed not later than the 90th day following the date on which the decision became final. Whenever a decision is made on a specific application, grievance, or property, any such petition shall be filed not later than the 90th day following the date of the notice to the applicant, person aggrieved, or property owner of the decision of the City, its Council, or any board, commission, officer, or employee thereof. Where there is no provision for reconsideration of the decision in any applicable provision of any statute, charter, or rule, for the purposes of this Section the decision is final on the date it is made, or on the date of the notice of the decision to the applicant, grievant, or property owner. Where there is a specific provision for reconsideration, the decision is final for the purposes of this Section upon the expiration of the period during which such reconsideration can be sought; provided that, if reconsideration is sought pursuant to any such provision, the decision is final for the purposes of this Section on the date that reconsideration is rejected. In making a final decision, the City shall provide notice to the party that the time within which judicial review must be sought is governed by this Section.

        (d)    The complete record of the proceedings shall be prepared by the City, or its commissions, boards, officers, or agents which made the decision. Upon written request, said record shall be delivered to the petitioner within ninety (90) days after the filing of the written request therefor. The City is hereby authorized to recover from the petitioner its actual costs for transcribing or otherwise preparing the record. Such record shall include a transcript of the proceedings, all pleadings, all notices and orders, any proposed decision by a hearings officer, a final decision, all admitted exhibits in the possession of the City, or its commissions, boards, officers, or agents, all written evidence, and any other papers in the case.

        (e)    If the petitioner files a request for a record as specified in Subsection (c) above, within ten (10) days after the date the decision becomes final as provided in Section (b) above, the time within which a petition pursuant to Section 1094.5 of the Code of Civil Procedure may be filed shall be extended to not later than the 30th day following the date on which the record is either personally delivered or mailed to the petitioner or his/her attorney of record, if he/she has one.

        (f)    The provisions of this Section comply with requirements established by Section 1094.6 of the Code of Civil Procedure and prevails over any conflicting provision in any otherwise applicable law relating to the subject matter, unless the conflicting provision is a state or federal law which provides a shorter statute of limitations, in which case the shorter statute of limitations shall apply.

 

2.50.020 Actions Attacking Certain Decisions, Time Limitation.
        (a)    Any action or proceeding to attack, review, set aside, void, or annul any decision of matters listed in Section 65901 and 65903 of the Government Code of the State of California, or concerning any of the proceedings, acts, or determinations taken, done, or made prior to such decision, or to determine the reasonableness, legality, or validity of any condition attached thereto, shall not be maintained by any person unless the action or proceeding is commenced within ninety (90) days after the date of the notice of the legislative body’s decision and the legislative body is served within one hundred twenty (120) days after the notice of the legislative body’s decision. Thereafter, all persons are barred from any such action or proceeding or any defense of invalidity of any unreasonableness of that decision or of these proceedings, acts, or determinations.

        (b)    The provisions of this Section comply with the requirements established by Section 65907 of the Government Code of the State of California.

 

2.50.030 Limitations of Issues Raised.
        (a)    In an action or proceeding to attack, review, set aside, void, or annul a finding, determination, or decision of the City of Dana Point made pursuant to Section 1.01.290 of the Dana Point Municipal Code at a properly noticed public hearing, the issues raised shall be limited to those issues raised in the public hearing or in written correspondence delivered to the City of Dana Point prior to, or at the public hearing, except where the court finds either of the following:

        (1)    The issue could not have been raised at the public hearing by persons exercising reasonable diligence.

        (2)    The body conducting the public hearing prevented the issue from being raised at the public hearing.

        (b)    The City Clerk shall include in any public notice issued pursuant to Section 1.50.290, a notice substantially stating all of the following:

 

        “If you wish to challenge the (nature of the proposed action) in court, you will be limited to raising only those issues you or someone else raised at the public hearing described in this notice, or in written correspondence delivered to the City Clerk at, or prior to, the public hearing.”

 

        (c)    The application of this Subdivision to causes of action brought pursuant to Subdivision (e) applies only to the final action taken in response to the notice to the City Clerk. If no final action is taken, then the issue raised in the cause of action brought pursuant to Subdivision (e) shall be limited to those matters presented at properly noticed public hearing or to those matters specified in the notice given to the City Clerk pursuant to Subdivision (e), or both.

        (d)    Except as provided in Section 2.50.010 of this Code and Subdivision (e), no action or proceeding shall be maintained in any of the following cases by any person unless the action or proceeding is commenced and service made on the legislative body one hundred twenty (120) days after the date of the notice of the legislative body’s decision:

        (1)    To attack, review, set aside, void, or annul the decision of the City Council (or Planning Commission as appropriate) to adopt or amend a general or specific plan. This paragraph does not apply where an action is brought based upon the complete absence of a general plan or a mandatory element thereof, but does apply to an action attacking a general plan or mandatory element thereof on the basis that it is inadequate.

        (2)    To attack, review, set aside, void, or annul the decision of the City Council to adopt or amend a zoning ordinance.

        (3)    To determine the reasonableness, legality, or validity of any decision to adopt or amend any regulation attached to a specific plan.

        (4)    Concerning any of the proceedings, acts, or determinations taken, done, or made prior to any of the decisions listed in paragraphs (1), (2) and (3).

        (e)    An action or proceeding shall be commenced and the legislative body served within two (2) years served after the accrual of the cause of action as provided in this subdivision, if the action or proceeding meets both of the following requirements:

        (1)    It is brought in support of the development of housing projects which meet the requirements for housing for persons and families with low or moderate incomes set forth in Section 65915 of the Government Code.

        (2)    It is brought with respect to actions taken pursuant to Article 10.6 (commencing with Section 65580) of the Government Code, Chapter 3 of that Division, pursuant to Section 65589.5, 65863.6, 65915, or 66474.2 or pursuant to Chapter 4.2 (commencing with Section 65913 of the Government Code). A cause of action brought pursuant to this Subdivision shall not be maintained until sixty (60) days have expired following notice to the City Clerk by the party bringing the cause of action, or his or her representative, specifying the deficiencies of the general plan, specific plan, or zoning ordinance. A cause of action brought pursuant to this Subdivision shall accrue sixty (60) days after notice is filed before the legislative body takes a final action in response to the notice, whichever occurs first. A notice or cause of action brought by one party pursuant to this Subdivision shall not bar filing of a notice and initiation of a cause of action by any other party.

        (f)    Upon the expiration of the time limits provided in this Section, all persons are barred from any further action or proceeding.

        (g)    The provisions of this Section comply with the requirements established by Section 65009 of the Government Code of the State of California.

 

2.50.040 City Action, Effect of Error.
        (a)    No action, inaction, or recommendation by the City of Dana Point, or its City Council, or any board or commission, or any of its administrative agencies or officials, on any matter shall be held invalid or set aside by any court of competent jurisdiction on the ground of improper admission or rejection of evidence or by reason of any error, irregularity, informality, neglect, or omission (hereafter, “Error”) as to any matter pertaining to applications, notices, findings, records, hearings, reports, recommendations, appeals, or any matters of procedures, unless the court finds that the error was prejudicial and that the party complaining or appealing suffered substantial injury from that error and that a different result would have been probable if the error had not occurred. There shall be no presumption that error is prejudicial or that injury was done if the error is shown.

        (b)    This Section satisfies and complies with the requirements of Section 65010 of the Government Code of the State of California. (Amended by Ord. 90-12, 8/14/90)

Chapter 2.55 HOLIDAYS OBSERVED BY THE CITY
2.55.010 Holidays Observed by the City.
        (a)    Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained within California Government Code Section 6700, the public offices of the City, excluding those offices which must remain open for the continuation of essential public services such as police and fire protection, shall be closed on Saturdays, Sundays, and on the following, and only the following holidays:

        (1)    New Year’s Day (January 1)

        (2)    Presidents Day (Third Monday in February)

        (3)    Memorial Day (Last Monday in May)

        (4)    Independence Day (July 4)

        (5)    Labor Day (First Monday in September)

        (6)    Veterans Day (November 11)

        (7)    Thanksgiving Day (Fourth Thursday in November)

        (8)    Friday following Thanksgiving Day

        (9)    Christmas Day (December 25).

        (b)    Holidays falling on Sunday will be observed on the following Monday. Holidays falling on Saturday shall be observed on the preceding Friday.

        (c)    Other holidays may be designated by Resolution or Ordinance of the City Council.

        (d)    Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this Section, the City Manager shall be authorized, by administrative regulation or otherwise, to direct that all or a portion of the public offices of the City shall remain open for business, on a full or reduced staff basis, on any of the days or holidays prescribed above, when it is determined to be necessary for the public interest to do so.

Chapter 2.60 PERSONNEL SYSTEM
2.60.010 System Adopted.
        In order to establish an equitable and uniform procedure for dealing with personnel matters and to comply with applicable laws relating to the administration of the personnel process, the following personnel system is hereby adopted.

 

2.60.020 Definitions.
        The terms used to administer the personnel system shall be defined in the personnel policies.

 

2.60.030 Administration.
        The City Manager shall administer the City personnel system and may delegate any of the powers and duties of such administration to any other officer or employee of the City or may recommend that such powers and duties be performed under contract as provided in Section 2.60.130. The City Manager shall:

        (a)    Act as the appointing authority for the City in accordance with Section 2.08.060(b) of the Municipal Code;

        (b)    Administer all the provisions of this Chapter and of the personnel policies and procedures not specifically reserved to the Council;

        (c)    Prepare or cause to be prepared personnel policies and procedures and revisions. The City Attorney shall approve the legality of such policies and procedures and revisions prior to their submission and to their implementation;

        (d)    Recommend to the City Council personnel policy issues involving financial commitments such as, but not limited to, pay rates and employee benefit programs;

        (e)    Prepare, or cause to be prepared, a position classification plan, including class specifications, and revisions of the plan;

        (f)    Prepare, or cause to be prepared, a plan of compensation, and revisions thereof, covering all classification titles for authorized City positions. The plan and any revisions thereof shall become effective upon approval of the Council;

        (g)    Have the authority to discipline employees in accordance with this Chapter and the personnel policies of the City;

        (h)    Provide for the recruitment and selection of City employees based upon open or promotional recruitments and perform any other duty that may be required to administer the personnel system.

 

2.60.040 Competitive Service.
        The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to all offices, positions, and employments in the service of the City which offices, positions and employments shall be in the competitive service, except this Chapter shall not apply to:

        (a)    Members of the City Council;

        (b)    Members of the appointive boards, commissions and committees;

        (c)    Persons engaged under contract to supply expert, professional, or technical services for a definite period of time;

        (d)    Volunteer personnel, who receive no regular compensation from the City;

        (e)    City Attorney, City Clerk, City Manager, City Treasurer, Assistant City Manager and/or Assistant to the City Manager;

        (f)    Department Heads and other management positions so designated by the City Manager;

        (g)    Emergency employees who are hired to meet the immediate requirements of an emergency condition, such as an extraordinary fire, flood, or earthquake which threatens life or property;

        (h)    Employees, other than those listed elsewhere in this Section, who are not regularly employed in positions. “Regularly employed in positions” means an employee hired for an indefinite term into a budgeted position, who is regularly scheduled to work no less than forty (40) hours per week and has successfully completed the probationary period and been retained as provided in this Chapter and the personnel policies;

        (i)     Any position primarily funded under a state or federal employment program;

        (j)     Any new position hereafter created by the City Council, unless declared by the City Council to be in the classified service at the time of creation or thereafter.

        Employees not included in the competitive service under this Section shall serve at the will of their appointing authority.

 

2.60.050 Adoption and Amendment of Policies.
        Personnel policies shall be prepared and may be amended from time to time by the City Manager, subject to review by the City Council. Any policy matters involving the commitment of financial resources shall be recommended and must be approved by the City Council prior to implementation. The policies shall govern the personnel system, including but not limited to:

        (a)    Preparation, installation, revision, and maintenance of a position classification plan covering all positions in the competitive service, including employment standards and qualifications for each class;

        (b)    Preparation, revision, and administration of a plan of compensation directly correlated with the position classification plan providing a rate or range of pay for each class;

        (c)    Open and promotional recruitments to fill regular positions;

        (d)    The making of temporary and emergency appointments;

        (e)    Establishment of probationary testing periods;

        (f)    Transfer, promotion, demotion, and reinstatement of employees;

        (g)    Evaluation of the job performance of employees;

        (h)    Separation of employees from the City service;

        (i)     Content, maintenance, and use of personnel records and forms;

        (j)     The establishment of any necessary appeal procedures.

 

2.60.060 Appointments.
        (a)    Appointments to vacant positions in the competitive service shall be made in accordance with the personnel policies. Appointments and promotions shall be based on merit and fitness. Examinations shall be used in and conducted to aid in the selection of qualified employees and shall consist of selection techniques which will test fairly the qualifications of candidates such as achievement and aptitude tests and other written tests, personal interviews, performance tests, physical agility tests, evaluation of daily work performance, work samples, or any combination of these tests. The probation period shall be considered an extension of the examination process. Physical, medical, and psychological tests may be given as part of any examination.

        (b)    In any examination, the City Manager or his designee may include, in addition to the competitive tests, qualifying test or tests and set minimum standards therefor.

        (c)    The appointing authority of employees in the competitive service is the City Manager. The City Manager may delegate the appointing authority to any other officer or employee of the City.

 

2.60.070 Probationary Period.
        All regular appointments, including promotional appointments, shall be for a probationary period in accordance with applicable provisions of the personnel policies. Determinations as to satisfactory completion or extension of said period, and/or rejection of an employee during said period, shall also be consistent with the applicable provisions of the personnel policies and procedures.

 

2.60.080 Status of Present Employees.
        Any person holding a position in the competitive service who, on the effective date of this Chapter, shall have served continuously in such position, or in some other position in the competitive service for period equal to the probationary period prescribed in the personnel policies and procedures for his class, shall assume regular status in the competitive service in the position held on such effective date without qualifying test, and shall thereafter be subject in all respects to the provisions of this Chapter and the personnel policies and procedures.

        Any other persons holding positions in the competitive service shall be regarded as probationers who are serving out the balance of their probationary periods as prescribed in the personnel policies and procedures before obtaining regular status. The probationary period shall be computed from the date of appointment or employment.

        All employees as defined under this Section are employed subject to the personnel system established herein which, in accordance with Government Code Section 53291, supersedes any other system.

 

2.60.090 Demotion, Dismissal, Reduction in Pay, Suspension, Reprimand.
        The City Manager or any appointing authority shall have the authority to demote, discharge, reprimand, reduce in pay, or suspend any regular employee for cause in accordance with procedures included in the personnel policies.

 

2.60.100 Right of Appeal.
        Any employee in the competitive service shall have the right to appeal a demotion, reduction in pay, suspension exceeding five (5) days, or discharge for disciplinary reasons, except in those instances where the right of appeal is specifically prohibited by this Chapter or the policies and procedures adopted thereunder. All appeals shall be processed in accordance with the requirements and the procedures as set forth in the personnel policies and procedures adopted pursuant to this Chapter.

 

2.60.110 Layoff and Reemployment.
        Layoff and reemployment actions shall follow the process outlined in the personnel policies.

 

2.60.120 Political Activity.
        The political activities of City employees shall conform to the pertinent provisions of State law and any local provision adopted pursuant to State law.

 

2.60.130 Contract for Special Services.
        The City Manager shall consider and make recommendations to the City Council regarding the extent to which the City should contract for the performance of technical personnel system. The City Council may contract with any qualified person or public or private agency for the performance of all or any of the following responsibilities and duties imposed by this Chapter.

 

2.60.140 Appropriation of Funds.
        The Council shall appropriate such funds as are necessary to carry out the provisions of this Chapter.

 

2.60.150 Abolishment of Position.
        Whenever in the judgment of the Council it becomes necessary in the interests of economy or because the necessity for the position involved no longer exists, the Council may abolish any position or employment in the classified service and discharge the employee or officer holding such position or employment. (Added by Ord. 89-27, 11/21/89)

Title 3 REVENUE AND FINANCE
Chapter 3.08 INVESTMENT OF MONEYS AND FUNDS
Chapter 3.10 COLLECTION OF DEBTS TO THE CITY
Chapter 3.12 PURCHASES
Chapter 3.13 INFORMAL BIDDING PROCEDURES
Chapter 3.16 DEMANDS AND CLAIMS
Chapter 3.18 TRANSFER OF TAX FUNCTIONS
Chapter 3.19 SALES AND USE TAX
Chapter 3.20 SPECIAL GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND
Chapter 3.22 REAL PROPERTY DOCUMENTARY TRANSFER TAX
Chapter 3.25 TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX

Chapter 3.08 INVESTMENT OF MONEYS AND FUNDS
3.08.010 Investment of City Moneys and Deposit of Securities.
        Pursuant to, in accordance with, and to the extent allowed by Sections 53607 and 53608 of the Government Code, the authority to invest and reinvest moneys of the City, to sell or exchange securities, and to deposit them and provide for their safekeeping is delegated to the City Treasurer.

 

3.08.020 Authorized Investments.
        Pursuant to the delegation of authority in Section 3.08.010, the City Treasurer is authorized to purchase, at their original sale or after they have been issued, securities which are permissible investments under any provision of State law relating to the investing of general City funds, including but not limited to Sections 53601 and 53635 of the Government Code, as said Sections now read or may hereafter be amended, from moneys in his or her custody which are not required for the immediate necessities of the City and as he or she may deem wise and expedient and to sell or exchange for other eligible securities and reinvest the proceeds of the securities so purchased.

 

3.08.030 Sales of Securities.
        From time to time the City Treasurer shall sell the securities in which City moneys have been invested pursuant to this Chapter so that the proceeds may, as appropriate, be applied to the purchase for which the original purchase money may have been designated or placed in the City treasury.

 

3.08.040 City Bonds.
        Bonds issued by the City and purchased pursuant to this Chapter may be canceled either in satisfaction of sinking fund obligations or otherwise if proper or appropriate; provided, however, that said bonds may be held uncanceled and while so held may be resold.

 

3.08.050 Reports.
        The City Treasurer shall make a monthly report to the City Council of all investments made pursuant to the authority delegated in this Chapter.

 

3.08.060 Deposits of Securities.
        Pursuant to the delegation of authority in Section 3.08.010, the City Treasurer is authorized to deposit for safekeeping the securities in which City moneys have been invested pursuant to this Chapter in any institution or depository authorized by the terms of any State law, including but not limited to Section 53608 of the Government Code as it now reads or may hereafter be amended. In accordance with said Section, the City Treasurer shall take from such institution or depository a receipt for the securities so deposited and shall not be responsible for such securities delivered to and receipted for by such institution or depository until they are withdrawn therefrom by the City Treasurer.

 

3.08.070 Trust Fund Administration.
        Any departmental trust fund established by the City Council pursuant to Section 36523 of the Government Code shall be administered by the City Treasurer in accordance with Section 36523 of the Government Code and any other applicable provisions of law.

Chapter 3.10 COLLECTION OF DEBTS TO THE CITY
3.10.010 Collection of Debts to the City.
        The amount of any fee, service charge, utility charge, license, or tax of any nature whatsoever imposed by this Code or by any other resolution, ordinance, rule, regulation, or in any other fashion by the City of Dana Point shall be deemed a civil debt owing to the City. An action may be commenced in the name of the City in any court of competent jurisdiction for the collection of the amount of any such delinquent or unpaid fee, service charge, utility charge, license, or tax, together with any penalties applicable thereto, as prescribed by this Code or any other enactment. Such action may also be commenced for the collection of any other amount or debt determined to be due the City on account of any contractual obligation or on account of any tortious act or conduct by any person. The remedy prescribed by this Section shall be cumulative, and the use of a civil action to collect such an amount as a debt shall not bar the use of any other remedy provided by this Code or by law for the purpose of enforcing the provisions thereof.

Chapter 3.12 PURCHASES
3.12.010 Adoption of Purchasing System.
        In order to establish efficient procedures for the purchase of supplies and equipment at the lowest possible cost commensurate with quality needs, to exercise positive financial control over purchases, to clearly define authority for the purchasing function, and to assure the quality of purchases, a purchasing system is adopted.

 

3.12.020 Scope of Chapter.
        The procedures established by this Chapter shall apply only to the purchase of supplies, equipment, and services, and shall not apply to public projects as defined in Section 20161 of the California Public Contracts Code.

 

3.12.030 Centralized Purchasing Division.
        There is created a centralized purchasing division in which is vested authority for the purchase of supplies and equipment.

 

3.12.040 Purchasing Agent.
        There is created the position of Purchasing Agent, who may also be known as the Purchasing Officer. The Purchasing Agent shall be the head and have general supervision of the Purchasing Division. The duties of Purchasing Agent may be combined with those of any other office or position. The Purchasing Agent shall have the authority to:

        (a)    Purchase or contract for supplies and equipment required by any using agency in accordance with purchasing procedures prescribed by this Chapter, such administrative regulations as the Purchasing Agent shall adopt for the internal management and operation of the Purchasing Division, and such other rules and regulations as shall be prescribed by the City Council or the City Manager;

        (b)    Negotiate and recommend execution of contracts for the purchase of supplies and equipment;

        (c)    Act to procure for the City the needed quality in supplies and equipment at least expense to the City;

        (d)    Discourage uniform bidding and endeavor to obtain as full and open competition as possible on all purchases;

        (e)    Prepare and recommend to the City Council rules governing the purchase of supplies and equipment for the City;

        (f)    Prepare and recommend revisions and amendments to the purchasing rules;

        (g)    Keep informed of current developments in the field of purchasing, prices, market conditions and new products;

        (h)    Prescribe and maintain such forms as are reasonably necessary for the operation of this Chapter and other rules and regulations;

        (i)     Supervise the inspection of all supplies and equipment purchased to insure conformance with specifications;

        (j)     Recommend the transfer of surplus or unused supplies and equipment between departments as needed;

        (k)    Maintain an approved vendors list, vendors’ catalog file, and records needed for the efficient operation of the Purchasing Division.

 

3.12.050 Purchasing Regulations.
        The Purchasing Agent shall be responsible for determining that the regulations and procedures in Sections 3.12.060 through 3.12.120 are carried out.

 

3.12.060 Exemptions from Centralized Purchasing.
        The City Manager may authorize, in writing, any department to purchase specified supplies and equipment independent of the Purchasing Agent; provided, however, that the City Manager shall require that such purchases be made in conformity with the procedures established by this Chapter and shall further require periodic reports from the Department on the purchases made under such written authorization.

 

3.12.070 Estimates of Requirements.
        All using departments shall file detailed estimates of their requirements in supplies and equipment in such manner, at such time, and for such future periods as the Purchasing Agent shall prescribe.

 

3.12.080 Requisitions.
        Using departments shall submit requests for supplies and equipment to the Purchasing Agent by standard requisition form, or by other means as may be established by the purchasing rules and regulations.

 

3.12.090 Purchase Orders.
        Purchases of supplies and equipment shall be made only by purchase orders. Except as otherwise provided herein, no purchase order shall be issued unless the prior approval of the Purchasing Agent or his designated representative has been obtained.

 

3.12.100 Encumbrance of Funds.
        Except in cases of emergency, the Purchasing Agent shall not issue any purchase order for supplies or equipment unless there exists an unencumbered appropriation in the fund account against which said purchase is to be charged.

 

3.12.110 Inspection and Testing.
        The Purchasing Agent shall, in his or her discretion, inspect supplies and equipment delivered to determine their conformance with the specifications set forth in the order. The Purchasing Agent shall have authority to require chemical and physical tests of samples submitted with bids and samples of deliveries which are necessary to determine their quality and conformance with specifications.

 

3.12.120 Bidding.
        Purchases of supplies and equipment shall be by bid procedures pursuant to Sections 3.12.130 through 3.12.280. Bidding may be dispensed with only under conditions stated in Section 3.12.290.

 

3.12.130 Formal (Sealed) Bid Procedures.
        Except as otherwise provided herein, purchases of supplies and equipment of an estimated value greater than Thirty-five Thousand Dollars ($35,000.00) shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder pursuant to the formal bid procedure hereinafter prescribed. (Amended by Ord. 03-10, 5/28/03)

 

3.12.140 Notice Inviting Formal Bids.
        Notices inviting formal bids shall include a general description of the article or service desired, shall state where bid documents and specifications may be secured, and the time and place for opening bids.

 

3.12.150 Published Notice for Formal Bids.
        Notices inviting formal bids shall be published at least ten (10) days prior to the date of opening of the bids. Notices shall be published at least once for non-public projects and at least twice, not less than five (5) days apart for public projects, in a newspaper of general circulation in the City.

 

3.12.160 Approved Vendors List.
        The Purchasing Agent shall also solicit formal sealed bids from responsible suppliers whose names are on the approved vendors list, or who have made written request that their names be added thereto.

 

3.12.170 Bulletin Board Notice.
        The Purchasing Agent shall advertise the pending formal purchases by posting a notice on the public bulletin board at the City offices.

 

3.12.180 Bidder’s Security.
        Where deemed necessary by the Purchasing Agent, formal bids shall be accompanied by security, either cash, cashier’s check, certified check or surety bond, in a sum equal to ten (10%) percent of the total aggregate of the bid, and shall be designated in the notice inviting bids. Bidders shall be entitled to the return of bid security; provided, however, that a successful bidder shall forfeit the bid security upon his or her refusal or failure to execute the contract within ten (10) days after the notice of award of contract has been mailed, unless the City is solely responsible for the delay in executing the contract. The City Council may, on refusal or failure of the successful bidder to execute the contract, award it to the next lowest responsible bidder who is willing to execute the contract, or may reject all bids and readvertise.

 

3.12.190 Other Formal Bond Requirements.
        A faithful performance bond and labor and material bond shall be required for all public projects, unless waived by the City Council, in an amount reasonably necessary to protect the best interests of the City. In addition, the City Council shall have authority to require a faithful performance bond or other bonds before entering into a contract other than a public project contract. If bonds are required, the form and amount thereof shall be designated in the notice inviting bids.

 

3.12.200 Formal Bid Opening Procedure.
        Sealed bids shall be submitted to the Purchasing Agent and shall be identified as “bids” on the envelope. The Purchasing Officer, or designee, shall publicly open all bids at the time and place stated in the public notices. A tabulation of all bids received shall be available for public inspection in the Purchasing Office during regular business hours for a period of not less than thirty (30) calendar days after the bid opening.

 

3.12.210 Rejection of Formal Bids.
        In its discretion, the City Council may reject any and all bids presented and may cause readvertising for bids pursuant to the procedure hereinabove prescribed. However, when all bids exceed the authorized budgeted amount, the City Manager may authorize rejection of all bids and authorize rebidding based upon the original specifications or as they may be modified, in accordance with procedures prescribed herein.

 

3.12.220 Award of Formal Bid Contracts.
        Except as otherwise provided herein, formal bid contracts shall be awarded by the City Council to the lowest responsible bidder. The determination of “lowest responsible bidder” shall be at the discretion of the City Council pursuant to findings and recommendations presented by the Purchasing Agent at the time of award of contract.

 

3.12.230 Tie Formal Bids.
        If two or more formal bids received are for the same total amount or unit price, quality and service being equal and if the public interest will not permit the delay of readvertising for bids, the City Council may in its discretion accept the one it chooses or accept the lowest bid made by and after negotiation with the tie bidders at the time of the bid opening or award of contract.

 

3.12.240 No Formal Bids.
        When no formal bids or no responsive bids are received, the Purchasing Officer is authorized to negotiate for written proposals, and his or her recommendation shall be presented to the City Manager, and the award, if any, shall be made in accordance with applicable provisions prescribed herein.

 

3.12.250 Open Market or Informal Bid Procedure.
        Purchases of supplies and equipment of an estimated value in the amount of Thirty-five Thousand Dollars ($35,000.00) or less may be made by the Purchasing Agent in the open market pursuant to the procedure prescribed in Sections 3.12.260 through 3.12.280 and without observing the procedure prescribed in Sections 3.12.130 through 3.12.240; provided, however, all bidding may be dispensed with for purchases of supplies and equipment having a total estimated value of less than Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000.00). (Amended by Ord. 03-10, 5/28/03)

 

3.12.260 Minimum Number of Informal Bids.
        Open market purchases shall, wherever possible, be based on at least three (3) informal bids, and shall be awarded to the bidder offering the most advantageous bid to the City after consideration of price, quality, durability, servicing, delivery time, standardization, and other factors.

 

3.12.270 Notice Inviting Informal Bids.
        The Purchasing Agent shall solicit informal bids by written requests to prospective vendors, or by telephone, or by public notice posted on a public bulletin board at the City offices.

 

3.12.280 Record of Informal Bids.
        The Purchasing Agent shall keep a written record of all open market purchases and informal bids for a period of two years. This record, while so kept, shall be open to public inspection.

 

3.12.290 Exceptions to Competitive Bidding Requirement.
        Notwithstanding any provision of this Chapter to the contrary, the competitive bidding procedures and requirements may be dispensed with in any of the following instances:

        (a)    When the estimated amount involved is less than Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000.00);

        (b)    When the commodity can be obtained from only one vendor;

        (c)    The City Manager may authorize the purchase of materials, supplies, equipment, and services where an emergency is deemed to exist and it is determined that service involving the public health, safety, or welfare would be interrupted if the normal procedure were followed. All emergency purchases which would otherwise require formal bidding procedures made pursuant to this Section shall be submitted to the City Council for ratification at the next regular Council meeting after the purchase is authorized;

        (d)    Contracts for personal services, for professional and consultant services, and for other, non-public projects and contractual services may be executed without observing the bidding procedures provided herein. The City Manager is authorized to enter into such contracts where the amount of the contract does not exceed Thirty-five Thousand Dollars ($35,000.00); provided there exists an unencumbered appropriation in the fund account against which said expense is to be charged. Where the amount of the contract exceeds Thirty-five Thousand Dollars ($35,000.00) the contract shall be approved by the City Council;

        (e)    Any agreement involving acquisition of supplies, equipment, or service entered into with another governmental entity. (Amended by Ord. 03-11, 5/28/03)

 

3.12.300 Regulations Regarding Selection of Contract Services.
        The City Council shall, by resolution, prescribe procedures, rules, and regulations governing the solicitation, selection, and award of proposals or bids for the furnishing of personal services or professional or consulting services or for other contractual services, the contracts for which may be awarded without observing the bidding procedures provided for in this Chapter. Such procedures, rules, and regulations shall have as one purpose the obtaining of contractual services of the highest quality together with cost-effectiveness.

 

3.12.310 Surplus Supplies and Equipment.
        All using departments shall submit to the Purchasing Agent, at such times and in such forms as he shall prescribe, reports showing all supplies and equipment which are no longer used or which have become obsolete and worn out.

 

3.12.320 Surplus Supplies—Trade-Ins.
        The Purchasing Agent shall have authority to exchange for or trade in on new supplies and equipment all supplies and equipment which cannot be used by any department or which have become unsuitable for City use.

 

3.12.330 Surplus Supplies—Sale.
        The Purchasing Agent shall have authority, subject to approval of the City Manager, to dispose of surplus supplies or equipment by auction or by sale or otherwise after receiving bids or proposals which, in his or her judgment, provide the maximum return to the City.

Chapter 3.13 INFORMAL BIDDING PROCEDURES
3.13.010 Construction on Public Projects.
        Pursuant to Sections 22000 through 22045 of the California Public Contract Code, when using the alternative procedures authorized in this Chapter, the following shall apply:

        (a)    Definitions. For purposes of this Section, the terms “maintenance work” and “public projects” shall have the meanings provided in Section 22002 of the California Public Contract Code.

        (b)    Construction of public projects shall be per the dollar limits outlined in California Public Contract Code Section 22032.

        (c)    Maintenance work and other work which does not fall within the definition of “public projects,” as defined in Section 22002 of the California Public Contract Code, may be let to contract by informal bidding procedures set forth in this Chapter.

        (d)    As to public projects only, if all bids received are in excess of the limits established in California Public Contract Code Section 22032, then Section 22034 of the California Public Contract Code shall apply. (Amended by Ord. 05-01, 4/11/05; Ord. 20-01, 2/4/20)

 

3.13.020 List of Qualified Contractors.
        The City Manager, or the City Manager’s designee, shall maintain a list of qualified contractors identified according to categories of work. Such list shall comply with the minimum criteria for development and maintenance of such list, as determined from time to time by the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission (“Commission”) and in accordance with California Public Contract Code Section 22034. (Amended by Ord. 20-01, 2/4/20)

 

3.13.030 Notice of Bids.
        Notice to contractors for informal bid work shall be provided in accordance with California Public Contract Code Section 22034. (Amended by Ord. 20-01, 2/4/20)

 

3.13.040 Delegation of Authority to Award Informal Contracts.
        The City Council hereby delegates the authority to award informal bid contracts to the City Manager. (Amended by Ord. 20-01, 2/4/20)

Chapter 3.16 DEMANDS AND CLAIMS
3.16.010 Claims for Money or Damages.
        As a prerequisite to bringing suit thereon against the City or any officer, employee, department, commission, or board of the City, any claim for money or damages, including claims which would otherwise be excepted by Section 905 of the Government Code of California, which is not governed by any other statute or regulation expressly relating thereto, shall be presented and acted upon in accordance with Title 1, Division 3.6, Part 3, Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 900) and Chapter 2 (commencing with Section 910), of the California Government Code. This Section shall relate only to the bringing of suit upon any claim, and shall not be deemed to apply to the authority of the Director of Finance and general services, the City Council, and other City officers to process and pay, in the ordinary course of business, the just obligations of the City, such as routine salaries and wages, principal and interest on bonds, payments for purchases, and other like expenditures for which there is an express budget appropriation and in connection with which there is no dispute as to the obligation and amount being payable.

 

3.16.020 Auditing Prerequisite to Payment.
        No payment shall be made from the City treasury or out of the funds of the City unless the demand which is to be paid is duly audited as prescribed herein or by other provisions of law.

 

3.16.030 Forms—Blanks for Demands.
        Claims against the City shall be paid on demands on the treasury as herein provided on forms to be prescribed by the City Manager.

 

3.16.040 Departmental Approval of Claims.
        Except for tort claims, every claim and demand received against the City shall be first presented to and approved in writing by the receiving department or office, which shall certify to the actual delivery or rendition of the supplies, materials, property or service for which payment is claimed. The receiving department or office shall also certify that the quality and prices correspond with the original specifications and contracts, if any, upon which the claim is based, that the demand in all other respects is proper and valid, and shall indicate the budgetary account to which said demand is to be charged.

 

3.16.050 Approval by City Manager.
        Each demand approved by the receiving department or office shall be presented to the City Manager, who shall determine whether:

        (a)    The claim is legally due and owing by the City;

        (b)    There are budgeted or otherwise appropriated funds available to pay said claim;

        (c)    The claim conforms to a valid requisition or order;

        (d)    The prices and computations shown on the claim are verified;

        (e)    The claim contains the approval of other departments and officials as required.

 

3.16.060 Prepayment of Demands.
        (a)    Prepayment of demands prior to audit by the City Council may be made by the City Manager in conformance with the authority provided by Section 37208 of the California Government Code.

        (b)    Whenever the City Manager determines that a refund of fees, taxes, or other receipts collected in error or in advance of being earned, or of money the refund of which is otherwise required pursuant to specific provisions of this Code or of any other Ordinance of this City is due, then any such refund shall be deemed as conforming to the currently approved budget, and may be prepaid in the same fashion as other demands encompassed within the terms of Subsection (a) of this Section.

 

3.16.070 Register of Demands.
        Following audit of demands, the City Manager shall prepare a register of audited demands showing the claimant’s name, amount of demand, the warrant number and date thereof, and transmit said register to the City Council, with a recommendation of approval or other report.

 

3.16.080 City Council Approval.
        The register of demands shall be presented to the City Council at the next meeting thereof. The City Council may by resolution approve, conditionally or partially approve, or reject such register of demands.

 

3.16.090 Record of Approved Demands.
        Following approval of the register of demands by the City Council, the Mayor and the City Manager shall endorse the register of audited demands to signify that the demands therein were properly processed prior to any action taken by the City Council.

Chapter 3.18 TRANSFER OF TAX FUNCTIONS
3.18.010 Assessment and Collection of City Taxes by County.
        Pursuant to, and in compliance with Section 51501 of the California Government Code, and except as otherwise provided in this Code, the assessment and tax collection duties which otherwise might be performed by a City assessor and tax collector are transferred to the Assessor and Tax Collector of the County of Orange.

Chapter 3.19 SALES AND USE TAX
3.19.010 Short Title.
        This Ordinance shall be known as the Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Ordinance.

 

3.19.011 Rate.
        The rate of sales tax and use tax imposed by this Ordinance shall be one percent (1%).

 

3.19.012 Operative Date.
        This Ordinance shall be operative on January 1, 1989.

 

3.19.013 Purpose.
        The City Council hereby declares that this Ordinance is adopted to achieve the following, among other, purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes:

        (a)    To adopt a sales and use tax Ordinance which complies with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code;

        (b)    To adopt a sales and use tax Ordinance which incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the State of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code.

        (c)    To adopt a sales and use tax Ordinance which imposes a tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California State Sales and Use Taxes;

        (d)    To adopt a sales and use tax Ordinance which can be administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting City sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this Ordinance.

 

3.19.015 Contract With State.
        Prior to the operative date this City shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this sales and use tax Ordinance; provided, that if this City shall not have contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract rather than the first day of the first calendar quarter following the adoption of this Ordinance.

 

3.19.020 Sales Tax.
        For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is hereby imposed upon all retailers in the City at the rate stated in Section 3.19.011 of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in this City on and after the operative date.

 

3.19.030 Place of Sale.
        For the purposes of this Ordinance, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the State sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the State or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization.

 

3.19.040 Use Tax.
        An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use, or other consumption in this City of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date for storage, use, or other consumption in this City at the rate stated in Section 3.19.011 of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to State sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made.

 

3.19.050 Adoption of Provisions of State Law.
        Except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are hereby adopted and made a part of this Ordinance as though fully set forth herein.

 

3.19.060 Limitations on Adoption of State Law.
        In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, wherever the State of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this City shall be substituted therefor. The substitution, however, shall not be made when the word “State” is used as part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, the State Treasury, or the Constitution of the State of California; the substitution shall not be made when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the City, or any agency thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this Ordinance; the substitution shall not be made in those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the State of California, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use, or other consumption remain subject to tax by the State under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or to impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the State under the said provisions of that Code; the substitution shall not be made in Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; and the substitution shall not be made for the word “State” in the phrase “retailer engaged in business in this State” in Section 6203 or in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203.

 

3.19.070 Permit Not Required.
        If a seller’s permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional seller’s permit shall not be required by this Ordinance.

 

3.19.080 Exclusions and Exemptions.
        (a)    The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the State of California upon a retailer or consumer.

        (b)    The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax Ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city in this State shall be exempt from the tax due under this Ordinance.

        (c)    There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of waterborne vessels to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property in such vessels for commercial purposes.

        (d)    The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of waterborne vessels and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property of such vessels for commercial purposes is exempted from the use tax.

        (e)    There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this State, the United States, or any foreign government.

        (f)    In addition to the exemptions provided in Section 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code the storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this State, the United States, or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax.

 

3.19.090 Amendments.
        All subsequent amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code which relate to the sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code shall automatically become a part of this Ordinance.

 

3.19.100 Enjoining Collection Forbidden.
        No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action, or proceeding in any court against the State or this City to prevent or enjoin the collection under this Ordinance, or Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected.

 

3.19.110 Penalties.
        Any person violating any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable in accordance with Section 1.01.200 to 1.01.230 of this Code.

 

3.19.120 Severability.
        If any provision of this Ordinance or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the Ordinance and the application of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby.

 

3.19.130 Effective Date.
        This Ordinance relates to taxes for the usual and current expenses of the City and shall take effect immediately.

Chapter 3.20 SPECIAL GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND
3.20.010 Created.
        To comply with the provisions of Section 2113 of the California Streets and Highways Code, and to avail the City of the benefits of Sections 2106 and 2107 of said Code, there is hereby created in the City treasury a special fund to be known as the “Special Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund.”

 

3.20.020 Moneys Included.
        All moneys received by the City from the State of California under the provisions of the Streets and Highways Code for the acquisition of real property, or interests therein, for engineering, or for the construction, maintenance, and improvement of streets or highways by the City, shall be paid into said fund.

 

3.20.030 Expenditures.
        All moneys in said fund shall be expended exclusively for the purposes authorized by and subject to the provisions of the California Streets and Highways Code.

Chapter 3.22 REAL PROPERTY DOCUMENTARY TRANSFER TAX
3.22.010 Short Title—Adoption.
        This Chapter shall be known as the “Dana Point Real Property Transfer Tax.” This Chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Part 6.7 (commencing with Section 11901) of Division 2 of the California Revenue and Taxation Code.

 

3.22.020 Imposition—Rates.
        There is imposed on each deed, instrument, or writing by which any lands, tenements, or other realty sold within the City shall be granted, assigned, transferred, or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, the purchaser or purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his or their direction, when the consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of sale) exceeds One Hundred Dollars ($100.00), a tax at the rate of twenty seven and one half cents ($.27½) for each Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) of consideration or value or fractional part thereof.

 

3.22.030 Payment.
        Any tax imposed pursuant to Section 3.22.020 shall be paid by any person who makes, signs or issues any document or instrument subject to the tax, or for whose use or benefit the same is made, signed, or issued.

 

3.22.040 Tax Inapplicable to Instruments in Writing to Secure Debts.
        Any tax imposed pursuant to this Chapter shall not apply to any instrument in writing given to secure a debt.

 

3.22.050 Government and Its Agencies Not Liable.
        The United States, or any agency or instrumentality thereof, any State or territory, or political subdivision thereof, or the District of Columbia shall not be liable for any tax imposed pursuant to this Chapter with respect to any deed, instrument, or writing to which it is a party, but the tax may be collected by assessment from any other party liable therefor.

 

3.22.060 Tax Inapplicable to Conveyances to Make Effective Plan of Reorganization or Adjustment.
        Any tax imposed pursuant to this Chapter shall not apply to the making, delivering, or filing of conveyances to make effective any plan of reorganization or adjustment:

        (a)    Confirmed under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as amended;

        (b)    Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a railroad corporation, as defined in Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended;

        (c)    Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a corporation as defined in Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended; or

        (d)    Whereby a mere change in identity, form, or place of organization is effected.

        Subdivisions (a) to (d), inclusive, of this Section shall apply only if the making, delivery, or filing of instruments of transfer or conveyances occurs within five (5) years from the date of such confirmation, approval, or change.

 

3.22.070 Tax Inapplicable to Make Effective Order of Securities and Exchange Commission.
        Any tax imposed pursuant to this Chapter shall not apply to the making or delivery of conveyances to make effective any order of the Securities and Exchange Commission, as defined in subdivision a. of Section 1083 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; but only if:

        (a)    The order of the Securities and Exchange Commission in obedience to which such conveyance is made recites that such conveyance is necessary or appropriate to effectuate the provisions of Section 79k of Title 15 of the United States Code, relating to the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935;

        (b)    Such order specifies the property which is ordered to be conveyed;

        (c)    Such conveyance is made in obedience to such order.

 

3.22.080 Partnerships.
        (a)    In the case of any realty held by a partnership, no levy shall be imposed pursuant to this Chapter by reason of any transfer of an interest in a partnership or otherwise, if:

        (1)    Such partnership (or another partnership) is considered a continuing partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; and

        (2)    Such continuing partnership continues to hold the realty concerned.

        (b)    If there is a termination of any partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, for purposes of this Chapter, such partnership shall be treated as having executed an instrument whereby there was conveyed, for fair market value (exclusive of the value of any lien of encumbrances remaining thereon), all realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination.

        (c)    Not more than one tax shall be imposed pursuant to this Chapter by reason of a termination described in Subdivision (b) and any transfer pursuant thereto with respect to the realty held by such partnership at the time of the such termination.

 

3.22.090 Administration.
        The County Recorder shall administer this Chapter in conformity with the provisions of Part 6.7 of Division 2 of the California Revenue and Taxation Code and the provision of any County ordinance adopted pursuant thereto.

 

3.22.100 Claims for Refund.
        Claims for refund of taxes imposed pursuant to this Chapter shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 5096 of Part 9 of Division 1) of the California Revenue and Taxation Code.

Chapter 3.25 TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX
3.25.010 Short Title.
        This Chapter shall be known as the “Dana Point Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax.”

 

3.25.020 Definitions.
        Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in this Section govern the construction of this Chapter.

        (a)    “Person” means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit.

        (b)    “Hotel” means any structure, or any portion of any structure, which is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging, or sleeping purposes, and includes, but is not limited to, any hotel, inn, tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodging house, rooming house, apartment house, dormitory, public or private club, mobile home or house trailer at a fixed location, or other similar structure or portion thereof, duplex, triplex, single-family dwelling units except any private dwelling house or other individually-owned single-family dwelling rented only infrequently and incidental to normal occupancy or any timeshare as set out in California Revenue and Taxation Code Section 7280; provided that the burden of establishing that the facility is not a hotel shall be on the owner or operator thereof.

        (c)    “Occupancy” means the use or possession or the right to the use or possession of any room or rooms, or portion thereof, offered for rent for dwelling, lodging, or sleeping purposes.

        (d)    “Transient” means any person who occupies or is entitled to occupy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other agreement for a period of thirty (30) consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any such person so occupying space in a hotel is a transient until the period of thirty (30) days has expired unless there is an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy. In determining whether a person is a transient, an uninterrupted period of time extending both prior and subsequent to the effective date of this Chapter may be considered.

        (e)    “Rent” means the consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy of space in a hotel valued in money, whether received in money, goods, labor, or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property, and services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever.

        (f)    “Operator” means the person who is proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, or any other capacity. Where the operator performs his or her functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent also is an operator for the purposes of this Chapter and has the same duties and liabilities as his or her principal. Compliance with the provisions of this Chapter by either the principal or the managing agent is, however, considered to be compliance by both.

        (g)    “Tax Administrator” means the City Manager.

 

3.25.030 Rate.
        For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient is subject to and shall pay a tax in the amount of 10% of the rent charged by the operator. This tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the City which is extinguished only by payment to the operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid. The unpaid tax is due upon the transient’s ceasing to occupy space in the hotel. If, for any reason, the tax due is not paid to the operator of the hotel, the Tax Administrator may require that such tax be paid directly to the Tax Administrator.

 

3.25.040 Exemptions.
        No tax shall be imposed upon:

        (a)    Any person as to whom, or any occupancy as to which, it is beyond the power of the City to impose the tax herein provided;

        (b)    Any federal or State of California officer or employee when on official business;

        (c)    Any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by reason of express provision of federal law or international treaty.

        No exemption is granted except upon a claim therefor made at the time rent is collected and under penalty of perjury upon a form prescribed by the Tax Administrator.

 

3.25.050 Operator’s Duties.
        Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this Chapter to the same extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of the rent charged, and each transient shall receive a receipt for payment from the operator. No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part will be refunded except in the manner hereinafter provided.

 

3.25.060 Registration.
        Within thirty (30) days after commencing business, each operator of any hotel renting to transients must register the hotel with the Tax Administrator and obtain from him or her a “Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate” to be posted at all times in a conspicuous place on the premises. This Certificate shall state, among other things, the following:

        (a)    The name of the operator;

        (b)    The address of the hotel;

        (c)    The date upon which the Certificate was issued; and,

        (d)    “This Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax by registering with the Tax Administrator for the purpose of collecting from transients the Transient Occupancy Tax and remitting said tax to the Tax Administrator. This Certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner, nor to operate a hotel without strictly complying with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department, or office of this City.”

 

3.25.070 Reporting and Remitting.
        (a)    Each operator shall, not later than twenty (20) days after the last day of each month, file a return with the Tax Administrator, on forms provided by the Tax Administrator, of the total rents charged and received and the amount of tax collected for transient occupancies during the preceding month. At the time the return is filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be remitted to the Tax Administrator. Any return and/or tax not received by the Tax Administrator by the twentieth day after the last day of the month to which such return relates, or during which such tax was collected, shall be deemed delinquent pursuant to Section 3.25.080 hereof. The Tax Administrator may establish shorter reporting periods for any certificate holder if it is deemed necessary to ensure collection of the tax, and may require further information in the return. Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. All taxes collected by operators pursuant to this Chapter are held in trust for the account of the City until payment thereof is made to the Tax Administrator.

        (b)    Notwithstanding Subsection (a), operators of short-term rentals must file a return and remit the full amount of tax collected from the short-term rental(s) to the Tax Administrator on a quarterly basis, not later than twenty (20) days after the last day of the quarter with the first quarter beginning on January 1st of each calendar year and ending on March 31st of that same calendar year, unless otherwise determined by the Tax Administrator. Aside from the quarterly reporting and remitting requirements, all the other provisions and requirements in Section 3.25.070(a) remains applicable to short-term rentals. (Amended by Ord. 89-24, 10/30/89; Ord. 13-02, 6/4/13)

 

3.25.080 Penalties and Interest.
        (a)    Original Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this Chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty of ten (10%) percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax.

        (b)    Continued Delinquency. For each subsequent thirty (30) day period following the date on which an operator’s remittance first becomes delinquent the operator shall pay a delinquency penalty of ten (10%) percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax and the ten (10%) percent penalty first imposed, up to a maximum of fifty (50%) percent.

        (c)    Fraud. If the Tax Administrator determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this Chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of twenty-five (25%) percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in Subsections (a) and (b).

        (d)    Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this Chapter shall pay interest at the rate of one (1%) percent per month or fraction thereof on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid.

        (e)    Penalties Merged with Tax. Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this Section shall become a part of the tax herein required to be paid.

 

3.25.090 Failure to Collect and Report.
        If any operator fails or refuses to collect the tax and to make, within the time provided in this Chapter, any report and remittance of the tax or any portion thereof required by this Chapter, the Tax Administrator shall proceed in such manner as he or she deems best to obtain facts and information on which to base an estimate of the tax due. As soon as the Tax Administrator procures such facts and information as he or she is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this Chapter and payable by any operator who has failed or refused to collect the same and to make such report and remittance, the Tax Administrator shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest, and penalties provided for by this Chapter. In case such determination is made, the Tax Administrator shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed at his last known place of business. Such operator may within ten (10) days after the serving or mailing of such notice make application in writing to the Tax Administrator for a hearing on the amount assessed. If application by the operator for a hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the tax, interest, and penalties, if any, determined by the Tax Administrator shall become final and conclusive and immediately due and payable. If such application is made, the Tax Administrator shall give not less than five (5) days’ written notice in the manner prescribed herein to the operator to show cause at a time and place fixed in the notice why the amount specified therein should not be fixed for such tax, interest, and penalties. At such hearing, the operator may appear and offer evidence why such specified tax, interest, and penalties should not be so fixed.

        After such hearing, the Tax Administrator shall determine the proper tax to be remitted and thereafter give written notice to the person in the manner prescribed herein of such determination and the amount of such tax, interest, and penalties. The amount determined to be due shall be payable after fifteen days unless an appeal is taken as provided in Section 3.25.100.

 

3.25.095 Cost of Audits.
        Should the Tax Administrator be required to perform an audit of the records of any operator pursuant to Section 3.25.090 to determine the proper amount of any tax owed pursuant to this Chapter, the entire cost of said audit shall be assessed against the operator. In the event that the books and/or records required to perform an audit are not made available within the City of Dana Point, the assessment shall include the cost of transportation, lodging, meals, and portal-to-portal travel time. Said assessment shall be due and payable not more than thirty (30) days after written notice of said assessment is sent, by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the operator. Should the operator fail to pay said assessment within the thirty (30) day time limit, said assessment shall constitute a lien against the property for which the audit was performed. After confirmation of said assessment lien by the City Council, the City Assessor and Tax Collector shall be notified, and shall add the amount of the assessment lien to the next regular tax bill levied against said property for municipal purposes.

 

3.25.100 Appeal.
        Any operator aggrieved by any decision of the Tax Administrator with respect to the amount of such tax, interest, and penalties, if any, may appeal to the City Council by filing a notice of appeal with the City Clerk within fifteen (15) days of the serving or mailing of the determination of tax due. The City Council shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal, and the City Clerk shall give notice in writing to such operator at his last known place of business. The findings of the City Council are final and conclusive and shall be served upon the appellant in the manner prescribed above for service of notice of hearing. Any amount found to be due is immediately due and payable upon the service of notice.

 

3.25.110 Records.
        It is the duty of every operator liable for the collection and payment to the City of any tax imposed by this Chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of three (3) years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax for which said operator may be or may have been liable. The Tax Administrator shall have the right to inspect all such records at all reasonable times.

 

3.25.120 Refunds.
        (a)    Whenever the amount of any tax, interest, or penalty has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the City under this Chapter it may be refunded as provided in Subsections (b) and (c) of this Section provided a claim in writing therefor, stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the Tax Administrator within three (3) years of the date of payment. The claim shall be on forms furnished by the Tax Administrator.

        (b)    An operator may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once, or erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established in a manner prescribed by the Tax Administrator that the person from whom the tax has been collected was not a transient; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a credit is allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either been refunded to the transient or credited to rent subsequently payable by the transient to the operator.

        (c)    A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid or paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the City by filing a claim in the manner provided in Subsection (a) of this Section, but only when the tax was paid by the transient directly to the Tax Administrator, or when the transient, having paid the tax to the operator, establishes to the satisfaction of the Tax Administrator that the transient has been unable to obtain a refund from the operator who collected the tax.

        (d)    No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this Section unless the claimant establishes his right thereto by written records showing entitlement thereto.

 

3.25.130 Actions to Collect.
        Any tax required to be paid by any transient under the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient to the City. Any such tax collected by an operator which has not been paid to the City shall be deemed a debt owed by the operator to the City. Any person owing money to the City under the provisions of this Chapter is liable to an action brought in the name of the City for the recovery of such amount.

 

3.25.140 Violations Designated Misdemeanor.
        Any operator or other person who fails or refuses to register as required herein, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the Tax Administrator, or who renders a false or fraudulent return or claim, is guilty of a misdemeanor. Any person required to make, render, sign, or verify any report or claim who makes any false or fraudulent report or claim with intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due required by this Chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor.

Title 4 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Chapter 4.02 ROLLERSKATING, SKATEBOARDING, AND BICYCLING PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN DESIGNATED AREAS
Chapter 4.04 FIREWORKS
Chapter 4.20 GARAGE AND YARD SALE REGULATIONS
Chapter 4.30 EMINENT DOMAIN
Chapter 4.40 DENSITY BONUSES

Chapter 4.02 ROLLERSKATING, SKATEBOARDING, AND BICYCLING PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN DESIGNATED AREAS
4.02.010 Definitions.
        For the purpose of this Chapter, the following words shall have the meanings ascribed below:

        (a)    “Business District” shall be defined as designated in Section 235 of the California Vehicle Code.

        (b)    “Private Property” shall mean any property held by private interests which is used primarily for business, commercial, or recreational purposes.

        (c)    “Public Property” shall mean any property owned or maintained by the City of Dana Point.

        (d)    “Rollerskate” shall mean any footwear, or device which may be attached to the foot or footwear, to which wheels are attached and such wheels may be used to aid the wearer in moving or propulsion.

        (e)    “Skateboard” shall mean a board of any material, which has wheels attached to it and which is propelled or moved by human, gravitational, or mechanical power, and to which there is not fixed any device or mechanism to turn or control the wheels. (Added by Ord. 91-2, 1/22/91)

 

4.02.012 General Prohibition.
        It shall be unlawful and subject to punishment in accordance with Section 4.02.022 of this Chapter, for any person utilizing or riding upon rollerskates, bicycles, skateboards, or similar devices to ride or move about in or on any public or private property when the same has been designated by Resolution of the City Council and posted as a no rollerskating, skateboarding, bicycling, etc., area. (Added by Ord. 91-2, 1/22/91)

 

4.02.014 Designation of Public Property as No Rollerskating, Skateboarding, or Bicycling Area.
        The City Council may, upon review and recommendation by the City Engineer, designate any public roadway, sidewalk, or other public property as a no rollerskating, skateboarding, bicycling, etc. area. The City Council shall designate such area by Resolution and order the posting of appropriate signage in accordance with Section 4.02.018 of this Chapter. (Added by Ord. 91-2, 1/22/91)

 

4.02.016 Designation of Private Property as No Rollerskating, Skateboarding, or Bicycling Area.
        (a)    This Section shall only be applicable to private properties located within a business district and private properties which are primarily used for commercial or recreational purposes.

        (b)    An owner of such of private property which is owner/occupier may designate the private property or any specific area within the private property as a no rollerskating, skateboarding, bicycling, or similar devices area by posting the property in accordance with Section 4.02.018.

        (c)    Tenants which occupy a private property may enter into a written agreement executed by a majority of the tenants on the property and the property owner, which agreement designates the private property or any specified area thereon as a no rollerskates, skateboards, bicycles, or similar device area. The area covered by the agreement shall be posted by the tenants and/or owners in accordance with Section 4.02.018.

        (d)    This Section shall not impair or abrogate any obligation or right of a party under an agreement, regulation, covenant or other binding document. (Added by Ord. 91-2, 1/22/91; amended by Ord. 07-04, 4/3/07)

 

4.02.018 Posting of Signs Required, Contents.
        Prior to the enforcement of the prohibition of rollerskating, skateboarding, bicycling, etc., the area so designated shall be posted with signs which provide substantially as follows:

 

        “Rollerskating, skateboarding, bicycling, etc., is prohibited by Dana Point Municipal Code Section 4.02.012. Any violation is punishable by a fine of $25.00 for a first offense.”

 

        Such prohibition shall apply to the property or area so designated once posted in plain view at all entrances to the property or area, and on signs which are not less than 17 by 21 inches in size with lettering not less than one inch in height. (Added by Ord. 91-2, 1/22/91)

 

4.02.020 Fees Set by Resolution.
        The City Council, may by Resolution, establish fees for the receipt and processing of applications and petitions for no rollerskating, skateboarding, bicycling, etc., areas. In addition, the City Council may, by Resolution, establish fees sufficient to cover the costs of developing, printing, and posting the areas designated pursuant to this Chapter. (Added by Ord. 91-2, 1/22/91)

 

4.02.022 Penalties.
        Any violation of this Chapter is deemed an infraction, punishable by a fine of Twenty-Five Dollars, ($25.00). A second violation of this Chapter shall be punishable by a fine of Fifty Dollars, ($50.00), and a third and subsequent violation shall be deemed a misdemeanor punishable in accordance with Sections 1.01.200 to 1.01.230 of this Code. (Added by Ord. 91-2, 1/22/91)

 

4.02.024 Exemption From the Provisions of this Chapter.
        Any devices designed, intended, and used solely for the transportation of infants, the handicapped, or incapacitated persons, or devices designed, intended, and used for the transportation of merchandise to and from the place of purchase and other wheeled devices, when being used for either of these purposes, shall be exempt from the provisions of this Chapter. Furthermore, the City Council may, by Resolution, suspend the enforcement of the provisions of this Chapter to accommodate special events when so requested by the event organizer. (Added by Ord. 91-2, 1/22/91)

Chapter 4.04 FIREWORKS
4.04.010 Seizure of Fireworks.
        The Chief shall seize, take, remove or cause to be removed at the expense of the owner all stocks of fireworks offered or exposed for sale, stored, or held in violation of this Municipal Code. (Added by Ord. 93-10, 5/25/93)

Chapter 4.20 GARAGE AND YARD SALE REGULATIONS
4.20.010 Garage and Yard Sale Regulations.
        No person shall conduct or allow to be conducted on any residentially zoned parcel of land a garage or yard sale in violation of the following regulations:

        (a)    A garage or yard sale may not be held for more than two (2) consecutive days.

        (b)    No more than four (4) garage or yard sales may be conducted on the same residentially zoned parcel in any one (1) calendar year.

        (c)    Garage or yard sale activity may not be conducted in the public sidewalks, parkways, streets, alleys or within the public right-of-way or on any public property, unless the public entity owning the property has given prior written consent to such garage or yard sale activity.

        (d)    Garage or yard sale activity shall be prohibited during the hours of 6:00 p.m. through 7:00 a.m.

        (e)    Garage or yard sale advertising signs shall be allowed per the Dana Point Sign Code [Sections 9.37.110 and 9.37.130(g) of the Dana Point Municipal Code]. In addition, such signs shall not be posted more than one (1) day prior to the first date of the garage or yard sale, and shall be removed within one (1) hour after the garage or yard sale is over. (Added by Ord. 93-18, 12/14/93)

 

4.20.020 Penalty.
        Violation of this Chapter shall be deemed an infraction. For the first violation of this Chapter, the fine shall be one hundred dollars ($100). For the second violation of this Chapter in any twelve (12) month period, the fine shall be two hundred dollars ($200). The fine for the third and each additional violation of this Chapter in any twelve (12) month period shall be five hundred dollars ($500). (Added by Ord. 93-18, 12/14/93)

Chapter 4.30 EMINENT DOMAIN
4.30.010 Limitations on Use of Eminent Domain.
        Neither the City of Dana Point nor any City-affiliated agency may exercise the power of eminent domain to acquire any property from any private owner thereof, without such owner’s consent, where the purpose of the acquisition at the time of acquisition is the intended conveyance of the property so acquired to any other private party, for the conduct of any for-profit commercial activity.

        As used in this Section, the following terms shall have the following ascribed meanings:

        “City-affiliated agency” shall mean the City of Dana Point and/or any other entity possessing the power of eminent domain, the governing board of which is solely composed of, or is solely appointed by, the members of the City Council of the City of Dana Point.

        “Owner” means the owner of the fee title interest in the property to be acquired, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, or other more current proof of vesting the City may have.

        “Property” shall mean any interest in real or personal property otherwise subject to acquisition through the use of eminent domain. (Added by Ord. 05-07, 10/12/05; amended by Ord. 06-11, 12/13/06)

Chapter 4.40 DENSITY BONUSES
4.40.010 Purpose and Application.
        The purpose of this Chapter is to establish procedures for implementing state density bonus requirements, as set forth in California Government Code Section 65915, as amended, and to increase the production of affordable housing, consistent with the City’s goals, objectives and policies. When an applicant seeks a density bonus for a housing development, or for the donation of land for housing, within the City’s jurisdiction, the City shall provide the applicant incentives or concessions for the production of housing units and child care facilities as prescribed in this Chapter. (Added by Ord. 06-09, 10/11/06)

 

4.40.012 Definitions.
        The following definitions shall apply to this Chapter:

        “Affordable housing cost” bears the same meaning as defined in Section 50052.5 of the California Health and Safety Code.

        “Affordable housing unit” means a dwelling unit within a housing development which will be rented or sold to and reserved for very low-income households, lower-income households, moderate-income households and/or senior citizens at an affordable housing cost for the respective group(s) in accordance with Section 65915 of the California Government Code and this Chapter.

        “Affordable rent” means that level of rent defined in Section 50053 of the California Health and Safety Code.

        “Applicant” means a developer or applicant for a density bonus pursuant to Section 65915, Subdivision (b), of the California Government Code and Section 4.40.014 of this Chapter.

        “Child care facility” means a child day care facility other than a family day care home, including, but not limited to, infant centers, preschools, extended day care facilities, and school-age child care centers.

        “Common interest development” bears the same meaning as defined in Section 1351 of the California Civil Code.

        “Density bonus” means a density increase over the otherwise maximum allowable residential density under the applicable zoning ordinance and land use element of the general plan as of the date of application by the applicant to the City.

        “Development standard” means site or construction conditions that apply to a housing development pursuant to any ordinance, general plan element, specific plan, charter amendment, or other local condition, law, policy, resolution or regulation.

        “Housing development,” means one or more groups of projects for residential units in the planned development of the City. “Housing development” also includes a subdivision or common interest development, as defined in Section 1351 of the California Civil Code, approved by the City and consisting of residential units or unimproved residential lots and either a project to substantially rehabilitate and convert an existing commercial building to residential use or the substantial rehabilitation of an existing multifamily dwelling, as defined in subdivision (d) of Section 65863.4, where the result of the rehabilitation would be a net increase in available residential units.

        “Lower income households” bears the same meaning as defined in Section 50079.5 of the California Health and Safety Code.

        “Maximum allowable residential density” means the density allowed under applicable zoning ordinances, or if a range of density is permitted, means the maximum allowable density for the specific zoning range applicable to the subject project.

        “Moderate income” or “persons and families of moderate income” means those middle-income families as defined in Section 50093 of the California Health and Safety Code.

        “Qualified mobile home park” means a mobile home park that limits residency based on age requirements for housing for older persons pursuant to Section 798.76 or 799.5 of the California Civil Code.

        “Senior citizen housing development” means senior citizen housing as defined in Sections 51.3 and 51.12 of the California Civil Code.

        “Specific adverse impact” means any adverse impact as defined in Paragraph (2), Subdivision (d), of California Government Code Section 65589.5, upon public health and safety or the physical environment, or on any real property that is listed in the California Register of Historical Resources, and for which there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact without rendering the housing development unaffordable to low- and moderate-income households.

        “Very low-income households” bears the same meaning as defined in Section 50105 of the Health and Safety Code. (Added by Ord. 06-09, 10/11/06)

 

4.40.014 Qualifications for Density Bonus and Incentives and Concessions.
        (a)    The City shall grant one density bonus as specified in Section 4.40.022, and incentives or concessions as described in Section 4.40.018, when an applicant seeks and agrees to construct a housing development, excluding any units permitted by the density bonus awarded pursuant to this Chapter, that will contain at least any one of the following:

        (1)    Ten percent (10%) of the total units of the housing development as affordable housing units affordable to lower-income households;

        (2)    Five percent (5%) of the total units of the housing development as affordable housing units affordable to very low-income households;

        (3)    A senior citizen housing development;

        (4)    A qualified mobile home park; or

        (5)    Ten percent (10%) of the total units of a common interest development as affordable housing units affordable to moderate-income households, provided that all units in the development are offered to the public for purchase subject to the restrictions specified in this Chapter.

        (b)    As used in Subsection (a) of this Section, the term “total units” does not include units permitted by a density bonus awarded pursuant to this Section or any other local law granting a greater density bonus.

        (c)    Each applicant who requests a density bonus pursuant to this Chapter, shall elect whether the bonus shall be awarded on the basis of Subsection (a)(1), (2), (3), (4) or (5) of this Section. Each housing development is entitled to only one density bonus, which may be selected based on the percentage of either very low-income affordable housing units, lower-income affordable housing units or moderate-income affordable housing units, or the development’s status as a senior citizen housing development or qualified mobile home park. Density bonuses from more than one category may not be combined. (Added by Ord. 06-09, 10/11/06)

 

4.40.016 Continued Affordability.
        (a)    An applicant shall agree to, and the City shall ensure, continued affordability of all low- and very low-income units that qualified the applicant for the award of the density bonus for a period of thirty (30) years or a longer period of time if required by the construction or mortgage financing assistance program, mortgage insurance program, or rental subsidy program. Rents for affordable housing units for lower-income households shall be set at an affordable rent. Owner-occupied affordable housing units shall be available at an affordable housing cost.

        (b)    An applicant shall agree to, and the City shall ensure, that the initial occupant of moderate-income units that are directly related to the receipt of the density bonus in a common interest development, are persons and families of moderate-income and that the units are offered at an affordable housing cost. The local government shall enforce an equity-sharing agreement, unless it is in conflict with the requirements of another public funding source or law. The following shall apply to the equity-sharing agreement:

        (1)    Upon resale, the seller of the unit shall retain the value of any improvements, the downpayment, and the seller’s proportionate share of appreciation. The City shall recapture any initial subsidy and its proportionate share of appreciation, which shall then be used within three (3) years for any of the purposes that promote homeownership as described in Subdivision (e) of Section 33334.2 of the California Health and Safety Code.

        (2)    For purposes of this Subsection, the City’s initial subsidy shall be equal to the fair market value of the home at the time of initial sale minus the initial sale price to the moderate-income household, plus the amount of any downpayment assistance or mortgage assistance. If upon resale, the market value is lower than the initial market value, then the value at the time of the resale shall be used as the initial market value.

        (3)    For purposes of this Subsection, the City’s proportionate share of appreciation shall be equal to the ratio of the initial subsidy to the fair market value of the home at the time of initial sale. (Added by Ord. 06-09, 10/11/06)

 

4.40.018 Incentives and Concessions.
        (a)    An applicant for a density bonus may also submit to the City a proposal for specific incentives or concessions in exchange for the provision of affordable housing units in accordance with this Chapter. The applicant may also request a meeting with the City to discuss such proposal. The City shall grant the concession or incentive requested by the applicant unless the City makes a written finding, based upon substantial evidence, of either of the following:

        (1)    The concession or incentive is not required in order to provide for affordable housing costs; or

        (2)    The concession or incentive would have a specific adverse impact.

        (b)    If the conditions of Section 4.40.014 and Subsection (a) of this Section are met by an applicant, the City may grant the applicant the following number of incentives or concessions:

        (1)    One incentive or concession for housing developments that include: at least ten percent (10%) of the total units affordable to lower-income households; or at least five percent (5%) of the total units affordable to very low-income households; or at least ten percent (10%) of the total units affordable to persons and families of moderate income in a common interest development;

        (2)    Two (2) incentives or concessions for housing developments that include: at least twenty percent (20%) of the total units affordable to lower-income households; or at least ten percent (10%) of the total units affordable to very low-income households; or at least twenty percent (20%) of the total units affordable to persons and families of moderate income in a common interest development;

        (3)    Three (3) incentives or concessions for housing developments that include: at least thirty percent (30%) of the total units for lower-income households; or at least fifteen percent (15%) for very low-income households; or at least thirty percent (30%) for persons and families of moderate income in a common interest development.

        (c)    For the purposes of this Chapter, available concessions or incentives may include any of the following:

        (1)    A reduction in site development standards or a modification of zoning code requirements or architectural design requirements that exceed the minimum building standards approved by the California Building Standards Commission as provided in Part 2.5 (commencing with Section 18901) of Division 13 of the California Health and Safety Code, including, but not limited to, a reduction in setback and square footage requirements and in the ratio of vehicular parking spaces that would otherwise be required that results in identifiable, financially sufficient, and actual cost reductions;

        (2)    Approval of mixed use zoning in conjunction with the housing development if commercial, office, industrial, or other land uses will reduce the cost of the housing development and if the commercial, office, industrial, or other land uses are compatible with the housing project and the existing or planned development in the area where the proposed housing development will be located;

        (3)    Other regulatory incentives or concessions proposed by the applicant or the City that result in identifiable, financially sufficient, and actual cost reductions.

        (d)    This Section does not limit or require the provision of direct financial incentives for the housing development, including the provision of publicly-owned land, by the City or the waiver of fees or dedication requirements. Nor does any provision of this Section require the City to grant an incentive or concession found to have a specific adverse impact.

        (e)    The granting of a concession or incentive shall not be interpreted, in and of itself, to require a general plan amendment, local coastal plan amendment, zoning change, or other discretionary approval.

        (f)    The application and review process for a proposal of incentives and concessions is set forth in Section 4.40.030.

        (g)    The importance of views and adherence to height limits to residents Citywide precludes any consideration of height increases associated with this Code. (Added by Ord. 06-09, 10/11/06)

 

4.40.020 Waiver/Modification of Development Standards.
        (a)    Applicants may, by application, seek a waiver, modification or reduction of development standards that will otherwise preclude or inhibit the use of density bonus units in a housing development at the densities or with the concessions or incentives permitted by this Chapter. The applicant may also request a meeting with the City to discuss such request for waiver/modification. In order to obtain a waiver/modification of development standards, the applicant shall show that (i) the waiver or modification is necessary to make the housing units economically feasible, and (ii) that the development standards will have the effect of precluding the construction of a housing development meeting the criteria of Section 4.40.014(a), at the densities or with the concessions or incentives permitted by this Chapter.

        (b)    Nothing in this Section shall be interpreted to require the City to waive, modify or reduce development standards if the waiver, modification or reduction would have a specific adverse impact.

        (c)    The application and review process for a waiver/modification of development standards is set forth in Section 4.40.030. (Added by Ord. 06-09, 10/11/06)

 

4.40.022 Specified Density Bonus Percentages.
        (a)    Only housing developments consisting of five (5) or more dwelling units are eligible for the density bonus percentages provided by this Section. The amount of density bonus to which the applicant is entitled shall vary according to the amount by which the percentage of affordable housing units exceeds the percentage established in Section 4.40.014(a).

        (b)    For housing developments meeting the criteria of Section 4.40.014(a)(1), the density bonus shall be calculated as follows:

 

Percentage Low-Income Units

Percentage Density Bonus

10

20

11

21.5

12

23

13

24.5

14

26

15

27.5

17

30.5

18

32

19

33.5

20

35

 

        (c)    For housing developments meeting the criteria of Section 4.40.014(a)(2), the density bonus shall be calculated as follows:

 

Percentage Very Low-Income Units

Percentage Density Bonus

5

20

6

22.5

7

25

8

27.5

9

30

10

32.5

11

35

 

        (d)    For housing developments meeting the criteria of Sections 4.40.014(a)(3) and (4), the density bonus shall be twenty percent (20%).

        (e)    For housing developments meeting the criteria of Section 4.40.014(a)(5), the density bonus shall be calculated as follows:

 

Percentage Moderate-Income Units

Percentage Density Bonus

10

5

11

6

12

7

13

8

14

9

15

10

16

11

17

12

18

13

19

14

20

15

21

16

22

17

23

18

24

19

25

20

26

21

27

22

28

23

29

24

30

25

31

26

32

27

33

28

34

29

35

30

36

31

37

32

38

33

39

34

40

35

 

        (f)    An applicant may elect to accept a lesser percentage of density bonus than that to which the applicant is entitled under this Chapter. All density bonus calculations resulting in a fractional number shall be rounded upwards to the next whole number. The granting of a density bonus shall not be interpreted, in and of itself, to require a general plan amendment, zoning change, or other discretionary approval.

        (g)    For the purpose of calculating a density bonus, the residential units do not have to be based upon individual subdivision maps or parcels. The density bonus shall be permitted in geographic areas of the housing development other than the areas where the units for the lower-income households are located.

        (h)    The application and review process for a density bonus as provided by this Section is set forth in Section 4.40.010. (Added by Ord. 06-09, 10/11/06)

 

4.40.024 Land Donation.
        (a)    When a developer of a housing development donates land to the City as provided for in this Section, the applicant shall be entitled to a fifteen percent (15%) increase above the otherwise maximum allowable residential density under the applicable zoning ordinance and land use element of the general plan for the entire housing development, as follows:

 

Percentage Very Low-Income Units

Percentage Density Bonus

10

15

11

16

12

17

13

18

14

19

15

20

16

21

17

22

18

23

19

24

20

25

21

26

22

27

23

28

24

29

25

30

26

31

27

32

28

33

29

34

30

35

 

        This increase shall be in addition to any increase in density mandated by Section 4.40.014, up to a maximum combined mandated density increase of thirty-five percent (35%), if an applicant seeks both the increase required pursuant to this Section and Section 4.40.014. All density calculations resulting in fractional units shall be rounded up to the next whole number. Nothing in this subdivision shall be construed to enlarge or diminish the City’s authority to require an applicant to donate land as a condition of development.

        (b)    An applicant shall be eligible for the increased density bonus described in this Section if the City is able to make all the following findings:

        (1)    The applicant donates and transfers the land no later than the date of approval of the final subdivision map, parcel map, or residential development application;

        (2)    The developable acreage and zoning classification of the land being transferred are sufficient to permit construction of units affordable to very low-income households in an amount not less than ten percent (10%) of the number of residential units of the proposed development;

        (3)    The transferred land is at least one acre in size or of sufficient size to permit development of at least forty (40) units, has the appropriate general plan designation, is appropriately zoned for development as affordable housing, and is or will be served by adequate public facilities and infrastructure. The land shall have appropriate zoning and development standards to make the development of the affordable units feasible. No later than the date of approval of the final subdivision map, parcel map, or development application for the housing development, the transferred land shall have all of the permits and approvals, other than building permits, necessary for the development of very-low income housing units on the transferred land, except that the City may subject the proposed development to subsequent design review to the extent authorized by Subdivision (i) of Section 65583.2 if the design is not reviewed by the local government prior to the time of transfer;

        (4)    The transferred land and the very low-income units constructed on the land will be subject to a deed restriction ensuring continued affordability of the units consistent with this Chapter, which restriction will be recorded on the property at the time of dedication;

        (5)    The land is transferred to the City or to a housing developer approved by the City. The City may require the applicant to identify and transfer the land to such City-approved developer;

        (6)    The transferred land shall be within the boundary of the proposed development or, if the City agrees in writing, within one-quarter mile of the boundary of the proposed development.

        (c)    The application and review process for a donation of land and related density bonus is set forth in Section 4.40.010. (Added by Ord. 06-09, 10/11/06)

 

4.40.026 Child Care Facilities.
        (a)    When an applicant proposes to construct a housing development that includes affordable units as specified in Section 4.40.014 and includes a child care facility that will be located on the premises of, as part of, or adjacent to such housing development, the City shall grant either of the following if requested by the developer.

        (1)    An additional density bonus that is an amount of square feet of residential space that is equal to or greater than the amount of square feet in the child care facility.

        (2)    An additional concession or incentive that contributes significantly to the economic feasibility of the construction of the child care facility.

        (b)    A housing development shall be eligible for the density bonus or concession described in this Section if the City, as a condition of approving the housing development, requires all of the following to occur:

        (1)    The child care facility will remain in operation for a period of time that is as long as or longer than the period of time during which the affordable housing units are required to remain affordable pursuant to Section 4.40.016;

        (2)    Of the children who attend the child care facility, the percentage of children of very low-income households, lower-income households, or moderate-income households shall be equal to or greater than the percentage of affordable housing units that are proposed to be affordable to very low-income households, lower-income households, or moderate-income households;

        (3)    Notwithstanding any requirement of this Section, the City shall not be required to provide a density bonus or concession for a child care facility if it finds, based upon substantial evidence, that the community already has adequate child care facilities.

        (c)    The application and review process for the provision of child care facilities and related density bonus or concessions or incentives is set forth in Section 4.40.010. (Added by Ord. 06-09, 10/11/06)

 

4.40.028 By-Right Parking Incentives.
        (a)    Housing developments meeting any of the criteria of Section 4.40.014(a), shall be granted the following maximum parking ratios, inclusive of handicapped and guest parking, which shall apply to the entire development, not just the restricted affordable units, when requested by a developer:

        (1)    Zero to one bedroom dwelling unit: one onsite parking space;

        (2)    Two (2) to three (3) bedrooms dwelling unit: two (2) onsite parking spaces;

        (3)    Four (4) or more bedrooms: two and one-half (2 1/2) parking spaces.

        (b)    If the total number of spaces required results in a fractional number, it shall be rounded up to the next whole number. For purposes of this Subsection, a development may provide “onsite parking” through tandem parking or uncovered parking, but not through on-street parking. (Added by Ord. 06-09, 10/11/06)

 

4.40.030 Application and Review Procedures.
        (a)    A written application for a density bonus, incentive, concession, waiver, or modification pursuant to this Chapter shall be submitted with the first application for approval of a housing development and processed concurrently with all other applications required for the housing development. The application shall be submitted on a form prescribed by the City and shall include at least the following information:

        (1)    Site plan showing total number of units, number and location of affordable housing units, and number and location of proposed density bonus units;

        (2)    Level of affordability of affordable housing units and proposals for ensuring affordability;

        (3)    Description of any requested incentives, concessions, waivers or modifications of development standards, or modified parking standards. The application shall include evidence that the requested incentives and concessions are required for the provision of affordable housing costs and/or affordable rents, as well as evidence relating to any other factual findings required under Section 4.40.018;

        (4)    If a density bonus or concession is requested in connection with a land donation, the application shall show the location of the land to be dedicated and provide evidence that each of the findings included in Section 4.40.024 can be made;

        (5)    If a density bonus or concession/incentive is requested for a childcare facility, the application shall show the location and square footage of the child care facilities and provide evidence that each of the findings included in Section 4.40.026 can be made.

        (b)    An application for a density bonus, incentive or concession pursuant to this Chapter shall be considered by and acted upon by the approval body with authority to approve the housing development and subject to the same administrative appeal procedure, if any. In accordance with state law, neither the granting of a concession, incentive, waiver, or modification nor the granting of a density bonus shall be interpreted, in and of itself, to require a general plan amendment, zoning change, variance, or other discretionary approval.

        (c)    For housing developments requesting a waiver, modification or reduction of a development standard, an application pursuant to this Subsection shall be heard by the City Planning Commission. A public hearing shall be held by the Planning Commission and the Commission shall issue a determination. Pursuant to Government Code Section 65915, the Planning Commission shall approve the requested waiver/modification or reduction of development standards, unless one of the following conditions applies:

        (1)    The waiver/modification is not required to make the proposed affordable housing units feasible; or

        (2)    The waiver/modification will have a specific adverse impact.

        The decision of the City Planning Commission may be appealed to the City Council within fourteen (14) consecutive calendar days of the date the decision is made in the manner provided in Dana Point Municipal Code.

        (d)    Notice of any City determination pursuant to this Section shall be provided to the same extent as required for the underlying development approval. (Added by Ord. 06-09, 10/11/06)

Title 5 BUSINESS REGULATIONS *
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 21-01. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


Note
Chapter 5.02 REGULATION OF STREET VENDING ACTIVITIES
Chapter 5.03 REGULATION OF SIDEWALK VENDORS
Chapter 5.04 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES WARNING SIGNS
Chapter 5.08 FIRE ALARMS, FALSE ALARMS
Chapter 5.10 REGULATION OF NEWSRACKS ON PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Chapter 5.16 TOBACCO VENDING MACHINES PROHIBITED
Chapter 5.20 MASSAGE REGULATIONS
Chapter 5.24 AMBULANCE SERVICE
Chapter 5.28 BINGO GAMES
Chapter 5.30 CABLE COMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISES
Chapter 5.32 ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Chapter 5.36 VIDEO FRANCHISE FEES, CUSTOMER SERVICE AND OTHER VIDEO-RELATED MATTERS
Chapter 5.38 SHORT-TERM RENTAL PERMITS
Chapter 5.40 CANNABIS RELATED USES, COMMERCIAL CANNABIS ACTIVITIES, DELIVERIES, AND CULTIVATION PROHIBITED

Note
*       Sections from the Codified Ordinances of the County of Orange have been adopted by reference. For information on these sections, contact the Office of the City Clerk.

 
Chapter 5.02 REGULATION OF STREET VENDING ACTIVITIES
Note
*       Prior ordinance history: Ord. 91-15.

 

5.02.010 Definitions.
        For the purposes of this Chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this Chapter are defined as follows:

        “Commercial vehicle” means a vehicle maintained for the transportation of persons for hire, compensation or profit, or designed, used or maintained primarily for the transportation of property. Passenger vehicles which are not used for the transportation of persons for hire, compensation or profit are not commercial vehicles.

        “Driver” means and includes every person who drives or is in actual charge and control of any vehicle or nonmotorized device from which vending takes place.

        “Goods or merchandise” includes items and products of every kind and description, including all food, produce and beverage items.

        “Highway” means a way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel.

        “Nonmotorized device” means any device moved exclusively by human power, including but not limited to, any pushcart, wagon, bicycle, tricycle or other wheeled container or conveyance.

        “Owner” means and includes every person having legal title to any vehicle, commercial vehicle or nonmotorized device from which vending takes place.

        “Person” means any natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation or other entity of any kind or nature.

        “Vehicle” means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved or drawn upon a highway, excepting a device moved exclusively by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.

        “Vend” or “vending” means the sale or offering for sale of any goods or merchandise to the public from a vehicle, commercial vehicle or nonmotorized device.

        “Vendor” means any person who engages in the act of vending from a vehicle, commercial vehicle or nonmotorized device or who drives or otherwise operates any such vehicle or nonmotorized device for the purpose of vending therefrom. (Amended by Ord. 96-09, 6/25/96)

 

5.02.020 Permit Process.
        It is unlawful for any person to engage in the act of vending within the City unless that person first obtains a vendor permit from the City and complies with all other provisions of this Chapter. Any person desiring to vend within the City shall first submit an application for a vendor permit. A nonrefundable processing fee and annual vendor permit fee to be set by City Council resolution shall be submitted with the application. Such application shall include, but not be limited to, the following information:

        (a)    Name;

        (b)    Applicant’s height, weight, color of eyes and hair;

        (c)    Written proof that the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age;

        (d)    A copy of the applicant’s State of California driver’s license or State of California-issued identification card;

        (e)    Current home address of applicant;

        (f)    The previous home addresses of applicant, if any, for the period of five (5) years immediately prior to date of application;

        (g)    Business, occupation and/or employment history of applicant for the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of application;

        (h)    Two (2) sets of fingerprints taken by the Orange County Sheriff’s Department;

        (i)     Two (2) prints of a recent passport-size photograph of applicant;

        (j)     The name and address of the owner of the vehicle, commercial vehicle or nonmotorized device to be used for vending;

        (k)    Any criminal convictions or offenses within the past ten (10) years;

        (1)    Any violations of this Chapter of this Code within the past year;

        (m)   The make, model and license plate number of all vehicles or commercial vehicles which will be used by the vendor;

        (n)    A written description and photograph of all nonmotorized devices which will be used by the vendor;

        (o)    A written description of the food, goods and/or merchandise proposed to be sold by the vendor;

        (p)    Such other information as may be reasonably required by the City;

        (q)    A statement in writing by the applicant that he or she certifies under penalty of perjury that the foregoing information contained in the application is true and correct, said statement being duly dated;

        (r)    Authorization for the City and its agents and employees to seek information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in the application.

        Upon receipt of a fully completed application for a vendor permit and the applicable fees, the City shall review the information and conduct a criminal background check for each vendor listed in the application. (Amended by Ord. 96-09, 6/25/96)

 

5.02.030 Permit Approval.
        The vendor permit shall be approved, conditionally approved or denied by the City Manager or his or her designee based on whether the following criteria have been met:

        (a)    Payment of all applicable fees;

        (b)    Receipt and approval by the City Attorney of certificates of insurance of at least five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) combined single limit, certifying as to adequate liability insurance for the specific vending business which the vendor will work for or owns, including coverage for all individuals, property and vehicles to be used in the vending. If a vendor will not be using a vehicle or commercial vehicle to vend, then the certificate of insurance will not be required;

        (c)    A finding that the vendor has not been found guilty or pled no contest to any of the following within the past five (5) years: a crime of moral turpitude; a drug-related misdemeanor or felony, including but not limited to, the sale of a controlled substance; the sale, distribution or display of obscene matter; indecent exposure; selling or disposing of lottery tickets; gambling; bookmaking; or illegal use of food stamps;

        (d)    A finding that, within the past year, the vendor has not had a vendor permit revoked or been found guilty of a violation of this Chapter;

        (e)    Accurate completion of the application.

        The decision of the City Manager may be appealed pursuant to Sections 2.04.100 through 2.04.130 of this Code.

        If the vendor permit application is approved, the City shall issue a vendor permit and vendor identification card to each vendor. The vendor identification card shall include a photograph of the vendor. The vendor permit and vendor identification card will be valid for a period of one (1) year and must be renewed on or before the one (1) year anniversary of the issuance of the permit if the vendor wishes to continue vending in the City.

        Any person found to have misrepresented any information on the application will not be eligible to apply for a vendor permit for a period of one (1) year. (Amended by Ord. 96-09, 6/25/96)

 

5.02.040 Vendor Regulations.
        (a)    All vendors vending fruits, vegetables, ice cream or other foodstuffs shall be in possession of a valid Orange County Health Inspection Sticker. If such foodstuffs are being vended from a vehicle or commercial vehicle, the sticker shall be affixed to the lower right side of the windshield of the vehicle or commercial vehicle and be clearly visible and legible. If such foodstuffs are being vended from a nonmotorized vehicle, the sticker shall be clearly displayed in a prominent location.

        (b)    While vending, each vendor who operates or vends from a vehicle or commercial vehicle shall have on his or her person a current valid State of California driver’s license or State of California identification card which he or she shall make available for inspection by law enforcement officials upon request.

        (c)    Each vendor shall wear his or her vendor identification card issued by the City in a visible position upon his or her person at all times while vending.

        (d)    Each vendor shall comply with all requirements of state law relating to the collection of applicable sales tax on any food, goods or merchandise sold within the City of Dana Point.

        (e)    Vendors may only vend between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. (Amended by Ord. 96-09, 6/25/96)

 

5.02.050 Prohibited Conduct.
        (a)    It is unlawful for any person to vend from any nonmotorized device or operate any nonmotorized device for vending purposes while parked, stopped or standing upon any public street, highway, alley, sidewalk or parkway in the City.

        (b)    It is unlawful for any person to vend from any vehicle or commercial vehicle unless the driver of such vehicle or commercial vehicle has brought such vehicle to a complete stop and lawfully parked adjacent to a curb. Such vehicle or commercial vehicle shall be deemed to not be lawfully parked for purposes of this Chapter if it is parked in any of the following locations:

        (1)    Within an intersection;

        (2)    On a crosswalk;

        (3)    Within an area designated as “no parking” by either signage or a curb painted red;

        (4)    Within fifteen (15) feet of the driveway entrance to a fire station;

        (5)    In front of a public or private driveway;

        (6)    On a sidewalk;

        (7)    Alongside or opposite any street or highway excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;

        (8)    On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped, parked or standing at the curb or edge of a highway;

        (9)    Alongside curb space designated for the loading and unloading of bus passengers;

        (10)  Upon a bridge;

        (11)  In front of that portion of a curb which has been cut down, lowered or constructed to provide wheelchair access and which has been designated as such by either signage or red paint on the curb.

        (c)    It is unlawful for any person to vend from a vehicle while parked, stopped or standing upon any public street, highway, alley, sidewalk or parkway:

        (1)    Before the hour of 7:00 a.m. or after the hour of 7:00 p.m.;

        (2)    Within five hundred (500) feet of any school property;

        (3)    In any manner that impedes the flow of traffic;

        (4)    In any manner that impedes the flow of pedestrians on any sidewalk;

        (5)    Without clearly displaying the vendor identification card on the vehicle so that it is visible from the public right-of-way.

        (d)    It is unlawful to engage in vending without first obtaining a vendor permit from the City.

 

        (e)    It is unlawful for any vendor or owner to drive or cause to be driven any vehicle or commercial vehicle used for vending which is in a defective, unsafe or unsanitary condition. Every vehicle or commercial vehicle used for vending shall be subject to inspection by any officer of the City at all times during its operation. (Amended by Ord. 96-09, 6/25/96)

 

5.02.060 Vending on Private Property.
        No vending shall be allowed on private property unless a separate permit is first obtained from the City and such vehicle, commercial vehicle or nonmotorized device is otherwise being operated in compliance with this Chapter and any other applicable state or local laws, including the City’s zoning regulations. (Amended by Ord. 96-09, 6/25/96)

 

5.02.070 Remedies for Violation.
        In addition to any other penalties of law, any vendor found to be in violation of this Chapter or who has been convicted or pled no contest to any of the violations outlined in Section 5.02.030(c) shall be subject to the following:

        (a)    Revocation of the current vendor permit and vendor identification card.

        (b)    Requirement that the vendor discontinue vending and vacate the area.

        (c)    Should any vendor fail to discontinue vending at the direction of any officer of the City, all property associated with the vendor’s operation shall be impounded at the vendor’s cost. In the event that property has been seized, said property will be held until all financial obligations related to impound costs and any other legally imposed fees, fines or costs have been met. (Amended by Ord. 96-09, 6/25/96)

 

5.02.080 Appeal of Revocation of Vendor Permit.
        In the event of the revocation of a vendor permit, the permittee shall have the right to appeal such revocation to the City Council pursuant to Sections 2.04.100 through 2.04.130 of this Code. In the event the revocation is upheld, the permittee shall not be eligible to apply for a new vendor permit for a period of one (1) year from the date of revocation. (Amended by Ord. 96-09, 6/25/96)

 

5.02.090 Violation—Penalty.
        Any person or persons who shall violate the provisions of this Chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to punishment in accordance with Section 1.01.220 of this Code. Each and every day during any portion of which the provisions of this Chapter are violated shall constitute a separate offense and may be punished accordingly. (Amended by Ord. 96-09, 6/25/96)

Chapter 5.03 REGULATION OF SIDEWALK VENDORS
5.03.010 Purpose.
        (a)    The purpose of this chapter is to establish a permitting and regulatory program for sidewalk vendors that complies with Senate Bill 946 (Chapter 459, Statutes 2018). The provisions of this chapter allow the City to encourage small business activities by removing total prohibitions on portable food stands and certain forms of solicitation while still permitting regulation and enforcement of unpermitted sidewalk vending activities to protect the public’s health, safety and welfare.

        (b)    The City Council hereby finds that to promote the public’s health, safety and welfare, restrictions on sidewalk vending are necessary to:

        (1)    Ensure no unreasonable interference with the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic including ingress into, or egress from, any residence, public building, or place of business, or from the street to the sidewalk, by persons exiting or entering parked or standing vehicles; and

        (2)    Provide reasonable access for the use and maintenance of sidewalks, pathways, poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, hydrants, water valves, manholes, storm drains, catch basins, firefighting apparatus, mailboxes or other utilities or appurtenances, as well as access to locations used for public transportation services; and

        (3)    Reduce exposure to the City for personal injury or property damage claims and litigation; and

        (4)    Ensure sidewalk vending activities occur only in locations where such activities would not restrict sidewalk and pathway access and enjoyment to all users, particularly those with disabilities.

        (c)    This Chapter shall not apply to the following:

        (1)    The sale of agriculture products on the site where the product is grown;

        (2)    Vending from food trucks and other motorized vehicles on public streets or alleys in accordance with Chapter 5.02 of this Code; or

        (3)    Vendors under contract for City-sponsored and/or City-approved special events, including, but not limited to, a certified farmers’ market, swap meet, street fairs, parades, festivals and outdoor concerts. (Added by Ord. 19-02, 5/7/19)

 

5.03.020 Definitions.
        As used in this chapter, the following terms and phrases shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this part, unless the context in which they are used clearly requires otherwise. If a term or phrase is not defined in this part, or elsewhere in this code, the most common dictionary definition is presumed to be correct.

        (a)    “Alcohol” and “alcoholic beverage” shall have the same meaning as defined in Section 13.04.020 of this code, or any successor section.

        (b)    “Cannabis” means the substances defined in Section 5.40.010 of this code, or any successor section.

        (c)    “Certified farmers’ market” means a location operated in accordance with Chapter 10.5 (commencing with Section 47000) of Division 17 of the Food and Agricultural Code and any regulations adopted pursuant to that chapter, or any successor chapter.

        (d)    “Curb face” means the vertical or sloping surface on the roadway side of the curb.

        (e)    “Emergency vehicle access” means the roadway path or other surface that provides police or fire safety vehicular access from the dispatched point of origin to a facility, building, parcel, park or portion thereof. Emergency vehicle access includes, but is not limited to, fire lanes, public and private streets, parking lot lanes, access roadways, and walkways.

        (f)    “Food” means any item provided in Health and Safety Code Section 113781, or any successor section.

        (g)    “Hearing officer” means an impartial individual designated by the City Manager to determine appeals pursuant to and in accordance with Section 5.03.080.

        (h)    “Heating element” means any device used to create heat for food preparation.

        (i)     “Merchandise” means any item(s) that can be sold and immediately obtained from a sidewalk vendor which is not considered food. Items for rent shall not be considered merchandise.

        (j)     “Park” means any area dedicated or established as a public park, including, without limitation, active and passive parks.

        (k)    “Pathway” means a paved path or walkway for pedestrian travel, other than a sidewalk.

        (l)     “Person” means and includes all domestic and foreign corporations, associations, syndicates, joint stock corporations, partnerships of every kind, clubs, business or common law trusts, societies, and individuals transacting and carrying on any business in the City.

        (m)   “Pocket park” means any park located in residential neighborhoods smaller than or equal to thirty thousand (30,000) square feet. These parks are situated adjacent to individual private residences.

        (n)    “Public property” means all property owned or controlled by the City, including, but not limited to, alleys, parks, pathways, streets, parking lots, sidewalks, and walking trails.

        (o)    “Residential” means any area zoned exclusively as residential in Title 9 of this code, including without limitation RSF 2, RSF 3, RSF 4, RSF 7, RSF 8, and RSF 12 zoning districts and specific plan areas.

        (p)    “Roaming sidewalk vendor” means a sidewalk vendor who moves from place-to-place and stops only to complete a transaction.

        (q)    “Sexually-oriented material” means the material defined in Section 5.32.110(l) of this Code, or any successor section.

        (r)    “Sidewalk” means that portion of a highway, other than the roadway, set apart by curbs, barriers, markings or other delineation for pedestrian travel.

        (s)    “Sidewalk vending receptacle” means a pushcart, stand, display, wagon, showcase, rack, or non-motorized conveyance used for sidewalk vending activities. “Sidewalk vending receptacle” shall not include pedal driven carts.

        (t)     “Sidewalk vendor” or “vendor” means a person(s) who sells food or merchandise from a sidewalk vending receptacle or from one’s person, upon a public sidewalk or pathway.

        (u)    “Sidewalk vendor activities” or “sidewalk vending” or “sidewalk vending activities” mean actions that qualify a person as a sidewalk vendor or actions done in anticipation of becoming a sidewalk vendor such as, but not limited to, installation, placement, or maintenance of any sidewalk vendor receptacles.

        (v)    “Special event” means any temporary permitted event approved by the City, including those permitted in accordance with Section 9.39.070.

        (w)   “Stationary sidewalk vendor” means a sidewalk vendor who vends from a fixed location.

        (x)    “Street” means a way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel.

        (y)    “Swap meet” means a location operated in accordance with Article 6 (commencing with Section 21660) of Chapter 9 of Division 8 of the Business and Professions Code, and any regulations adopted pursuant to that Chapter, or any successor Chapter.

        (z)    “Tobacco” shall mean any preparation of the nicotine-rich leaves of the tobacco plant, which are cured by a process of drying and fermentation for use in smoking, chewing, absorbing, dissolving, inhaling, snorting, sniffing, or ingesting by any other means into the body.

        (aa)  “Tobacco paraphernalia” shall mean any paraphernalia, equipment, device, or instrument that is primarily designed or manufactured for the smoking, chewing, absorbing, dissolving, inhaling, snorting, sniffing, or ingesting by any other means into the body of tobacco, tobacco products, or other controlled substances as defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 11054 et seq. Items or devices classified as tobacco paraphernalia include, but are not limited to, the following: pipes, punctured metal bowls, bongs, water bongs, electric pipes, e-cigarettes, e-cigarette juice, buzz bombs, vaporizers, hookahs, and devices for holding burning material. Lighters and matches shall be excluded from the definition of tobacco paraphernalia.

        (bb)  “Tobacco product” shall mean any product in leaf, flake, plug, liquid, or any other form, containing nicotine derived from the tobacco plant, or otherwise derived, which is intended to enable human consumption of the tobacco or nicotine in the product, whether smoked, chewed, absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested by any other means. (Added by Ord. 19-02, 5/7/19)

 

5.03.030 Permit Required.
        (a)    Permit Required. No person, either for himself/herself or any other person, shall engage in any sidewalk vendor activities within the City without first applying for and receiving a permit from the City Manager, or designee, in accordance with this Chapter.

        (b) Application. A written application for a sidewalk vendor permit shall be filed with the City Manager, or designee, on a form provided by the City and shall contain the following information:

        (1)    The name, address, and telephone number of the person applying to become a sidewalk vendor;

        (2)    lf the sidewalk vendor is an agent of an individual, company, partnership, or corporation, the name and business address of the principal;

        (3)    The California driver’s license or identification number, individual taxpayer identification number, or municipal identification number (which shall not be available to the public for inspection, is confidential, and shall not be disclosed except as required to administer the permit or comply with a State law or State or Federal court order);

        (4)    The name, address, and telephone number of the person who will be in charge of any roaming sidewalk vendors, sidewalk vending activity and/or be responsible for the person(s) working at the sidewalk vending receptacle;

        (5)    The name, address, and telephone number of all persons that will be employed as roaming sidewalk vendors or at a sidewalk vending receptacle;

        (6)    The number of sidewalk vending receptacles the sidewalk vendor will operate within the City under the permit;

        (7)    Whether the vendor intends to operate as a stationary sidewalk vendor or a roaming sidewalk vendor;

        (8)    The day(s) and hours of operation the stationary sidewalk vendor intends to operate at such location(s);

        (9)    The location(s) in the City where the stationary sidewalk vendor intends to operate;

        (10)  The dimensions of the sidewalk vendor’s sidewalk vending receptacle(s), including a picture of each sidewalk vending receptacle operating under the permit;

        (11)  lf the sidewalk vendor proposes to be a stationary sidewalk vendor, a description or site plan map of the proposed location(s) where vending will take place, showing that the stationary sidewalk vending location maintains a minimum of thirty-six (36) inches of accessible route area, in compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act;

        (12)  Whether the sidewalk vendor will be selling food, merchandise, or both;

        (13)  If the sidewalk vendor is selling food, a description of the type of food to be sold, whether such foods are prepared on site, and whether the vendor requires a heating element to prepare the food;

        (14)  If the vendor is selling merchandise, a description of the merchandise to be sold;

        (15)  A copy of the health permit required for any sidewalk vendors selling food, as required by Chapter 6.30.012 of this Code, or any successor chapter;

        (16)  Proof of his or her possession of a valid California Department of Tax and Fee Administration seller’s permit, which shall be maintained during the pendency of the sidewalk vendor’s permit;

        (17)  An acknowledgment that the sidewalk vendor will comply with all other generally applicable local, State, and Federal laws;

        (18)  A certification that, to his or her knowledge and belief, the information contained within the application is true and correct;

        (19)  An agreement by the sidewalk vendor to defend, indemnify, release and hold harmless the City, its City Council, boards, commissions, officers and employees from and against any and all claims, demands, obligations, damages, actions, causes of action, suits, losses, judgments, fines, penalties, liabilities, costs and expenses (including without limitation, attorney’s fees, disbursements and court costs) of every kind and nature whatsoever which may arise from or in any manner relate (directly or indirectly) to the permit or the vendor’s sidewalk vending activities. This indemnification shall include, but not be limited to, damages awarded against the City, if any, costs of suit, attorneys’ fees, and other expenses incurred in connection with such claim, action, or proceeding whether incurred by the permittee, City, and/or the parties initiating or bringing such proceeding;

        (20)  An acknowledgement that the sidewalk vendor’s use of public property is at their own risk, the City does not take any steps to ensure public property is safe or conducive to the sidewalk vending activities, and the sidewalk vendor uses public property at his or her own risk;

        (21)  An acknowledgment by the sidewalk vendor that he or she will obtain and at all times during the duration of the permit, maintain any insurance of such types and in such amounts as required by the City’s Risk Manager;

        (22)  An acknowledgment that at least four (4) feet in width shall be maintained outside the vending receptacle and any customers acquiring food or merchandise;

        (23)  An acknowledgment that the vendor will relocate if any public agency or emergency personnel need to access facilities/appurtenances in the area where the vendor is operating when notified; and

        (24)  Any other relevant information required by the City Manager.

        (c)    Application and Permit Fees. Each application for a sidewalk vendor permit shall be accompanied by an application fee as established by resolution of the City Council. The application and permit is only applicable to the individual(s) named on the application. If said permit is approved, it shall not be necessary for the permittee to obtain a City business license to carry on the activities authorized by said permit, unless such permittee maintains a permanent place of business within the City. (Added by Ord. 19-02, 5/7/19)

 

5.03.040 Issuance of Permit.
        (a)    Within thirty (30) calendar days of receiving a complete application determined at the sole discretion of the City Manager or designee, the City Manager may issue a sidewalk vendor permit, with appropriate conditions, as provided for herein, if he or she finds based on all of the relevant information that:

        (1)    The conduct of the sidewalk vendor will not unduly interfere with traffic or pedestrian movement, or tend to interfere with or endanger the public peace or rights of nearby residents to the quiet and peaceable enjoyment of their property, or otherwise be detrimental to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare;

        (2)    The conduct of the sidewalk vendor will not unduly interfere with normal governmental or City operations, threaten to result in damage or detriment to public property, or result in the City incurring costs or expenditures in either money or personnel not reimbursed in advance by the vendor;

        (3)    The conduct of such sidewalk vending activity will not constitute a fire hazard, and all proper safety precautions will be taken;

        (4)    The conduct of such sidewalk vending activity will not require the diversion of police officers to properly police the area of such activity as to interfere with normal police protection for other areas of the City;

        (5)    The sidewalk vendor has paid all previous administrative fines, completed all community service, and completed any other alternative disposition associated in any way with a previous violation of this Chapter;

        (6)    The sidewalk vendor has not had a permit revoked within the same calendar year;

        (7)    The sidewalk vendor’s application contains all required information;

        (8)    The sidewalk vendor has not made a materially false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of fact to the City in the application process;

        (9)    The sidewalk vendor has satisfied all the requirements of this Chapter;

        (10)  The sidewalk vendor has paid all applicable fees as set by City Council resolution;

        (11)  The sidewalk vendor’s sidewalk vending receptacle and proposed activities conform to the requirements of this Chapter;

        (12)  The sidewalk vendor has adequate insurance to protect the City from liability associated with the sidewalk vendor’s activities, including the naming of the City as an additional insured, as determined by the City’s Risk Manager; and

        (13)  The vendor has satisfactorily provided all information requested by the City Manager to consider the vendor’s application.

        (b)    A sidewalk vendor permit is non-transferable. Any change in ownership or operation of a sidewalk vendor or sidewalk vending receptacle requires a new permit under this Chapter.

        (c)    All permits issued under this chapter, expire one (1) year from the date they were issued. (Added by Ord. 19-02, 5/7/19)

 

5.03.050 Operating Conditions.
        All sidewalk vendors are subject to the following operating conditions when conducting sidewalk vending activities:

        (a)    All food and merchandise shall be stored either inside or affixed to the sidewalk vendor receptacle or carried by the sidewalk vendor. Food and merchandise shall not be stored, placed, or kept on any public property. If affixed to the sidewalk vendor receptacle, the overall space taken up by the sidewalk vendor receptacle shall not exceed the size requirements provided in this section.

        (b)    The sidewalk vendor permit shall be displayed conspicuously at all times on the sidewalk vending receptacle or the sidewalk vendor’s person. If multiple sidewalk vendors are staffing a sidewalk vendor receptacle or working as roaming sidewalk vendors, each person shall wear their permit on their person in a conspicuous manner.

        (c)    Sidewalk vendors shall not leave their sidewalk vending receptacle unattended to solicit business for their sidewalk vending activities. Sidewalk vending receptacles shall not be stored on public property and shall be removed when not in active use by a vendor.

        (d)    All sidewalk vendors shall allow a City police officer, firefighter, life safety services officer, or code enforcement officer, at any time, to inspect their sidewalk vending receptacle for compliance with the size requirements of this chapter and to ensure the safe operation of any heating elements used to prepare food.

        (e)    Sidewalk vending receptacles shall not exceed a total height of three (3) feet, a total width of three (3) feet, and a total length of three (3) feet.

        (f)    No sidewalk vending receptacle shall be motorized or pedal-driven.

        (g)    If a sidewalk vending receptacle requires more than one (1) person to conduct the sidewalk vending activity, all sidewalk vendors associated with the sidewalk vending receptacle shall be within five (5) feet of the sidewalk vending receptacle when conducting sidewalk vending activities.

        (h)    Sidewalk vendors that sell food shall maintain a trash container in or on their sidewalk vending receptacle and shall not empty their trash into public trashcans. The size of the vendor’s trash container shall be taken into account when assessing the total size limit of a sidewalk vending receptacle.

        (i)     Sidewalk vendors shall not leave any location without first picking up, removing, and disposing of all trash or refuse from their operation.

        (j)     Sidewalk vendors shall maintain the vending location in a clean, orderly, and sanitary condition.

        (k)    Sidewalk vendors shall maintain a minimum four (4) foot clear accessible path free from obstructions, including sidewalk vending receptacles and customer queuing area.

        (l)     Sidewalk vendors shall comply with the noise standards provided in Chapter 11.10 of this code, and any successor chapters.

        (m)   Sidewalk vendors shall not approach persons to sell food or merchandise and shall not interfere in any way with anyone engaged in an activity to sell food or merchandise.

        (n)    Sidewalk vendors shall not vend to or otherwise conduct transactions with persons in moving vehicles or vehicles illegally parked or stopped.

        (o)    Sidewalk vendors shall immediately clean up any food, grease or other fluid or item related to sidewalk vending activities that falls on public property. (Added by Ord. 19-02, 5/7/19)

 

5.03.060 Prohibited Activities and Locations.
        (a)    Sidewalk vendors shall comply with all operating conditions, including those conditions set forth in Section 5.30.050.

        (b)    All sidewalk vendors, regardless of whether a roaming sidewalk vendor or stationary sidewalk vendor, are prohibited from conducting sidewalk vending activities between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. daily. In residential areas, all stationary sidewalk vending is prohibited. In residential areas, roaming sidewalk vending activity is prohibited between the hours of 6:00 p.m. or sunset, whichever is earlier, and 9:00 a.m. of the following day, Monday through Saturday, inclusive, and all day on Sundays and federal holidays.

        (c)    Sidewalk vendors shall not engage in any of the following activities:

        (1)    Renting merchandise to customers;

        (2)    Displaying merchandise or food that is not available for immediate sale;

        (3)    Selling of sexually-oriented material, tobacco, tobacco products or paraphernalia, cannabis, or alcohol;

        (4)    Using an open flame on or within any sidewalk vending receptacle;

        (5)    Using sound amplification equipment, music or live entertainment in conjunction with any sidewalk vending activity, including, but not limited to, the use of bells, whistles and horns or bright/flashing lights;

        (6)    Using free standing signs in conjunction with any sidewalk vending activities;

        (7)    Continuing to offer food or merchandise for sale, following, or accompanying any person who has been offered food or merchandise after the person has asked the vendor to leave or after the person has declined the offer to purchase food or merchandise;

        (8)    Knowingly making false statements or misrepresentations during the course of offering food or merchandise for sale;

        (9)    Blocking or impeding the path of the person(s) being offered food or merchandise to purchase;

        (10)  Making any statements, gesture, or other communication which a reasonable person in the situation of the person(s) being offered food or merchandise to purchase would perceive to be a threat and which has a reasonable likelihood to produce in the person(s) a fear that the threat will be carried out; and

        (11)  Touching the person(s) being offered to purchase food or merchandise without that person(s)’ consent.

        (d)    Sidewalk vendors shall not engage in sidewalk vending activities at the following locations:

        (1)    Within twelve (12) inches of any curb face on all roads;

        (2)    Within fifteen (15) feet of any entrance or exit to a building, structure or facility;

        (3)    On any designated emergency vehicle access way;

        (4)    Any public property that does not meet the definition of a sidewalk or pathway including without limitation any alley, park, street, open space trail, roadway or parking lot;

        (5)    Within two hundred (200) feet of an area designated for a temporary special permit issued by the City, during the limited duration of the temporary special permit. If the City provides any notice, business interruption mitigation, or other rights to affected businesses or property owners under the City’s temporary special permit, such notice will also be provided to any sidewalk vendors specifically permitted to operate in the area, if applicable;

        (6)    On any private property without the express written consent of the owner or lessee of the property;

        (7)    Within fifty (50) feet of another sidewalk vendor;

        (8)    Within two hundred (200) feet of a school, a place of worship, or a child day-care facility;

        (9)    Within two hundred (200) feet of a permitted certified farmers’ market or swap meet during the limited operating hours of that certified farmers’ market or swap meet;

        (10)  On sidewalks or pathways with a paved dimension less than ten (10) feet in width;

        (11)  Within twenty-five (25) feet of a:

        (A)   Fire hydrant,

        (B)   Curb which has been designated as yellow or red zone, or a bus zone,

        (C)   Automated teller machine,

        (D)   Driveway, alley, or street corner; crosswalk or utility box,

        (E)   Trash or recycling receptacles, bike racks, benches, bus/trolley stops or similar public use items,

        (F)    Public art objects, items, and displays,

        (G)   Storm drain catch basin,

        (H)   Handicapped parking spaces or access ramps, and

        (I)    Other public utilities;

        (12)  In a location that would violate provisions of this code relating to visibility requirements for streets, alleys, driveways, and intersections;

        (13)  In a location that would block access to play equipment, playing fields or park amenities;

        (14)  For stationary sidewalk vendors, at any park where the City has signed an agreement for concessions that exclusively permits the sale of food or merchandise by a concessionaire;

        (15)  In pocket parks located in residential areas. These parks are small by design and any vending or commercial activity in them prevents the public from enjoying the natural resources and recreational opportunities in the pocket parks. A prohibition on sidewalk (and all other) vending in these pocket parks will prevent an undue concentration of commercial activity that unreasonably interferes with the scenic and natural character of the park. These parks are situated adjacent to individual residences, and sidewalk vending activity will result in increased traffic, noise, and crowding, resulting in health, welfare, and safety issues;

        (16)  In Memorial Park. Such restriction is necessary to ensure the public’s use and enjoyment of the natural resources and recreational activities provided by this historical park. Visitors use this park as an escape from commercial activity, and sidewalk vending activities will cause congestion and commercial activity in direct contravention of the park’s purpose. This restriction is necessary to prevent an undue concentration of commercial activity that unreasonably interferes with the scenic and natural character of Memorial Park;

        (17)  On the Pacific Coast Highway Pedestrian Bridge. Such restriction is necessary to ensure the public’s safe use and enjoyment of the bridge. The public use the bridge for safe passage over PCH and sidewalk vending activities will cause congestion and commercial activity in direct contravention with its purpose. This restriction prevents commercial activity that unreasonably interfere with its use;

        (18)  On any sidewalk with a gradient in excess of ten percent (10%);

        (19)  Within two hundred (200) feet of any public safety facility, including, without limitation, police stations, fire stations, and lifeguard towers;

        (20)  Within twenty-four (24) inches of a parallel parking space, measured from curb face or edge of pavement;

        (21)  On any sidewalk where vending equipment and queuing patrons would reduce clearance to less than four (4) feet;

        (22)  On any sidewalk where vending equipment and queuing patrons would restrict access requirements under the Americans with Disabilities Act; and

        (23)  On any sidewalk where vending equipment and queuing patrons would jeopardize the fire or life safety of any person.

        (e)    Sidewalk vending receptacles shall not touch, lean against or be affixed at any time to any building or structure, including, but not limited to lampposts, parking meters, mailboxes, traffic signals, fire hydrants, benches, bus shelters, newsstands, trashcans, traffic signs, utility boxes, traffic barriers, or any other public utilities. (Added by Ord. 19-02, 5/7/19)

 

5.03.070 Penalties.
        (a)    Violations of this chapter shall not be prosecuted as infractions or misdemeanors and shall only be punished by the following administrative fine and rescission provisions.

        (b)    Any violation of this chapter may be punished by:

        (1)    An administrative fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first violation;

        (2)    An administrative fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second violation within one (1) year of the first violation; and

        (3)    An administrative fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each additional violation within one (1) year of the first violation.

        (c)    If a sidewalk vendor violates any portion of this chapter and cannot present the citing officer with a proof of a valid permit, the sidewalk vendor may be punished by:

        (1)    An administrative fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for a first violation;

        (2)    An administrative fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a second violation within one (1) year of the first violation; and

        (3)    An administrative fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each additional violation within one (1) year of the first violation.

        (d)    Upon proof of a valid permit issued by the City, the administrative fines set forth in subsection C shall be reduced to the administrative fines set forth in subsection B, or any successor sections.

        (e)    The City Manager, of designee, may rescind a permit issued to a sidewalk vendor for the term of that permit upon the fourth violation or subsequent violations, or for fraud or misrepresentation in the application for the permit. (Added by Ord. 19-02, 5/7/19)

 

5.03.080 Appeals.
        (a)    Decisions to deny an application for a permit or to impose administrative fines may be appealed by any interested person. Appeals shall be heard and determined by the hearing officer.

        (b)    Appeals shall be initiated in writing within fifteen (15) calendar days of the decision or imposition of administrative fine. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a person appealing an administrative fine shall pay the administrative fine as a prerequisite to filing an appeal.

        (c)    Appeals of decisions or administrative fines shall be made in writing to the hearing officer on forms provided by the City. The appeal shall state the facts and basis for the appeal.

        (d)    Appeals of a decision to deny an application for a permit shall be accompanied by a fee as established by resolution of the City Council.

        (e)    Decisions regarding administrative fines that are appealed shall not become effective until the appeal is resolved.

        (f)    The person requesting the hearing shall be notified of the time and place set for the hearing at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the date of the hearing. The hearing shall be set for a date that is not less than fifteen (15) calendar days from the date that a completed request for administrative hearing is filed in accordance with the above provisions.

        (g)    No hearing shall be held unless and until the fine or penalty has been deposited with the City Clerk or an advance deposit hardship waiver has been issued.

        (h)    The hearing officer shall give notice in writing to the appellant of the time and location of the appeal hearing. At the hearing, the hearing officer shall review the record of the decision or administrative fine and hear testimony of the appellant, if any, the applicant and any other interested party. The appeal shall be reviewed and determined on a de novo basis.

        (1)    If an administrative fine is the subject of an appeal, the hearing officer shall take into consideration the person’s ability to pay the fine. The hearing officer shall provide the person with notice of his or her right to request an ability-to-pay determination and shall make available instructions or other materials for requesting an ability-to-pay determination. The person may request an ability-to-pay determination at or before the hearing or while the administrative fine remains unpaid.

        (2)    If the person meets the criteria described in subsection (a) or (b) of Government Code Section 68632, or any successor section, the hearing officer shall accept, in full satisfaction, twenty percent (20%) of the administrative fine imposed pursuant to this chapter.

        (3)    The hearing officer may allow the person to complete community service in lieu of paying the total administrative fine, may waive the administrative fine, or may offer an alternative disposition.

        (i)     After the hearing, the hearing officer shall affirm, modify or reverse the original decision or administrative fine. When a decision or administrative fine is modified or reversed, the hearing officer shall state the specific reasons for modification or reversal. Decisions on appeals shall be rendered within thirty (30) calendar days of the close of the hearing. The hearing officer shall mail notice of a decision to the appellant. Such notice shall be mailed within five (5) working days after the date of the decision to the appellant. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final. If the person contesting an administrative citation prevails in a challenge to the citation, the City shall within thirty (30) calendar days refund the full amount of the fine or penalty deposited. (Added by Ord. 19-02, 5/7/19)

Chapter 5.04 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES WARNING SIGNS
5.04.060 Legislative Purpose.
        The Surgeon General of the United States has recommended that women who are pregnant, or considering pregnancy, be advised not to drink alcoholic beverages, and be aware of the alcoholic content in anything they eat because alcohol consumption during pregnancy, especially in the early months, can harm the fetus. In order to serve the public health, safety, and welfare, the purpose of this Chapter is to educate the public by requiring that warning signs be placed at all locations where alcoholic beverages are sold to the public within the City. Pursuant to the recently enacted provisions of Proposition 65, (codified at California Health and Safety Code Section 25249.6), require that any person in the course of doing business must provide a clear and reasonable warning prior to exposing any person to a chemical listed by the State of California, pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 25249.8. Alcohol is one of those substances deemed to be applicable to the above-referenced provisions.

 

5.04.061 Definitions.
        The following terms used in this Chapter shall have the meanings indicated below:

        (a)    “Alcoholic Beverages” shall include without limitation, beer, malt liquors, wine, and distilled spirits.

        (b)    “Health Department” shall mean the Orange County Health Care Agency or other agency designated by the City Council.

        (c)    “Health Officer” shall mean the Health Officer for the City of Dana Point, his/her Deputy, or other such person as designated by the City Council.

 

5.04.062 Duty to Post Signs.
        Any person or entity who owns, operates, manages, leases, or rents a premises offering wine, beer, distilled spirits, malt liquors, or other alcoholic beverages for sale, or who dispenses such beverages for consideration to the public, shall cause signs to be posted in compliance with the following:

        (a)    For alcoholic beverages intended for consumption off the premises where sold or distributed at least one (1) notice or sign shall be placed in the retail establishment so as to assure that it is readable and likely to be read either in the retail point of sale or each point of display. Signs or notices placed at the point of display shall be placed no more than ten (10) feet from any display of any alcoholic beverage container in a manner associating the sign or notice with the display.

        (b)    For alcoholic beverages provided for consumption on the premises at tables served by food or beverage persons, at least one (1) notice or sign shall be placed so as to assure that it is readable and likely to be read by the public being served on the premises, or a notice or sign shall be conspicuously displayed at each of the tables.

        (c)    For alcohol sold or distributed through over-the-counter service, at least one (1) notice or sign shall be placed in the retail establishment so that it is likely to be read from all counter locations available to the public.

        (d)    Any sign required to be posted or displayed pursuant to this Section shall bear the following warning message:

 

        “WARNING: Drinking Distilled Spirits, Beer, Coolers, Wine, and Other Alcoholic Beverages May Increase Cancer Risk and During Pregnancy, Can Cause Birth Defects.”

 

5.04.063 Language.
        In the event that twenty-five (25%) percent or more of the public patronizing a premises offering for sale or dispensing, for consideration, wine, beer, or other alcoholic beverages uses a language other than English as a primary language, any sign or notice required under Section 5.04.062 of this Code shall be worded in both English and the primary language or languages involved.

 

5.04.064 Enforcement.
        The Health Officer shall be responsible for enforcing the provisions of this Chapter. The Health Department shall have the authority to adopt reasonable rules and regulations for the implementation of this Chapter, including rules and regulations for alternative signs and placement of required signs.

 

5.04.065 Penalties.
        Any person or persons who shall violate the provisions of this Chapter shall be guilty of an infraction and subject to punishment in accordance with Section 1.01.220(b) of this Code. Each and every day during any portion of which the provisions of this Chapter are violated, shall constitute a separate offense and may be punished accordingly.

 

5.04.066 Sign Availability.
        Warning signs may be obtained, free from charge, from the Health Department. Vendors of alcoholic beverages may also prepare and post signs of their own making meeting the requirements of this Chapter, at their expense. In no event shall the language of the warning sign be altered from that specified in Subsection (d) of Section 5.04.062.

Chapter 5.08 FIRE ALARMS, FALSE ALARMS
5.08.010 Definitions.
        Wherever used within this Chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning set forth below:

        “Alarm” means the giving, signaling, or transmission to the Fire Department, its station(s) or companies or to any officer, or employee thereof, whether by telephone, spoken word, or otherwise, an indication or information to the effect that there is a fire, or other emergency at or near the place indicated by the person, devices, or system giving, signaling, or transmitting such information.

        “Alarm System” means any manual, mechanical, or electrically operated circuits, instruments, and/or devices, when activated emits a sound or transmits alarms, a message, and/or trouble signals for the protection of life and property from heat, smoke, fire, hazardous materials, or medical emergency. Provided, however, that this definition shall not include domestic smoke, fire, or burglar alarm devices whose primary purpose is to awaken, or alert persons on the premises and which emit a light, or sound only within the protected premises.

        “Alarm Business” means the work, occupation, or profession of any person who performs, authorizes, directs, or causes the selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, inspection, repairing, altering, replacement, moving, or installing of any alarm system, including any business that monitors alarms.

        “Alarm Subscriber” means any person who purchases, leases, contracts for, or otherwise obtains an alarm system or the servicing or maintenance of an alarm system.

        “Automatic Communication Device” means any electrical, electronic, or mechanical device capable of being programmed to send a prerecorded message, when activated, over a telephone line or dedicated circuit to a central station.

        “Direct Alarm System” means alarm systems electronically or otherwise connected directly to the emergency response agency from the protected premises.

        “Central Station” means an office to which remote and supervisory signaling circuits are connected, where personnel are in attendance at all times to supervise the circuits and investigate signals.

        “False Alarm” means an alarm necessitating response by the Fire Department where an emergency situation does not exist. This shall include mechanical failure, accidental tripping, misoperation, malfunction, misuse, or neglect of an alarm system.

        “Fire Department” means the Orange County Fire Department. Fire Department includes and also means the Emergency Response Agency. (Added by Ord. No. 91-11, 5/28/91)

 

5.08.012 Alarm Systems, Standards, and Regulations.
        All alarm systems shall meet or exceed the standards established by the Fire Department including National Fire Protection Association Codes 72A and 72C, and such other regulations as may be adopted by the Orange County Board of Supervisors and/or the City Council of the City of Dana Point. All alarm systems, equipment, installations, and repairs and all fire and other emergency drills shall comply with rules and regulations promulgated by the Emergency Response Agency or the Fire Department regulating the times and conditions under which such installations, repairs, tests, or drills may be made. All audible alarm systems shall, after activation, limit the generation of the audible sound to a maximum of fifteen (15) minutes when the system is protecting residential premises, and thirty (30) minutes when an alarm is protecting any other premises. This limitation shall be incorporated into the equipment at the protected premises. Said systems may include an automatic resetting device causing the alarm system to rearm upon automatic shut off. The Director or designee or the Fire Department may exempt any alarm system or kind or type of alarm system from any or all of the requirements of this Chapter if in his/her opinion such system does not create a substantial danger of generating false alarms necessitating a response by an Emergency Response Agency or the Fire Department. (Added by Ord. No. 91-11, 5/28/91)

 

5.08.014 Central Station Permit.
        All central stations or any business which receives signals that an emergency exit at a protected premises and transmits that information to the Emergency Response Agency or the Fire Department shall be required to have a permit from the Fire Department which shall be renewed annually. (Added by Ord. No. 91-11, 5/28/91)

 

5.08.016 Automatic Communication Devices.
        A.    No automatic communication device shall be programmed to the “911” emergency line.

        B.     Direct alarm systems shall not be connected to any Emergency Response Agency or the Fire Department except with the express written permission of the Emergency Response Agency or said Department.

        C.     No person shall lease, maintain, install, or use any alarm system which automatically direct dials the telephone number of the Fire Department. (Added by Ord. No. 91-11, 5/28/91)

 

5.08.018 Responsibilities of Alarm Business and Alarm System Subscribers or Users.
        (a)    Each alarm business shall provide accurate and complete instructions to the alarm system user in the proper use and operation of said system which is provided to the user by that business or which is monitored by that business. Specific emphasis shall be placed on the avoidance of false alarms.

        (b)    The alarm subscriber or user shall maintain the alarm system and equipment in proper working order at all times.

        (c)    When an alarm system has been activated for an alarm subscriber, the alarm business or central station shall arrange for a representative to have the ability to be present at the location of the alarm within one (1) hour after being requested by the Fire Department. The user of an alarm system which is not connected to an alarm business or central station shall designate a person to be available to respond to the protected property within one (1) hour after being requested by the Fire Department. (Added by Ord. No. 91-11, 5/28/91)

 

5.08.020 Alarm Business, Central Station, and False Alarm Service Charges.
        In addition to such other fines or penalties established by law, a false alarm service fee is hereby imposed upon the residential occupants and/or commercial owner(s) and/or operator(s) of the premises wherein a false alarm was made and any Central Station owners and operators who initiated the Fire Department’s response to such premises. The City Council is hereby authorized to set by Resolution the amount of each fee which shall be charged to those city residents who incur false alarm charges and/or penalties and other miscellaneous charges relating to alarm systems and businesses for services provided by the Fire Department. Said fees are hereby imposed effective January 1, 1991, as may be amended by the City Council from time to time. The County of Orange is hereby authorized to administer and take collection and enforcement action as may be necessary on such fees, charges, and/or penalties. (Added by Ord. No. 91-11, 5/28/91)

 

5.08.022 Intentional False Alarms; Penalties.
        No person shall intentionally initiate a false alarm except for purposes of testing an alarm system and then only if made in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Fire Department therefor and after having given the Emergency Response Agency or the Fire Department prior notice thereof. Any person who violates this Section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to punishment in accordance with Section 1.01.220(a) of this Code. (Added by Ord. No. 91-11, 5/28/91)

 

5.08.024 Tampering With or Damaging Alarm Systems.
        It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor, subject to punishment in accordance with Section 1.01.220(a) of this Code, for any person to tamper with, render inoperative, or maliciously damage any alarm system maintained for the purpose of sounding or transmitting alarms excepting alarm systems undergoing approved maintenance or repairs. (Added by Ord. No. 91-11, 5/28/91)

 

5.08.026 Violations and Enforcement.
        Any violations of this Chapter shall be an infraction, subject to punishment in accordance with Section 1.01.220(b) of this Code, unless otherwise noted herein. The provisions of this Chapter may be enforced by the City and the Fire Department. (Added by Ord. No. 91-11, 5/28/91)

Chapter 5.10 REGULATION OF NEWSRACKS ON PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
5.10.010 Purpose and Intent.
        The City Council of the City of Dana Point finds and declares that:

        (a)    The uncontrolled placement of newsracks in public rights-of-way presents an inconvenience and danger to the safety and welfare of persons using such rights-of-way, including pedestrians, persons entering and leaving vehicles and buildings, and persons performing essential utility, traffic control and emergency services.

        (b)    Newsracks located so as to cause an inconvenience or danger to persons using public rights-of-way, and unsightly newsracks located therein, constitute public nuisances.

        (c)    The uncontrolled proliferation of newsracks detracts from the appearance of streets, sidewalks, and adjacent businesses.

        (d)    The uncontrolled placement of newsracks inhibits safe entry and departure of vehicles.

        (e)    The uncontrolled placement of newsracks impairs the vision and distracts the attention of motorists and pedestrians, particularly small children and may cause injury to the person or property of such persons.

        (f)    The placement of newsracks in public rights-of-way adjacent to residential areas detracts from and reduces neighborhood aesthetics and increases the exposure of residents to noise, traffic volume and hazards and congestion.

        (g)    The provisions and prohibitions contained and enacted in this Chapter are in pursuit of and for the purpose of securing and promoting the public safety and general welfare of persons in the City in their use of public rights-of-way through the regulation of placement, appearance, number, size, and servicing of newsracks on the public rights-of-way.

        (h)    It is not the intent of this Chapter to in any way discriminate against, regulate, or interfere with the publication, circulation, distribution, or dissemination of any printed material that is constitutionally protected. (Added by Ord. No. 91-16, 10/22/91)

 

5.10.020 Definitions.
        Whenever the following words and phrases are used in this Chapter, they shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this Section:

        (a)    “Distributor” means the person responsible for placing and maintaining a newsrack in a public right-of-way.

        (b)    “Newsrack” means any self-service or coin-operated box, container, storage unit, or other dispenser installed, used or maintained for the display, sale or distribution of publications.

        (c)    Any pictorial material is “obscene” if all of the following apply:

        (1)    The average person, applying contemporary community standards, would find that it appeals to the prurient interest when the publication or material is considered as a whole; and

        (2)    It depicts, describes or represents in a patently offensive manner, sexual behavior as defined below; and

        (3)    It lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value when the publication or material is considered as a whole.

        (d)    “Parkway” means the area between the sidewalk and curb of a roadway, and where there is no sidewalk, that area between the edge of the traveled roadway and the edge of a public right-of-way. “Parkway” also includes any area within a roadway that is not open to vehicular travel.

        (e)    “Pictorial material” means any material suggesting or conveying a visual image, and includes but is not limited to, a photograph, painting or drawing.

        (f)    “Public right-of-way” means any place of any nature which is dedicated to use by the public for pedestrian and vehicular travel, and includes, but is not limited to, a street, sidewalk, curb, gutter, crossing, intersection, parkway, highway, alley, lane, mall, court, way, avenue, boulevard, road, roadway, viaduct, subway, tunnel, bridge, thoroughfare, park, square, and any other similar public way.

        (g)    “Roadway” means that part of a public right-of-way that is designated and used primarily for vehicular travel.

        (h)    “Sexual behavior” means the patently offensive representation, depiction or description of any of the following:

        (1)    Ultimate sexual acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including without limitation, vaginal intercourse between a male and a female, and anal intercourse, fellatio and cunnilingus between persons regardless of gender;

        (2)    Masturbation, excretory functions and lewd exhibition of genitals;

        (3)    The actual or simulated infliction of pain by one (1) individual upon another, or by an individual upon himself, for the purpose of the sexual gratification or release of either individual, as a result of flagellation, beating, striking or touching of an erogenous zone, including without limitation, the thigh, genitals, buttock, pubic region or, if such person is a female, a breast;

        (4)    Ultimate sexual acts, actual or simulated, between a human being and an animal.

        (i)     “Sidewalk” means that part of a public right-of-way that is designated and ordinarily used for pedestrian travel. (Added by Ord. No. 91-16, 10/22/91)

 

5.10.030 Prohibition.
        No person shall knowingly place, install, use or maintain any newsrack which rests in whole or in part upon, in or on any portion of a public right-of-way or which projects onto, into, or over any part of a public right-of-way except in compliance with the provisions of this Chapter. (Added by Ord. No. 91-16, 10/22/91)

 

5.10.040 Permits.
        (a)    No person shall install or maintain any newsrack which in whole or in part rests upon, in or over any public right-of-way without first obtaining a permit from the City Engineer or his designated representative after providing the following:

        (1)    The location of each newsrack to be installed or maintained in the City by applicant; and

        (2)    The name, address and telephone number of the applicant.

        (b)    No more than one (1) permit shall be required per applicant regardless of the number of newsracks the applicant maintains in the City. However, an amended application for said permit shall be filed with the City Engineer in the event that additional newsracks are installed in the City or removed from the City by the applicant subsequent to the issuing of the original permit by the City.

        (c)    From the above information the City Engineer or his designated representative shall designate locations and shall be guided therein solely by the standards and criteria set forth in this Chapter. Such application may be granted either in whole or in part when more than one (1) location is proposed by the applicant, and in any event, when denial is solely as to location, it shall be without prejudice to amend such application to state a different location or locations.

        (d)    In addition to the permit application, the applicant shall also execute a document, approved as to form by the City Attorney, agreeing to hold the City, its officers, employees and agents, free and harmless from any claim, demand or judgment in favor of any person, arising out of the location of any newsrack located in a public right-of-way. (Added by Ord. No. 91-16, 10/22/91)

 

5.10.050 Standards for Newsracks.
        Any newsrack which rests in whole or in part upon, in or on any portion of a public right-of-way or which projects onto, into or over any part of a public right-of-way shall comply with the standards set forth in this Section.

        (a)    No newsrack shall exceed forty-eight inches in height, thirty inches in width, or twenty-four inches in thickness.

        (b)    No advertising signs or material, other than those dealing with the name of the publication contained within the newsrack, shall be displayed on the outside of the newsrack.

        (c)    Each newsrack shall be equipped with a coin-return mechanism to permit a person using the machine to secure an immediate refund in the event he is unable to receive the publication paid for. The coin-return mechanisms shall be maintained in good working order.

        (d)    Each newsrack shall have affixed to it in a readily visible place so as to be seen by anyone using the newsrack a notice setting forth the name and address of the distributor and the telephone number of a working telephone service to call to report a malfunction, or to secure a refund in the event of a malfunction of the coin-return mechanism, or to give the notices provided for in this Chapter.

        (e)    Each newsrack shall be maintained in a neat and clean condition and in good repair at all times. Specifically, but without limiting the generality of the foregoing, each newsrack shall be serviced and maintained so that:

        (1)    It is reasonably free of dirt and grease;

        (2)    It is reasonably free of chipped, faded, peeling and cracked paint in the visible painted areas thereof;

        (3)    It is reasonably free of rust and corrosion in the visible unpainted metal areas thereof;

        (4)    The clear plastic or glass parts thereof, if any, through which the publications therein are viewed are unbroken and reasonably free of cracks, dents, blemishes and discoloration;

        (5)    The paper or cardboard parts or inserts thereof are reasonably free of tears, peeling or fading; and

        (6)    The structural parts thereof are not broken or unduly misshapen.

        (f)    Newsracks shall have wood grain panels and the mount shall be painted gloss black and all newsracks on a tray shall be the same type.

        (g)    Newsracks which depict matters on their covers which fall under the definition of “harmful matter” as that term is defined in Section 313, Subdivision (a) of the Penal Code of the State of California, and which are located in a public place other than a public place from which minors are excluded, shall have devices which are commonly known as “blinder racks” in front of the material, so that the lower two-thirds of the material is not exposed to view. (Added by Ord. No. 91-16, 10/22/91)

 

5.10.060 Location of Newsracks.
        Any newsrack which rests in whole or in part upon, in, or on any portion of a public right-of-way or which projects onto, into or over any part of a public right-of-way shall be located in accordance with the provisions of this Section:

        (a)    No newsrack shall be located in whole or in part in any roadway.

        (b)    Newsracks shall be located at the rear of the sidewalk farthest from the street or roadway curb (or, if there is no curb, the edge of the roadway) or the wall of a building. Newsracks located near the curb shall be located no less than eighteen (18²) inches nor more than twenty-four (24²) inches from the roadway edge of the curb. Newsracks located adjacent to a building shall be located parallel to and not more than six (6²) inches from the wall thereof. No newsrack shall be located directly in front of any display window of any building abutting a sidewalk or parkway except near the curb. No newsrack shall be located on the sidewalk or parkway directly opposite a newsstand or another newsrack.

        (c)    No newsrack shall be chained, bolted, or otherwise attached to any fixture located in the public right-of-way, except to other newsracks.

        (d)    Newsracks may be placed next to each other, provided that no group of newsracks shall extend for a distance of more than fifteen (15¢) feet, nor include more than five (5) newsracks.

        (e)    No newsrack shall be placed, installed, used or maintained:

        (1)    Within a twenty-five-foot (25¢) sight triangle created by measuring along the curb beginning at the curb return to form a triangle free of any obstructions in excess of thirty (30²) inches in height in accordance with City engineering standard design criteria for sight distance for streets;

        (2)    Within five (5¢) feet of any fire hydrant, fire call box, police call box or other emergency facility;

        (3)    Within five (5¢) feet of the outer end of any bus bench;

        (4)    Within three (3¢) feet ahead or fifteen (15¢) feet to the rear of any sign marking a designated bus stop;

        (5)    At any location whereby the clear space of the passageway of pedestrians is reduced to less than six (6¢) feet;

        (6)    Within three (3¢) feet of or on any public area improved with lawn, flowers, shrubs, trees or other landscaping;

        (7)    Within one (1) city block of any newsrack or group of newsracks which are on the same side of the street, whether or not containing the same issue or edition of the same publication;

        (8)    Within five (5¢) feet of a curb painted blue, pursuant to the provisions of California Vehicle Code Section 21458;

        (9)    Within five hundred (500¢) feet of a school site.

        The provisions contained in Subsection (e) of this Section shall not apply if compliance with the provisions would prohibit the placement of all newsracks on the same side of a street in the same block. (Added by Ord. No. 91-16, 10/22/91)

 

5.10.070 Existing Newsracks.
        Newsracks lawfully in existence on December 31, 1991 shall be made to conform with Section 5.10.050 by January 1, 1993, and with Section 5.10.060 by January 1, 1995, provided, however, that Subsection (e) of Section 5.10.050 shall apply on January 1, 1992. In order to benefit from this Section, a distributor must report the number and location of all existing newsracks by March 1, 1992. The City Engineer shall compile an inventory of such existing newsracks. Such inventory list shall be conclusive as to the location and existence of such newsracks. Thereafter, all such newsracks shall be required to comply with all provisions of this Chapter.

        If, after the amortization periods provided for by this Section, the City Engineer determines that a newsrack or group of newsracks is in violation of Subsection (d) or Paragraph (7) of Subsection (e) of Section 5.10.060, then the City Engineer shall determine which newsrack or newsracks must be removed. In making said determination, the City Engineer shall be guided solely by the following criteria:

        1.     First priority shall be given to newsracks used for the sale of publications which have been adjudicated to be newspapers of general circulation for Orange County or the City of Dana Point, pursuant to the procedure set forth in Division 7, Article 2 of the California Government Code.

        2.     Second priority shall be given to newsracks used for the sale of daily publications (those published on five (5) or more days in a calendar week) which have not been adjudicated to be newspapers of general circulation for Orange County or the City of Dana Point.

        3.     Third priority shall be given to newsracks used for the sale of weekly publications (those published on at least one (1) but less than five (5) days in a calendar week) which have not been adjudicated to be newspapers of general circulation for Orange County or the City of Dana Point.

        4.     All other newsracks shall be given lowest priority. (Added by Ord. No. 91-16, 10/22/91)

 

5.10.080 Applicability in Residential Zones.
        Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter, newsracks shall not be permitted in a public right-of-way adjoining land zoned for residential use. (Added by Ord. No. 91-16, 10/22/91)

 

5.10.090 Display of Obscene Material.
        It is unlawful for any person to knowingly place or maintain any publication or material in newsracks which exposes to public view any pictorial matter that is obscene. (Added by Ord. No. 91-16, 10/22/91)

 

5.10.100 Enforcement.
        Upon a determination by the City Engineer that a newsrack has been installed, used or maintained in violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter, he shall cause an order to be issued to the distributor to correct the offending condition. The order shall be telephoned to the distributor and confirmed by mailing a copy of the order by certified mail, return receipt requested to the distributor at the address shown on the notice required by Section 5.10.050. The order shall specifically describe the offending condition and specify actions necessary to correct it. If the distributor fails to correct properly the offending condition within ten (10) days (excluding Saturdays, Sundays and other legal holidays) after receipt of the order, or file an appeal as permitted under Section 5.10.110, the City Engineer shall cause the offending newsrack to be removed and processed as unclaimed property under applicable provisions of law relating thereto. If the distributor of the offending newsrack cannot be identified, the newsrack shall be removed immediately and processed as unclaimed property under applicable provisions of law. The foregoing provisions are not exclusive, and are in addition to any other penalty or remedy provided by law. (Added by Ord. No. 91-16, 10/22/91)

 

5.10.110 Appeal.
        Any person or entity aggrieved by a finding, determination, notice, order or action taken under the provisions of this Chapter may appeal and shall be advised of his or her right to appeal to the City Manager. An appeal must be perfected within ten (10) working days after receipt of the notice of any decision or action by filing with the City Engineer a letter of appeal briefly stating therein the basis for such appeal. The hearing shall be held on a date no more than ten (10) days after receipt of the letter of appeal. Appellant shall be given at least five (5) days notice of the time and place of the hearing. The City Manager shall give the appellant and any other interested party the reasonable opportunity to be heard, in order to show cause why the determination of the City Engineer should not be upheld. Within five (5) days of the hearing the City Manager shall make a written decision. His decision may be appealed to the City Council by filing a written notice of appeal with the City Clerk within ten calendar days of the date of the decision of the City Manager. Fees for filing an appeal shall be set by resolution of the City Council. (Added by Ord. No. 91-16, 10/22/91)

 

5.10.120 Minor Violations.
        In the case of minor violations of this Chapter that can be corrected on the spot, any city employee, as an alternative to removal of the newsrack, is authorized to correct the violation summarily. (Added by Ord. No. 91-16, 10/22/91)

 

5.10.130 Public Nuisance.
        Any newsrack, or any publication offered for sale or distribution, in violation of this Chapter shall constitute a public nuisance, and may be abated in accordance with applicable provisions of law. (Added by Ord. No. 91-16, 10/22/91)

 

5.10.140 Abandonment.
        In the event a newsrack remains empty for a period of thirty continuous days, the same shall be deemed abandoned, and may be treated in the manner as provided in Section 5.10.100 for newsrack in violation of the provisions of this Chapter. (Added by Ord. No. 91-16, 10/22/91)

 

5.10.150 Violations.
        Any person or corporation who violates any of the provisions of this Chapter is guilty of an infraction except for the fourth or each additional violation of a provision within one (1) year which shall be a misdemeanor. Penalties for a violation of this Chapter shall be as designated in Section 1.01.200. (Added by Ord. No. 91-16, 10/22/91)

Chapter 5.16 TOBACCO VENDING MACHINES PROHIBITED
5.16.010 Findings and Purpose.
        The City Council does hereby find that:

        (a)    Smoking is responsible for the premature deaths of four hundred thirty-four thousand (434,000) Americans each year from lung cancer, heart disease, respiratory illness, and other diseases; secondhand smoke is responsible for an additional fifty-three thousand (53,000) deaths among nonsmokers; and,

        (b)    The U.S. Surgeon General has declared that nicotine is as addictive as cocaine or heroin; no other addictive product or drug, or cancer-causing product or drug is sold through vending machines; and,

        (c)    The U.S. Secretary of Health and Human Services, the U.S. Surgeon General, and the leading voluntary health organizations all recommend the elimination of cigarette vending machines for health reasons; and,

        (d)    Accordingly, the City Council finds that prohibiting the sale of cigarettes through vending machines is essential to protect public health, safety and welfare. (Added by Ord. 93-06, 5/23/93)

 

5.16.012 Definitions.
        The phrase “tobacco vending machine,” as used herein, means any machine or device designed for or used for the vending of cigarettes, cigars, tobacco or tobacco products upon the insertion of coins, bills, trade checks, or slugs. (Added by Ord. 93-06, 5/23/93)

 

5.16.014 Tobacco Vending Machines Prohibited.
        No cigarette or other tobacco product may be sold, offered for sale, or distributed by or from a vending machine or appliance, or any other device designated or used for vending purposes. (Added by Ord. 93-06, 5/23/93)

 

5.16.016 Violations—Penalties.
        It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor subject to punishment in accordance with Section 1.01.200 et seq., of this Code for any person, firm, partnership, corporation, or any other venture to violate any provision of this Chapter. The City Manager and City Attorney shall enforce this Chapter. (Added by Ord. 93-06, 5/23/93)

Chapter 5.20 MASSAGE REGULATIONS
5.20.010 Definitions.
        For the purposes of this Chapter, the words, terms, and phrases set forth in this Section shall have the meanings herein set forth below unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.

        “Acupressure” refers to the practice of applying pressure (by means including, but not limited to, the use of the thumbs or fingertips) to the same discrete points on the body stimulated in acupuncture for the therapeutic purpose (such as the relief of tension or pain).

        “Applicant” means a person or persons submitting an application for a massage establishment permit under this Chapter. “Applicant” includes both the singular and plural.

        “California Massage Therapy Council” means the State-organized non-profit organization created to regulate the massage industry as set forth in Chapter 10.5 of Division 2 of the California Business and Professions Code (commencing with Section 4600, as amended). The California Massage Therapy Council may also be referred to herein as “CAMTC.”

        “Certified Massage Therapist” means any person holding a current and valid State certificate issued by the CAMTC pursuant to California Business and Professions Code Section 4600 et seq., as amended.

        “City” means the City of Dana Point.

        “City Manager” means the City Manager of the City of Dana Point or his or her designee.

        “City Regulatory Officials” means Building and Safety Division, Code Enforcement Division, Fire Department and Police Services, and the County Health Department.

        “Completed application” means an application packet, in the form provided by the City, completed with all required information including, but not limited to, all of the information required under Section 5.20.080 (Exemptions and Exceptions) and containing the verified fingerprints of the applicant. The application shall be completed in the manner given, and not altered in any way by the applicant.

        “Conviction” or “convicted” means a guilty plea or verdict, or a conviction following a plea of nolo contendere, where the time for appeal has elapsed or the judgment of conviction has been affirmed on appeal, irrespective of an order granting probation following that conviction, suspending the imposition of sentence, or of a subsequent order under Section 1203.4 of the Penal Code allowing the applicant to withdraw his or her plea of guilty and to enter a plea of not guilty, or dismissing the accusation or information.

        “Disqualifying conduct” means the occurrence, by any person who establishes, maintains, administers, oversees, manages, operates, works at or proposed to be employed at the subject massage establishment, of any of the following events within ten (10) years immediately preceding the date of filing of the application in question or, in the case of revocation or suspension proceedings, within ten (10) years of the date of notice of hearing pursuant to Section 5.20.240 (Notice of Revocation):

        (a)    A conviction in a court of competent jurisdiction of any of the following:

        (1)    Any infraction, misdemeanor or felony offense that relates directly to the operation of a massage establishment or to the performance of a massage;

        (2)    Any felony that occurred on the premises of a massage establishment;

        (3)    A violation of any provision of law pursuant to which a person is required to register under the provisions of Penal Code Section 290, or conduct in violation of Penal Code Sections 236.1(a), 236.1(c)(2), 186.10(a), 186.10(b), 243.4(e), 266h, 266i, 314, 315, 316, 318, or subsections (a), (b) or (d) of Penal Code Section 647, or an attempt to commit or conspiracy to commit any of the above mentioned offenses, or any other crime involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit, or moral turpitude or when the prosecution accepted a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to a charge of a violation of Penal Code Section 415, 602 or any lesser included or related offense, in satisfaction of, or as a substitute for, any of the previously listed crimes, or any crime committed while engaged in the ownership of a massage establishment or the practice of massage;

        (4)    Any crime specified in Government Code Section 51032;

        (5)    A violation of Health and Safety Code Section 11550 or any offense involving the illegal sale, distribution or possession of a controlled substance specified in Health and Safety Code Sections 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057 or 11058;

        (6)    Conspiracy or attempt to commit any of the aforesaid offenses;

        (7)    Any lesser-included offense of any of the aforesaid offenses;

        (8)    Any offense in a jurisdiction outside the State of California which is the equivalent of any of the aforesaid offenses;

        (9)    The requirement to register under the provisions of California Penal Code Section 290;

        (10)  Being subject to a permanent injunction against the conducting or maintaining of a nuisance pursuant to California Penal Code Sections 11225 through 11235 or any similar provisions of law in a jurisdiction outside the State of California;

        (11)  Being subject to a permanent injunction against the conducting or maintaining of a nuisance pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Sections 11570 through 11587 or any similar provisions in a jurisdiction outside the State of California;

        (12)  Being subject to the denial, non-renewal, suspension, or revocation of any license or permit issued by any State, County, City, or other local government within the United States for the operation of a massage establishment or for the performance of massages, except that denial of license or permit for the operation of a massage establishment shall not be considered if the sole basis for the denial was the prohibition of the use within the zoning or planning district in which the use was proposed to be located;

        (13)  Touching the genitals, pubic regions, anuses, or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areolas, whether or not the same are covered, of oneself or of another person while providing massage services or while within view of a customer or patron of the massage establishment;

        (14)  Exposing the genitals, pubic regions, anuses, or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola of a customer or patron while providing massage services;

        (15)  Exposing the genitals, pubic regions, anuses, or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola of oneself or of another person to view while providing massage services or while within view of a customer or patron of the massage establishment;

        (16)  Allowing a customer or client to masturbate or touch the specified anatomical areas of a massage provider during the course of massage services.

        Per Section 5.20.200 (Management of Massage Establishment Interest) of this Chapter, the owner, operator, and designated manager of the massage establishment shall also be responsible for the conduct of all employees and independent contractors while they are on the establishment premises.

        “Employ,” for purposes of this Chapter, includes contracting with employees and independent contractors.

        “Employee” includes every owner, partner, operator, manager, supervisor, person and worker, whether paid or not, full-time or part-time, who renders personal services of any nature or is otherwise employed or retained in the support of the operation of a massage establishment. For the purposes of this Chapter, the term “employee” includes independent contractors.

        “License” means the license to operate a massage establishment as required by this Chapter.

        “Licensee” means a person who has been duly licensed by the City pursuant to this Chapter as either a massage establishment owner or operator.

        “Manager” means a person who has been designated by an operator pursuant to Section 5.20.200 (Management of Massage Establishment License) to be responsible for the operation of a licensed massage establishment.

        “Massage” or “massage services” means any method of pressure on, or friction against, or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating, or stimulating the external parts of the human body with the hands or with the aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus, or other appliances or devices, with or without such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniment, antiseptic, oil, powder, cream, lotion, ointment, or other similar preparations. The terms “massage” or “massage services” shall not include any act prohibited by this Chapter or by any other applicable law or regulation.

        “Massage establishment” means any establishment having a fixed place of business where any individual, person, firm, association, partnership, corporation, joint venture, limited liability company, or combination of individuals that engages in, conducts, carries on, or permits to be engaged in, conducted, or carried on for consideration, massages, baths, or health treatments involving massages or baths as regular functions. The term “massage” also includes the following acts, businesses, callings, or occupations:

        (a)    Acupressure;

        (b)    Anatomy care;

        (c)    Body wrap;

        (d)    Holistic health center or practitioner;

        (e)    Holistic therapy;

        (f)    Hydro therapy;

        (g)    Public bath;

        (h)    Reflexology;

        (i)     Sauna;

        (j)     Sports massage;

        (k)    Stress management center;

        (l)     Toxic herbal massage; or

        (m)   Massage parlor.

        “Massage provider” means any person who provides massage as an employ of a massage establishment.

        “Material misstatement” means any untrue statement of a material fact in any application or report filed with the City, or the omission of any material fact in any application or report.

        “Operator” means a person who has applied pursuant to Section 5.20.100 (Application for Massage Establishment License) of this Chapter, and who has been issued a license to operate a massage establishment pursuant to Section 5.20.120 (Approval or Denial of Massage Establishment License).

        “Operator’s permit” means the permit required to engage in massage pursuant to this Chapter.

        “Person” means any individual, entity, firm, association, partnership, corporation, joint venture, limited liability company, or combination of individual.

        “Police Services Department” shall mean the Police Services Department of the City of Dana Point, whether under contract or with its own forces.

        “Public bath” means any place open to the public where there is given steam baths; electric lights baths; electric tub baths; shower baths; sponge baths; sunbaths; mineral baths; mud baths; vapor baths; Russian, Swedish, or Turkish baths; or any other type of baths, fomentations, alcohol rubs or any other types of rubs; or giving salt glows or any type of therapy; any public bathing place which has in connection therewith a steam room, hot dry room, plunge, shower bath, or sleeping accommodations; or any public bathing place where there is communal bathing or communal use of spa or whirlpool facilities and a massage service is also performed.

        “Reflexology” is the application of pressure, stretch and movement to the feet and hands of a clothed patron to affect corresponding parts of the body, and is included in the definition of massage.

        “Sauna” means an establishment or place primarily in the business of providing a steam bath or massage services.

        “Sex-oriented merchandise” means sex-oriented implements or paraphernalia, such as, but not limited to: dildos, sex-oriented vibrators, edible underwear, similar sex-oriented devices which are designed or marketed primarily for the stimulation of human genital organs or sadomasochistic activity, lingerie, and condoms.

        “Specified anatomical areas” means and includes any of the following human anatomical areas: genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areolae.

        “Specified sexual activities” means and includes any of the following:

        (a)    The fondling or other erotic touching of any specified anatomical area;

        (b)    Human sex acts, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy;

        (c)    Human masturbation, actual or simulated;

        (d)    The actual or simulated infliction of pain by one (1) human upon another or by an individual upon him or herself, for the purpose of the sexual gratification or release of either individual, as a result of flagellation, beating, striking or touching of an erogenous zone, including, without limitation, specified anatomical areas;

        (e)    Sex acts, actual or simulated, between a human being and an animal, including, but not limited to intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy; or

        (f)    Excretory or urinary functions as part of, or in connection with, any of the activities set forth in subsections (a) through (e) of this definition.

        “State certification” means a valid and current certificate issued by CAMTC pursuant to California Business and Professions Code Section 4600 et seq., as may be amended.

        “Stress management center” means to the degree that such business, calling, or occupation identified above involves any method of massage or massage services as defined above, will still be considered a massage establishment. Such businesses, callings, or occupations are not covered by this definition to the degree the same is done in conjunction with a licensed medical or health care practitioner or facility. (Amended by Ord. 06-13, 12/13/06; Ord. 20-03, 10/6/20)

 

5.20.020 Preemption.
        This Chapter is intended to comply with and supplement State law. In the event of a conflict between this Chapter and State law, the City shall give effect to State law. (Amended by Ord. 20-03, 10/6/20)

 

5.20.030 Massage Establishment License Required.
        (a)    It is unlawful for any person to own, operate, manage, engage in, conduct, or carry on, in or upon any premises within the City, a massage establishment without a massage establishment license obtained in accordance with this Chapter, unless otherwise exempted in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.

        (b)    A massage establishment license shall only be issued to the person signing the application, after compliance with the requirements of this Chapter and all other applicable provisions of this Code including, but not limited to, the payment of the appropriate application license fee and background investigation fee, unless grounds for denial of such license are found to exist.

        (c)    A separate license shall be obtained for each separate massage establishment owned, operated, or managed by any person. (Amended by Ord. 06-13, 12/13/06; Ord. 20-03, 10/6/20)

 

5.20.040 Off-Premises Massage.
        (a)    No massage regulated by this Chapter shall be performed at a place or location other than at a premises for which a valid massage establishment license has been obtained under this Chapter, except in the following circumstances:

        (1)    Massage may be performed at premises expressly exempted or excepted by Section 5.20.080 (Exemptions and Exceptions) provided the massage is performed by a person exempt under Section 5.20.080(a) or (b).

        (2)    A certified massage therapist may perform massages at a place or location other than at a premises for which a valid massage establishment license has been obtained under this Chapter, and other than as provided in subsection (a)(1) hereof, only when such massage is specifically prescribed in writing by a physician, surgeon, chiropractor, or osteopath duly licensed to practice in the State of California. No additional massage service shall be performed for any patron beyond that service which is specifically described in the writing whether or not such patron desires any additional service to be performed. (Amended by Ord. 20-03, 10/6/20)

 

5.20.050 Massage Establishment in Athletic Club or Hotel.
        A massage establishment may be permitted in an athletic club, hotel or similar establishment provided such massage operations are clearly incidental to the operation of such bona fide athletic club and such athletic club has a valid permit approved by the County of Orange or the City of Dana Point which identifies the massage establishment and its specific location. “Clearly incidental” is defined as no more than fifteen percent (15%) of the gross floor area or one thousand (1,000) square feet of the athletic club, whichever is greater. (Amended by Ord. 06-13, 12/13/06; Ord. 20-03, 10/6/20)

 

5.20.060 Massage Therapist Certificate Required.
        (a)    It shall be unlawful for any person to perform or administer a massage or advertise to provide massage services in the City of Dana Point, unless such person possesses and maintains a current, valid state certification issued by CAMTC. A massage provider shall provide his or her full name and certificate number to any representative of the Code Enforcement Division and Police Services or any member of the public upon request.

        (b)    No certified massage therapist shall provide massage therapy within the City without first providing to the Code Enforcement Division and Police Services a copy of his or her CAMTC certificate and a list of the names and addresses of massage establishments at which he or she will provide massage for compensation. The applicant shall submit to Code Enforcement Division and Police Services in writing any change in employment or residence address within five working days. (Amended by Ord. 06-13, 12/13/06; Ord. 20-03, 10/6/20)

 

5.20.070 Display of Permits, Licenses.
        Each massage establishment shall display its massage establishment license, and the CAMTC certificate for each certified massage therapist employed or performing massages at the establishment, in an open and conspicuous place that is visible upon first entering the premises. Passport-size photographs of the massage establishment licensee shall be affixed to the massage establishment license on display pursuant to this Section.

        Each certified massage therapist shall wear or display their massage technician photo identification card on their clothing in an openly visible manner or displayed in the massage room where their massage services are to be rendered during working hours.  (Amended by Ord. 06-13, 12/13/06; Ord. 20-03, 10/6/20)

 

5.20.080 Exemptions and Exceptions.
        (a)    Exemptions. This Chapter shall not apply to the following classes of individuals, and the individuals shall be exempt from massage establishment requirements while engaged in the performance of the duties of their respective professions:

        (1)    Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, acupuncturists, or osteopaths (“professionals”) duly licensed to practice their respective professions in the State of California under the provisions of the Business and Professions Code, while performing activities encompassed by such professional licenses; however:

        (A)   Massage providers are required to be certified by CAMTC,

        (B)   If the professional’s facility is used for the purposes of nonmedical massage, the facility itself must be licensed as a massage establishment pursuant to this Chapter;

        (2)    Registered nurses, licensed vocational nurses or physical therapists who are duly licensed to practice their professions in the State of California under the provisions of the Business and Professions Code, while performing activities encompassed by their respective licenses;

        (3)    Other health care personnel engaged in the healing arts as regulated and licensed by Division 2 of the Business and Professions Code. Notwithstanding the foregoing, anyone duly exempted under this subsection employing or utilizing either a massage technician or a massage practitioner for the purpose of furnishing a massage shall be required to employ licensed massage technicians and practitioners;

        (4)    Barbers, cosmetologists, estheticians and manicurists duly licensed by the State of California while performing activities encompassed by their respective licenses, except that this exemption applies solely for the massaging of the neck, face and/or scalp of the customer or client of a barber, cosmetologist, or esthetician, or in the case of a licensed manicurist, the massaging of the forearms, hands, calves and/or feet; and

        (5)    Coaches and trainers employed by accredited high schools, community colleges or universities while acting within the scope of their employment, as well as trainers of amateur, semi-professional or professional athletes or athletic teams while acting in that capacity.

        (b)    Exception. Individuals administering massages or health treatment involving massage to persons participating in road races, track meets, triathlons, and similar athletic or recreational events shall be exempt from the provisions of this Chapter, provided that all of the following conditions are met:

        (1)    The massage services are made equally available to all participants in the event;

        (2)    The event is open to participation by the general public or a significant segment of the public such as employees of sponsoring or participating corporations, students from the participating schools, members of participating organizations, etc.;

        (3)    The massage services are provided at the site of the event and either during, immediately preceding, or immediately following the event;

        (4)    The sponsors of the event have been advised of and have approved the provision of massage services; and

        (5)    The persons providing the massage services are not the primary sponsors of the event.

        (c)    The exemption for professionals shall only apply to the extent that the massages are administered for medical purposes. Professionals that administer nonmedical massages are subject to the licensing requirements of this Chapter.

        (d)    If any State-licensed professional, who is exempt under this Section, violates any provision of this Chapter, the City may notify the State licensing body that licenses the professional in writing of the professional’s Municipal Code violation. (Amended by Ord. 06-13, 12/13/06; Ord. 20-03, 10/6/20)

 

5.20.090 Massage Establishment License Application Fee.
        Any application for a massage establishment license shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee in an amount established by resolution of the City Council. The application fee shall be used to defray the costs of investigation, report, and related application processing issues. An additional background investigation fee, as set by the Police Services Department, shall also accompany any application. (Amended by Ord. 06-13, 12/13/06; Ord. 20-03, 10/6/20)

 

5.20.100 Application for Massage Establishment License.
        (a)    No person shall operate any massage establishment prior to having obtained a massage establishment license pursuant to this Chapter. A completed application for a massage establishment license shall be filed with the City Manager. Incomplete applications shall be returned to the applicant until all the required information, as detailed herein, is provided in full to the City.

        (b)    The completed application shall set forth the exact nature of the massage, bath or health treatments to be administered, the proposed place of business and facilities therefor, and the current and valid name and address of the applicant. The applicant shall also furnish the following information:

        (1)    The previous addresses of the applicant, if any, for a period of five (5) years immediately prior to the date of the application and the dates of residence at each;

        (2)    Written proof that the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age;

        (3)    The history of the applicant as to the ownership, operation, or management of any massage establishment or similar business or occupation within five (5) years immediately preceding the filing of the application. Such information shall include, but shall not be limited to, a statement as to whether or not such person, in previously owning, operating, or managing a massage establishment within this State under a permit or license, has had such permit or license revoked or suspended or was the subject of discipline, and the reasons therefor; and the business, activity or occupation the license applicant engaged in subsequent to such action of revocation, suspension, or discipline;

        (4)    All criminal convictions or offenses including, but not limited to, those described in Section 5.20.010 (Definitions); whether the applicant is required to register under the provisions of California Penal Code Section 290; whether the applicant, including a corporation or partnership, or a former employer of the applicant while so employed, or a building in which the applicant was so employed or a business conducted, was ever subjected to an abatement proceeding under California Penal Code Sections 11225 through 11235, California Health and Safety Code Sections 11570 through 11587, or any similar provisions of law in a jurisdiction outside the State of California;

        (5)    Applicant’s gender, height, weight, and color of eyes and hair;

        (6)    Two (2) prints of a recent passport-size photograph of applicant;

        (7)    Business, occupation, or employment history of the applicant for the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of the application;

        (8)    If the applicant is a corporation, limited liability company, limited liability partnership, general or limited partnership, or other form of business entity other than a sole proprietorship, the name of the business entity shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or formation document, together with the names and residence addresses of each of its officers, directors, managing members, and/or general partners and each stockholder, member, or limited partner holding more than five percent (5%) of the stock of or interest in the business entity, along with the amount of stock or interest held. If one (1) or more of the partners or members is a corporation, the information required herein for the applicant shall also be required for such partners or members. The application shall be signed by the individual who is and shall be responsible for all actions, omissions, and conduct of the applicant licensee;

        (9)    The names and residence addresses of all persons currently employed or intended to be employed in the massage establishment, regardless of the nature of the employment, including the names, addresses and copies of the state certificate issued by CAMTC for any certified massage therapist along with the proposed or actual nature of the work performed or to be performed, and recent passport-sized photographs, suitable for the City Manager to process the application of each such employee. The City Manager shall require such employees to furnish fingerprints for the purpose of establishing identification. Any applicant or licensee shall notify the City in writing of the names, addresses and nature of the work, or any new employees, five (5) days prior of such employment, and supply the photographs described in this Subsection. Such new employees shall allow fingerprints to be taken for the purpose of identification upon request. “Employee” includes every owner, partner, manager, supervisor and worker, whether paid or not, who renders personal services of any nature in the operation of a massage establishment;

        (10)  The name of the person(s) designated or appointed as manager(s) of the establishment;

        (11)  Such other information as may reasonably be deemed necessary by the City Manager or determined to be necessary by the Orange County Sheriff’s Department to investigate the accuracy and veracity of the information required in the application;

        (12)  If the applicant is not the owner of the property proposed as the location for the massage establishment, the applicant shall submit a statement (on a form provided by the City with the application) signed by the property owner, consenting to the operation of the massage establishment at the location by the applicant and a copy of any lease between the property owner and applicant for the subject property;

        (13)  If the applicant is assuming control over an existing massage establishment, and the existing licensee will not be an owner or operator of the massage establishment for the entire term of the new license, then the new license shall not be issued unless and until the former massage establishment license has been surrendered and relinquished to the City;

        (14)  A sketch or diagram (on a form provided by the City with the application) showing the complete interior configuration of the business, including, without limitation, the location of the restrooms, massage rooms, customer areas, employee-only designated areas, and any facilities requirements as identified in Section 5.20.190 (Massage Establishment Facilities and Operations Requirements). The form need not be professionally prepared, but must accurately and clearly depict all interior areas identified in this Section and Section 5.20.190 (Massage Establishment Facilities and Operations Requirement);

        (15)  A statement in writing by the applicant that he or she certifies under penalty of perjury that the foregoing information contained in the application is true and correct, with said statement being duly dated;

        (16)  Authorization for the City, its employees and agents to seek information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in the application and the qualifications of the application for the license. Upon receipt of a completed application, the City manager will cause the massage establishment’s proposed site to be inspected for compliance with the requirements of this Chapter and Code. The City will not issue a massage establishment license unless and until inspection of the proposed place of business confirms that the facility complies with the requirements of this Code and Chapter;

        (17)  A copy of each applicant’s social security card;

        (18)  A copy of each applicant’s recently completed Service for Live Scan (on a form provided by City with application);

        (19)  Acknowledgement in the application that the appointment of a manager by the applicant constitutes consent by the applicant for assumption of responsibility for all acts and conduct of the manager, including service of notices by the City.

        (c)    Notwithstanding the fact that an application filed hereunder may be a “public record” under Government Code Section 6250 et seq., certain portions of such application contain information vital to the effective administration and enforcement of the licensing and/or permit scheme established herein which is personal, private, confidential, or the disclosure of which could expose the applicant to a risk of harm. Such information includes, but is not limited to, the applicant’s residence address and telephone number, the applicant’s date of birth and/or age, the applicant’s driver’s license and/or Social Security number, and/or personal financial data. The City Council in adopting the application and licensing and/or permit system set forth herein has determined in accordance with Government Code Section 6255 that the public interest in disclosure of the information set forth above is outweighed by the public interest in achieving compliance with this Chapter by ensuring that the applicant’s privacy, confidentiality, or security interests are protected. To the extent allowed by applicable law, the City Clerk shall cause to be obliterated from any copy of a completed license application made available to any member of the public the information set forth above. (Amended by Ord. 06-13, 12/13/06; Ord. 20-03, 10/6/20)

 

5.20.110 Renewal of Massage Establishment License.
        (a)    Each massage establishment license shall expire after one (1) calendar year from the date of issuance of the license unless renewed in accordance with this Chapter.

        (b)    The licensee requesting renewal of its massage establishment license shall file an application for renewal with the City Manager at least ninety (90) calendar days prior to the scheduled expiration of the license. The renewal application shall provide all of the information required under Section 5.20.100 (Application for Massage Establishment License), and shall also: (1) state that the licensee is currently operating under a massage establishment license; (2) state the scheduled date for expiration of the license for which the licensee is seeking renewal; and (3) provide either a current copy of the lease agreement under which the licensee has operated the massage establishment or evidence that the licensee owns the property at which the licensee operates the massage establishment.

        (c)    Any application for renewal of a massage establishment license shall be accompanied by a renewal fee in an amount established by resolution of the City Council. The renewal fee shall be used to defray the costs of investigation, report, and related application processing issues. The application shall also be accompanied by a background investigation fee.

        (d)    The City Manager shall review the application for renewal and approve or deny the application, pursuant to the criteria in and within the time provided in Section 5.20.120 (Approval or Denial of Massage Establishment License), and shall either issue the renewed license or mail a written statement to the address indicated on the application via U.S. mail and certified mail return receipt requested, denying the license and stating the reasons therefor. The decision of the City Manager is final, unless the applicant files a written request for reconsideration with the City Manager within ten (10) calendar days of the date stated on the notice, requesting reconsideration. A license for which renewal has been denied shall be of no effect or validity after its scheduled expiration.

        (e)    If criminal charges are pending against an applicant within a court or public agency, the conviction of which would result in the denial of the application, the City Manager shall suspend review of the application pending the final disposition of the criminal charges. The City Manager shall send written notice to the applicant notifying him or her that the review of their application is suspended pending the final disposition of the current criminal charges. The applicant shall then have the obligation of notifying the City Manager when a final decision is reached, and provide to the City adequate written evidence to substantiate the claimed outcome of the criminal matter is decided (i.e., conviction, dismissal, etc.). The application during the period of suspension shall be treated as if it were never submitted, and the seventy-five (75) day review period shall be of no effect. Once the City Manager receives notice from the applicant of the final disposition of a criminal matter, the City Manager shall resume the review of the application. The seventy-five (75) day review period shall commence from the date that the City Manager receives notice deemed adequate by the City of the final disposition of the criminal charges from the applicant. If an applicant fails to notify the City Manager of the final disposition of the criminal charges within one hundred eighty (180) calendar days of the disposition, the application shall be deemed expired, and the applicant will be required to submit a new application.

        (f)    If a license has not been renewed prior to the scheduled expiration of the license, the operator must immediately suspend all operations until the license has been renewed. (Amended by Ord. 06-13, 12/13/06; Ord. 20-03, 10/6/20)

 

5.20.120 Approval or Denial of Massage Establishment License.
        (a)    Within seventy-five (75) calendar days following receipt of a completed application, the City Manager shall either issue the license or mail a written statement to the address indicated on the application via U.S. mail and certified mail return receipt requested of the reasons for denial thereof, unless such period is continued for good cause as provided herein. The decision of the City Manager is final, subject to Section 5.20.130 (Request for Reconsideration on Denial of License).

        (b)    The City Manager may continue his/her determination to approve or deny a completed application for a period not to exceed sixty (60) calendar days, in the event that the review of a completed application involves obtaining documents, records, or information from another governmental agency, including, but not limited to, the State of California or Department of Justice, and that agency cannot reasonably respond to the City Manager’s request within the time required for the City Manager to complete his or her review of the completed application, or in the event that additional time is necessary to complete the identification of the applicant or persons to be employed by the massage establishment. In the event the City Manager determines to continue the application review period, written notice shall be mailed via U.S. mail to the applicant, at the address indicated on the application, stating the period of the continuance and the reasons therefor.

        (c)    The City Manager shall deny a license to the license applicant where any of the following conditions exist:

        (1)    The applicant has made one (1) or more material misstatements in the completed application for a license;

        (2)    The applicant, if an individual; or the stockholders holding more than five percent (5%) of the stock of the corporation; the officers and directors and each of them if the applicant be a business entity; or the partners, including limited partners, and each of them, if the applicant be a partnership; the members, and each of them, holding more than five percent (5%) of the interest in the entity if the applicant is a limited liability company; the manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the business, or any such individuals, is a person who has engaged in disqualifying conduct as described in Section 5.20.010 (Definitions) in the ten (10) years immediately preceding the date of the application;

        (3)    Any persons to be employed at the massage establishment are persons who have engaged in disqualifying conduct as described in Section 5.20.010 (Definitions) in the ten (10) years immediately preceding the date of the application;

        (4)    The massage establishment, as proposed by the applicant, if permitted, would not comply with all the applicable laws, including, but not limited to, all City of the applicable building, fire, zoning, and health regulations;

        (5)    The applicant has violated any provision of this Chapter, or any similar ordinance, law, rule, or regulation of any other public agency which regulates the operation of massage establishments;

        (6)    The applicant is less than eighteen (18) years of age; or

        (7)    The location of the proposed massage establishment in whole or in part has, within the two (2) year period prior to the submittal of the application, been the site of:

        (A)   Disqualifying conduct,

        (B)   A place where violation of this Chapter—or a violation of any similar criminal or civil ordinance, law, rule, or regulation of the State of California or any other public agency related to the operation of massage establishments—has occurred, or

        (C)   A revocation pursuant to this Chapter of a massage establishment license;

        (8)    The applicant has not otherwise complied with the applicable requirements of this Chapter or is lacking in the background and qualifications to conduct a bona fide massage establishment; or

        (9)    The massage establishment is located within a radius of three hundred (300) feet of another premises massage establishment, as measured in a straight line, from the nearest point of the premises where said massage establishment is conducted to the nearest property line of any lot or legal parcel upon which a massage establishment is proposed to be located.

        (d)    In no event shall the decision to grant or deny the license be based on information authorized or required to be kept confidential pursuant to Welfare and Institutions Code Sections 600 to 900.

        (e)    If criminal charges are pending against an applicant within a court or public agency, the conviction of which would result in the denial of the application, the City Manager shall suspend review of the application pending the final disposition of the criminal charges. The City Manager shall send written notice to the applicant notifying him or her that the review of his or her application is suspended pending the final disposition of the current criminal charges. The applicant shall then have the obligation of notifying the City Manager when a final decision is reached, and the outcome of the criminal matter is decided (i.e., conviction, dismissal, etc.). During the period of suspension the application shall be treated as if it were never submitted, and the seventy-five (75) day review period shall not commence or run during the period of suspension. Once the City Manager receives notice from the applicant of the final disposition of a criminal matter the City Manager shall resume his or her review of the application. The seventy-five (75) day review period shall commence on the date that the City Manager receives notice of the final disposition of the criminal charges from the applicant. If an applicant fails to notify the City Manager of the final disposition of the criminal charges within one hundred eighty (180) calendar days of the disposition, the application shall be deemed expired, and the applicant will be required to submit a new application. (Amended by Ord. 06-13, 12/13/06; Ord. 20-03, 10/6/20)

 

5.20.130 Request for Reconsideration on Denial of License.
        If the City Manager denies a massage establishment license as provided in Section 5.20.120 (Approval or Denial of Massage Establishment License), then the decision shall be final, unless the applicant files a written request for reconsideration with the City Manager within ten (10) calendar days of the date of the City Manager’s written notice of denial. Upon receipt of the written request, the City Manager shall reconsider the application together with any new records, documents, or information presented by the applicant, or discovered by the City, within the time and in the manner provided in Section 5.20.120 (Approval or Denial of Massage Establishment License). The City Manager’s decision on the reconsideration shall be final. (Amended by Ord. 06-13, 12/13/06; Ord. 20-03, 10/6/20)

 

5.20.140 Reapplication After Denial.
        An applicant for a massage establishment license under this Chapter, whose application for such license has been denied, may not reapply for such license for a period of two (2) years from the date such notice of denial was deposited in the mail or received by the applicant, whichever occurs first. However, a reapplication prior to the expiration of two (2) years may be made if accompanied by evidence that the ground or grounds for denial of the application no longer exist, unless the basis for denial was disqualifying conduct. (Amended by Ord. 06-13, 12/13/06; Ord. 20-03, 10/6/20)

5.20.150 No Refund of Fee.
        No refund or rebate of a license fee shall be allowed by reason of the fact that the licensee discontinues an activity for which a license is required pursuant to this Chapter, or that the license is suspended, revoked, or not renewed. (Amended by Ord. 06-13, 12/13/06; Ord. 20-03, 10/6/20)

 

5.20.160 Business Name.
        No person licensed to operate a massage establishment shall operate under any name or conduct business under any designation not specified in the license. (Amended by Ord. 06-13, 12/13/06; Ord. 20-03, 10/6/20)

 

5.20.170 Business Location Change.
        Prior to any change of location of a licensed massage establishment, an application shall be made to the City Manager as provided in Section 5.20.100 (Application for Massage Establishment License), and such application shall be granted within the time stated therein, provided all applicable provisions of this Chapter are complied with, and a change of location fee in an amount established by City Council Resolution to defray the costs of investigation and report has been paid to the City. (Amended by Ord. 06-13, 12/13/06; Ord. 20-03, 10/6/20)

 

5.20.180 Sale or Transfer of Massage Establishment Interest.
        A sale or transfer of any interest in a massage establishment, which interest would be reported as required in this Chapter upon application for a massage establishment license, shall be reported to the City Manager within thirty (30) calendar days prior to the closing of the sale or transfer. The City Manager shall investigate any person receiving any interest in a massage establishment as a result of such sale or transfer, and if such person satisfies the requirements relating to massage establishment license applicants, the existing license shall be endorsed to include such person. A fee as set forth by resolution of the City Council shall be paid to the City for the investigation by the City Manager necessitated by each such sale or transfer. (Amended by Ord. 06-13, 12/13/06; Ord. 20-03, 10/6/20)

 

5.20.190 Massage Establishment Facilities and Operations Requirements.
        All massage establishments shall comply with the following facilities and operations requirements:

        (a)    All persons conducting a massage at a massage establishment, that are not specifically exempt under Section 5.20.100 (Application for Massage Establishment License) of this Chapter, shall have a valid and current state certificate issued by the CAMTC throughout their employment in the massage establishment and they shall carry identification and proof of CAMTC certification while present in the massage establishment. Such identification and proof of certification shall be provided to City regulatory officials upon demand.

        (b)    Massage establishments shall be located in a zoning district which permits such use and shall be operated within a structure for which the City has issued all necessary building and other permits of occupancy and operations. The City shall not issue a massage establishment permit unless and until all tenant and other improvements within the massage establishment have been properly permitted as required by the Dana Point Municipal Code and State law. The massage establishment shall comply with all applicable building and site development standards of the Dana Point Municipal Code and State law, including, but not limited to, the California Building Codes, the California Fire Code and the health and safety requirements. The massage establishment shall also comply with all applicable City permit and inspection procedures.

        (c)    The operator and/or on-duty manager consents to the inspection of the massage establishment by the City’s regulatory officials for the purpose of determining that the provisions of this Chapter or other applicable laws or regulations are met including, as follows:

        (1)    The City’s regulatory officials may, from time to time, make an inspection of each massage establishment for the purpose of determining that the provisions of this Chapter, State law or other applicable laws or regulations are met. Criminal investigations may be conducted, as directed by the Chief of Police. The Police Services Department may inspect the occupied massage rooms for the purpose of determining that the provisions of this Chapter are met upon occurrence of any of the conditions described in this Chapter. During an inspection, the Police Services Department may verify the identity of all on-duty employees.

        (2)    Inspections of the massage establishment shall be conducted during business hours.

        (3)    An operator of a massage establishment, his or her agent or employee commits an offense if he or she refuses to permit a lawful inspection of the premises by a City regulatory official at any time it is occupied or open for business.

        (d)    Each operator shall post and maintain, in compliance with existing State and City laws, a readable sign identifying the premises as a massage establishment. The sign and the front of the business shall not be illuminated by strobe or flashing lights. Each operator and/or on-duty manager shall display the massage establishment permit in a conspicuous public place in the lobby of the massage establishment. In addition, each operator and/or on-duty manager shall ensure that the current, valid massage therapist certification issued by the CAMTC for each massage provider employed at the establishment (whether on-duty or not) is conspicuously displayed in a public place in the lobby, and that each massage provider is wearing or has in their possession the identification required at all times when in the massage establishment. The operator and/or on-duty manager must also post, on a daily basis in a conspicuous public place in the lobby, the name of the operator and/or on-duty manager, as well as all on-duty massage provider. Finally, the hours of operation must be posted in the front window and clearly visible from the outside.

        (e)    Each service offered, the price thereof, and the minimum length of time such service shall be performed shall be posted in a conspicuous public location in each massage establishment. All letters and numbers shall be capitals not less than one (1) inch in height. No services shall be performed and no sums shall be charged for such services other than those posted. All arrangements for services to be performed shall be made in a room in the massage establishment which is not used for administration of massages, baths or health treatments, unless no other room exists in the establishment. No massage technician or provider shall, after the commencement of any service for any patron, advise, suggest or otherwise indicate to such patron that any additional service is available or ask or inquire of such patron whether such patron desires any additional service to be performed. No massage provider shall perform any service for any patron which was not ordered by such patron prior to the commencement of performance of any service rendered.

        (f)    An owner and/or operator and/or massage establishment licensee of a massage establishment shall be responsible for the conduct of all employees or independent contractors working on the premises of the massage establishment.

        (g)    With the exception of a sole proprietorship, at all times the massage establishment is open for business, one (1) person designated as the manager and one (1) certified massage therapist shall be on premises of the massage establishment. One (1) or more persons shall be registered with the Code Enforcement Division to receive all complaints and, in addition to the holder of the massage establishment permit, shall be responsible for all violations taking place on the premises.

        (h)    The operator and/or on-duty manager shall maintain a register of all employees showing the name, nicknames and aliases used by the employee, home address, age, birth date, gender, height, weight, color of hair and eyes, phone numbers, social security number, date of employment and termination, if any, duties of each employee and a copy of each massage therapist’s state certification issued by the CAMTC. The above information on each employee shall be maintained in the register on the premises for a period of two (2) years following termination; provided, however, that the Chief of Police may establish a policy that would allow for the safeguarding of social security numbers on the premises, while making the full social security numbers available for inspection within twenty-four (24) hours of demand as provided for herein. The operator and/or on-duty manager shall make the register of employees immediately available for inspection upon demand of a representative of the Police Services Department at all reasonable times.

        (i)     Every massage establishment shall keep a written record of the date and hour of each treatment administered, the name and telephone number of each patron, the name of the massage technician administering treatment, and the type of treatment administered, to be recorded on a patron release form. Such written record shall be opened to inspection by officials in charge of enforcement of this Chapter, as authorized by law or court order. Such records shall be kept on the premises of the massage establishment for a period of two (2) years.

        (j)     The owner must advise the City, in writing, at the time of application for a permit of the business hours and any changes in hours. No person shall operate a massage establishment or administer a massage in any massage establishment or at an outcall location booked by that massage establishment between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. A massage begun any time before 10:00 p.m. must nevertheless terminate at 10:00 p.m. All customers, patrons and visitors shall be excluded from the massage establishment between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. and be advised of these hours. The hours of operation must be displayed in a conspicuous public place in the lobby within the massage establishment and in the front window clearly visible from the outside.           

        (k)    No massage establishment granted a permit under this Chapter shall place, publish or distribute, or cause to be placed, published or distributed, any advertising matter that depicts any portion of the human body that would reasonably suggest to prospective patrons that any service is available other than those services described in this Chapter or otherwise permitted by State law. Nor shall any massage establishment utilize any language in the text of such advertising that would reasonably suggest to a prospective patron that any service is available other than those services authorized by this Chapter or State law.

        (l)     A minimum of one (1) toilet and wash basin shall be provided in accordance with duly adopted City requirements and all lavatories or wash basins shall be provided with hot and cold running water and soap.

        (m)   The walls in all rooms where water or steam baths are given shall have a washable, mold-resistant surface. All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, bathtubs, steam rooms and all other physical facilities including appliances and apparatuses of the establishment must be in good repair and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor rooms, steam or vapor cabinets, shower compartments and toilet rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected each day the business is in operation. Bathtubs shall be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected after each use.

        (n)    Each operator shall provide in each room where massage is given sufficient lighting that complies with the California Building Code. The lighting in each massage room shall be activated at all times while the patron is in such room or enclosure.

        (o)    Minimum ventilation shall be provided in accordance with the applicable building codes of the City. To allow for adequate ventilation in cubicles, rooms and areas provided for patrons’ use, which are not serviced directly by required windows or mechanical systems of ventilation.

        (p)    All massage establishments shall be provided with clean and sanitary towels, sheets, and linens in sufficient quantity. Towels, sheets, and linens shall not be used by more than one (1) person. Reuse of such linen is prohibited unless the same has first been laundered. Heavy white paper may be substituted for sheets, provided that such paper is used once for each person and then discarded into a sanitary receptacle cabinets or other covered space shall be provided for the storage of clean linen. Safe and sanitary receptacles shall be provided for the storage of all soiled linen and paper towels.

        (q)    Disinfecting agents and sterilizing equipment shall be provided for any instruments used in performing any type of massage and said instruments shall be disinfected and sterilized after each use.

        (r)    A massage table shall be provided in each massage room and all massages shall be performed on the massage table. The tables should have a minimum height of eighteen (18) inches. Two (2) inch thick foam pads with a maximum width of four (4) feet may be used on a massage table and must be covered with durable, washable plastic or other acceptable waterproof material. Beds, floor mattresses, and waterbeds shall not be permitted on the premises.

        (s)    To assure patrons’ health, safety, sanitation, and comfort, all employees and certified massage therapists shall be clean and dressed appropriately in clean, opaque clothing which does not expose the female breasts, genitals, pubic regions, buttocks, or anuses when performing services upon the premises. Attire worn by all employees and certified massage therapists, while engaging in the practice of massage for compensation, or while visible to clients in the massage establishment, may not include the following:

        (1)    Attire that is transparent, see-through, or substantially exposes the certified massage therapist’s undergarments;

        (2)    Swim attire, if not providing a water-based massage modality approved by CAMTC;

        (3)    Attire that constitutes a violation of Section 314 of the Penal Code; or

        (4)    Attire that is otherwise deemed by CAMTC to constitute unprofessional attire based on the custom and practice of the profession in California.

        (t)     No employee of the massage establishment or any certified massage therapist shall expose any genitals, pubic regions, buttocks, anuses, or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola to the view of a customer or patron of the massage establishment. All customers and patrons shall be appropriately draped with a clean, opaque towel sufficient to cover their genitals, pubic regions, buttocks, anuses, or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola while receiving such services.

        (u)    No person or persons shall be allowed to reside, dwell, occupy, or live inside the massage establishment at any time and no beds, floor mattresses or waterbeds shall not be permitted on the premises.

        (v)    No massage establishment shall be equipped with any of the following improvements:

        (1)    Tinted or “one-way” glass in any room or office;

        (2)    Door-viewer or peephole designed to look through a door wall;

        (3)    No surveillance cameras, closed circuit cameras, video or audio recording devices of any type shall be used in in any room where massage services are to be rendered, restrooms, lavatories and shower rooms or room where patrons would otherwise have an expectation of privacy when not in the immediate presence of an employee of the establishment. Furthermore, no employee shall record (video or audio) in any of the areas listed above for the purposes of monitoring the performance of a massage, any conversations or other sounds in the massage rooms without the knowledge and consent of the patron; or

        (4)    No windows into the lobby shall be covered or made opaque in any way, except during daylight hours, when blinds or other equivalent window coverings may be used. Daylight hours are defined as one (1) hour after sunrise through one (1) hour before sunset.

        (w)   All exterior, reception, hallway and treatment room doors (except back or exterior doors used solely for employee entrance to and exit from the massage establishment) shall be unlocked during business hours, except as may be permitted by applicable law (such as the California Fire Code which allow for safety doors which may be opened from the inside when locked). Notwithstanding the foregoing, the exterior doors to the massage establishment may be locked during business hours if the massage establishment is owned by one (1) person with one (1) or no employees or independent contractors. Whenever the establishment is open, staff shall be available to assure security for clients and employees who are behind closed/unlocked doors. No massage may be given within any cubicle, room, booth or any area within a massage establishment which is fitted with a lock of any kind (such as a locking door knob, padlock, dead bolt, sliding bar or similar device), unless the only door is an exterior door that would impede inspection to massage treatment rooms.

        (x)    There shall be no display, storage, use or possession of any instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities, as defined by Section 5.20.010 (Definitions), adult oriented material, or sexually oriented merchandise, as defined by the same section, on the premises of the massage establishment.

        (y)    No massage provider or other person may, after the commencement of any service for any patron, advise, suggest or otherwise indicate to such patron that any additional service is available or ask or inquire of such patron whether such patron desires any additional service to be performed at that time, except with respect to services that are publicly posted. No massage provider may perform any service for any patron that was not ordered by such patron prior to the commencement of performance of any service requested.

        (z)    No person(s), other than massage establishment employees and customers, will be allowed anywhere in the massage establishment other than the lobby/reception area during hours of operation. Entry doors to any room shall not be obstructed by any means.

        (aa)  No alcoholic beverages or controlled substances shall be sold, served, furnished, kept, consumed, imbibed, or possessed on the premises of any massage establishment. No person shall enter, be in, or remain in any part of a massage establishment licensed under this Chapter while in possession of, consuming, using or under the influence of any alcoholic beverage or controlled substance.

        (bb)  The applicant shall notify the City in writing of the names and nature of the work of any new employees at least ten (10) calendar days prior to such employee commencing work at the massage establishment. If the new employee is to perform massage, then the applicant shall provide a copy of the employee’s valid and current certified massage therapist certificate. “Employee” includes every owner, partner, manager, supervisor, independent contractor, and worker, whether paid or not, who renders personal services of any nature in the operation of a massage establishment.

        (cc)  The applicant shall notify the City in writing of the name of a newly designated or appointed manager at least ten (10) calendar days prior to such employee commencing work as the manager.

        (dd)  The operator or a manager of a massage establishment shall be present on the premises at all times when the establishment is open for business or in operation. The operator is at all times responsible for the operation of the premises in compliance with the terms and conditions of this Chapter, whether he or she is actually present.

        (ee)  No massage establishment shall be located within a residential structure. (Amended by Ord. 06-13, 12/13/06; Ord. 20-03, 10/6/20)

 

5.20.200 Management of Massage Establishments.
        The owner, operator, and designated manager shall be responsible for the conduct of all employees or independent contractors while they are on the establishment premises. In addition, the owner, operator and any designated manager shall be responsible for compliance with the terms of this Chapter and for receipt of any notices served or delivered to the premises by the City. Any act or omission of any employee or independent contractor constituting a violation of the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed the act or omis-

sion of the owner, operator, and designated manager for purposes of determining whether the establishment license shall be revoked, suspended, denied or renewed. (Amended by Ord. 06-13, 12/13/06; Ord. 20-03, 10/6/20)

 

5.20.210 Inspection by Officials.
        Any and all investigating officials of the City, including Code Enforcement Officers, Police Services, Building Inspectors, and Health and Safety Inspectors, shall have the right to enter massage establishments from time to time during regular business hours to make reasonable inspections to observe and enforce compliance with building, fire, electrical, plumbing, or health regulations, and to ascertain whether there is compliance with the provisions of this Chapter. (Amended by Ord. 06-13, 12/13/06; Ord. 20-03, 10/6/20)

 

5.20.220 Issuance of Notice of Violation.
        Whenever City Regulatory Officials makes an inspection of a massage establishment and finds that any provision of this Chapter has been violated, Code Enforcement Division shall give notice of such violation by means of an inspection report or other written notice. In any such notification, the Code Enforcement Division shall:

        (a)    Set forth the specific violation or violations found;

        (b)    Establish a specific and reasonable period of time for the correction of the violation or violations. If the Code Enforcement Division determines that the violation or violations are minor in nature, the Code Enforcement Division may issue a warning to the licensee or permittee that any further violation of this Chapter may result in the filing of a complaint for revocation or suspension of the license or permit; and

        (c)    State that failure to comply with any notice issued in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter may result in the Code Enforcement Division filing a complaint for revocation or suspension of the license or permit, or other legal action as permitted under applicable law.

        (d)    If a certified massage technician violates any of the massage technician operating requirement contained in this Chapter, or any requirement of State law, the City Manager may revoke the massage establishment license and the City may take such legal action as is deemed appropriate. (Amended by Ord. 06-13, 12/13/06; Ord. 20-03, 10/6/20)

 

5.20.230 Massage Establishment License Suspension or Revocation.
        (a)    Any license issued under this Chapter may be revoked or suspended after notice as provided in Section 5.20.240 (Notice of Revocation) and a hearing as provided in Section 5.20.250 (Hearing for Revocation of License) where any of the grounds stated in this Section are determined to exist.

        (b)    A massage establishment licensee under this Chapter whose license has been revoked or whose application for renewal of a license has been denied may not reapply for such license for a period of two (2) years from the date of such revocation or denial.

        (c)    A massage establishment license shall not be issued to any location where a massage establishment license has been denied or revoked for a period of two (2) years from the date of such revocation or denial.

        (d)    At such time as the City has reason to believe that grounds exist to revoke a license issued under this Chapter, the City Manager shall cause an investigation of the licensee and/or massage establishment to be undertaken. If based on the result of the investigation, the City Manager determines that grounds to revoke the license are present, then the City Manager shall commence proceedings to revoke or suspend the license by providing notice of the City’s intent to revoke the license as required in Section 5.20.240 (Notice of Revocation), and by scheduling a date for the revocation hearing with a Hearing Officer, which date shall not be less than thirty (30) calendar days from and after the date the notice of intent to revoke the license is mailed.

        (e)    The occurrence of any of the following are grounds for revocation of a license issued under this Chapter:

        (1)    The licensee has violated any provisions of this Chapter, including, but not limited to, the requirement that the applicant or the applicant’s designee be present at the premises at all times the massage establishment is in operation;

        (2)    The licensee or any of the establishment managers or employees has engaged in disqualifying conduct as described in Section 5.20.010 (Definitions);

        (3)    The licensee has made a material misstatement in the application for a license;

        (4)    The licensee has engaged in fraud, made a misrepresentation, or made a false statement in conducting the massage establishment or in performing massage services;

        (5)    The licensee has continued to operate the massage establishment after the license has been suspended;

        (6)    The licensee has failed to comply with one (1) or more of the facilities and operations requirements of Section 5.20.190 (Massage Establishment Facilities and Operations Requirements); or

        (7)    The licensee has employed or otherwise allowed a person to work as a massage provider at the massage establishment who:

        (A)   Does not have a valid CAMTC certification, or

        (B)   Has engaged in disqualifying conduct, as described in Section 5.20.010 (Definitions), at the massage establishment.

        (f)    The building, structure, equipment, or location used by the massage establishment fails to comply with the applicable building, fire, electrical, plumbing, health, or zoning requirements in the Dana Point Municipal Code or the requirements of this Chapter.

        (g)    Massage has been provided at the massage establishment by any person who is not a certified massage technician through CAMTC.

        (h)    Where it is determined that the grounds to revoke a license exist, the City may suspend the license for a period of not less than thirty (30) calendar days, but not more than ninety (90) calendar days following the conclusion of the hearing, where the Hearing Officer has found the existence of mitigating circumstances, which, in the sole discretion of the City, renders suspension appropriate. Mitigating circumstances include, but are not limited to, the following:

        (1)    The licensee or its manager or employees have not been found to have engaged in disqualifying conduct as defined in Section 5.20.010 (Definitions);

        (2)    The violation committed by the licensee does not present an immediate threat or danger to the public health, safety, or welfare;

        (3)    The licensee has not previously been cited for violations of this Chapter or violations of the Code within the ten (10) years prior to the date of the hearing; and

        (4)    The licensee has agreed in writing to take specific measures, as approved by the City, to cure or correct the violation within a period of not more than fifteen (15) calendar days.

        (i)     The massage establishment or any licensee or massage technician has committed a violation of this Chapter. (Amended by Ord. 06-13, 12/13/06; Ord. 20-03, 10/6/20)

 

5.20.240 Notice of Revocation.
        (a)    Notice of the City’s intent to revoke a license and of the revocation hearing shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of this Section.

        (b)    Notice shall be delivered to the licensee, and other person(s) designated on the license, at the address(es) designated in the license, via U.S. mail and certified mail return receipt requested.

        (c)    The notice shall be in writing and shall contain all of the following:

        (1)    That the City intends to revoke the license;

        (2)    The grounds for the revocation;

        (3)    The date, time, and place of the revocation hearing;

        (4)    That the licensee may appear, be heard, examine witnesses, and present evidence in the licensee’s favor; and

        (5)    That the licensee’s failure to appear, be heard, and present evidence in the licensee’s favor may result in the revocation of the license. (Amended by Ord. 06-13, 12/13/06; Ord. 20-03, 10/6/20)

 

5.20.250 Hearing for Revocation of License.
        (a)    Hearing Officer Assignment. The City Manager shall designate a Hearing Officer to preside over the revocation of massage establishment licenses. The Hearing Officer shall not be a City employee, and may, but need not be, a qualified attorney, qualified City manager or a hearing officer with the State Office of Administrative Hearings. The Hearing Officer shall be subject to disqualification for bias, prejudice, or material financial interest in the outcome, as provided in subsection (c).

        (b)    Scheduling of Hearing. The Hearing Officer shall conduct a hearing within thirty (30) calendar days of the City’s mailing of the notice required by Section 5.20.240 (Notice of Revocation).

        (c)    Challenge to Hearing Officer. No later than five (5) days after notice of the hearing date is sent to the appellant, the appellant may challenge the Hearing Officer’s impartiality by filing a written statement with the City Manager objecting to the hearing before the Hearing Officer and setting forth the specific grounds for disqualification. General and unsupported claims of bias, prejudice, or material financial interest shall not form a basis for disqualification. The City Manager, or designee, shall issue and serve on the appellant a written decision on the question of disqualification prior to the date of the hearing specified in the notice of hearing.

        (d)    Recording of Appeal Hearing. All hearings shall be recorded by a video or audio device. Any party to the appeal hearing may also, at his, her, or its own expense, use a court reporter to record the proceeding. If a court reporter is not used, the City will make the video or audio tapes of the hearing available to any party. The City may charge a reasonable fee for reproducing the tapes. If a court reporter is used, a party to the hearing may obtain a copy of the transcript upon payment of any applicable fees or costs charged by the court reporter. The City may destroy such tapes or transcripts following the time during which any and all appeals of the decision are required to be made pursuant to this Chapter or following the time during which such tapes or transcripts are required to be retained by the City pursuant to State law, whichever is later.

        (e)    Evidentiary Rules. The hearing need not be conducted in accordance with the technical rules of evidence. Each party shall have the right to call and examine witnesses, to introduce exhibits and to cross-examine opposing witnesses who have testified under direct examination. The Hearing Officer may call and examine any witness. Hearsay evidence may be used for the purpose of supplementing or explaining any direct evidence, but shall not be sufficient in itself to support a finding, unless it would be admissible over objection in a civil action. The rules of privilege are applicable to the extent they are permitted in civil actions. Any relevant evidence may be admitted if it is the type on which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of their affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule which might make admission of such evidence improper over objection in civil actions. Oral evidence may be taken on oath or affirmation. Irrelevant collateral, undue or repetitious evidence shall be excluded.

        (f)    Hearing Officer Decision. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Hearing Officer shall decide whether grounds for revocation exist. Within ten (10) calendar days after the conclusion of the hearing, the Hearing Officer shall file with the City Manager, a written decision, supported by written findings based on the evidence submitted, and a statement of his or her order. A copy of such report shall be forwarded by first class and certified mail, postage prepaid, to the licensee on the day it is filed with the City Manager. The order of the Hearing Officer shall become effective three (3) calendar days after its mailing to the licensee, unless timely appealed as provided in this Section.

        (g)    In the event the Hearing Officer determines that the grounds for revocation exist, the City may request at the conclusion of the hearing that, based on the evidence submitted at the hearing, the Hearing Officer determine whether mitigating circumstances exist as provided under Section 5.20.230 (Massage Establishment License Suspension or Revocation), to suspend the establishment license in lieu of revocation. In the event the Hearing Officer determines that suspension is appropriate, the Hearing Officer shall establish all terms and condition for such suspension.

        (h)    The decision of the Hearing Officer shall be appealable to the City Council by the filing of a written appeal with the City Clerk within fifteen (15) calendar days following the day of mailing of the Hearing Officer’s decision and paying the fee for appeals provided under this Code. All such appeals shall be filed with the City Clerk and shall be public records. The City Council shall, at a regularly scheduled meeting within thirty (30) calendar days from the date the written appeal was filed hold a public hearing to consider the appeal, and shall accept all testimony and evidence from the parties that the City Council deems pertinent. At the conclusion of the review, a majority of the City Council members present shall decide to sustain the decision, modify the decision, or order the decision stricken and issue such order as the City Council finds is supported by the entire record. The action of the City Council shall be final and conclusive and there shall be no additional right of appeal. (Amended by Ord. 20-03, 10/6/20)

 

5.20.260 Return of License.
        In the event that a license or permit is cancelled, suspended, revoked or invalidated, the licensee or permittee shall forward it to the officer who issued it not later than the end of the third business day after notification of the cancellation, suspension, revocation or invalidation. (Amended by Ord. 06-13, 12/13/06; Ord. 20-03, 10/6/20)

 

5.20.270 Violations Declared a Public Nuisance—Violations Subject to All Legal Remedies.
        In addition to the punishment provided for in this Chapter for a violation of any provision of this Chapter, a violation of any provision hereof, including the failure to obtain a license, or the failure to abide by a condition of approval, constitutes a public nuisance and is subject to abatement as such. Said declaration and abatement of a public nuisance is in addition to and not in lieu of any other remedy or punishment provided at law or in equity. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a violation of any provision of this Chapter may also be subject to any legally available criminal, civil or administrative remedy. (Amended by Ord. 20-03, 10/6/20)

 

5.20.280 Violation and Penalty.
        It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to violate any provision of this Chapter and shall subject the violator to punishment. (Amended by Ord. 20-03, 10/6/20)

 

5.20.290 Application to Existing Establishment.
        Each owner or operator of a massage establishment legally doing business on the effective date of this Chapter shall apply for a massage establishment license not later than one hundred eighty (180) days from the effective date of this Chapter, January 1, 2021. A written notice of this requirement will be delivered to the owner or operator by first class and certified mail, postage prepaid, by the City. The massage establishment shall comply with all requirements which are prerequisites for issuance of a license before such a license will be issued. (Amended by Ord. 20-03, 10/6/20)

 

5.20.300 Conflicting Ordinances Repealed.
        All ordinances or parts of ordinances, or regulations, in conflict with the provisions of this Chapter are hereby repealed. (Amended by Ord. 20-03, 10/6/20)

Chapter 5.24 AMBULANCE SERVICE
5.24.010 Intent and Purpose.
        It is the intent of this Chapter to establish general operating procedures and standards for medical transportation services operating within the City in both emergency and other situations, to provide a fair and impartial means of allowing responsible private operators to provide such services in the public interest, and to provide a means for the designation of exclusive operating areas. This Chapter is modeled after Division 9, Article I of Title 4 of the Codified Ordinances of the County of Orange (County Model Ambulance Ordinance No. 3517; OCC § 4-9-1). (Added by Ord. 98-02, 2/24/98; amended by Ord. 4-02, 6/23/04)

 

5.24.020 Definitions.
        For purposes of this Chapter, the following terms are defined:

        (a)    “Advanced life support service (ALS)” and “basic life support service (BLS)” mean the same as defined in the California Health and Safety Code.

        (b)    “Ambulance” means a motor vehicle, helicopter, or similar vehicle, specifically constructed, modified, equipped, or arranged and operated for the purpose of transporting patients requiring immediate or ongoing medical services excluding the transportation of such persons to or from locations not providing services as defined in this Chapter.

        (c)    “Ambulance service” means the activity, business or service, for hire, profit, or otherwise, of transporting one or more persons by ambulance; provided, however, ambulance service shall not include the transportation by ambulance by an employer of his or her own employees in an ambulance owned and operated by the employer solely for this purpose.

        (d)    “Ambulance service operator” means any person who operates or owns an ambulance service.

 

        (e)    “Attendant” means a trained, qualified individual who, regardless of whether he or she also serves as driver, is responsible for the care of patients.

        (f)    “County” means the County of Orange, State of California.

        (g)    “City” means the City of Dana Point, California.

        (h)    “Department” means the Emergency Medical Services Agency of the County of Orange or the Health Care Agency of the County of Orange, or as otherwise designated by the Orange County Board of Supervisors.

        (i)     “Dispatcher” means an individual employed by an ambulance service operator responsible for sending an ambulance to provide ambulance service to a patient.

        (j)     “Driver” means an attendant who drives or pilots an ambulance.

        (k)    “Emergency” means sudden, unforeseen event giving rise to a need for ambulance service with basic or advanced life support services and is a condition in which an individual has a need for immediate medical attention, or where the potential for such need is perceived by emergency medical personnel or a public safety agency.

        (l)     “Exclusive operating area (EOA)” means the same as defined in Section 1797.85 of the Health and Safety Code, and which is established pursuant to Section 1797.224 of the Health and Safety Code.

        (m)   “Emergency service” means ambulance service performed in response to an emergency.

        (n)    “Fire Chief” means the Fire Chief of the Orange County Fire Authority.

        (o)    “Health Officer” means the Orange County Health Officer or other official designated by the Board of Supervisors of Orange County to perform the Health Officer’s functions under this Chapter.

        (p)    “Licensee” means an ambulance service operator which has been granted a license under this Chapter to provide ambulance service.

        (q)    “Medical services” means services provided by health care professionals licensed pursuant to the California Business and Professions Code or as specified by regulations adopted pursuant to this Chapter.

        (r)    “Paramedic” means the same as defined in the California Health and Safety Code.

        (s)    “Patient” means a wounded, injured, sick, invalid, or otherwise incapacitated person.

        (t)     “Person” means any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association, or other group or combination acting as a unit.

        (u)    “Physician” means a medical doctor or osteopath holding the appropriate license or certificate to practice as such within the State of California pursuant to the Business and Professions Code.

        (v)    “Public safety agency” means any public law enforcement agency, fire protection agency or forest ranger operating in the County. (Added by Ord. 98-02, 2/24/98; amended by Ord. 04-02, 6/23/04)

 

5.24.030 License Required.
        (a)    It shall be unlawful for any person to be an ambulance service operator, or to act in such a capacity either directly or indirectly, within the City without possession of a license issued pursuant to this Chapter. A license may specify the specific geographical area within the City in which it is valid; provided, however, with respect to EOA’s, reference to the EOA by a specific number or similar identification shall be sufficient description of geographic limitation. A license shall be valid for not more than one calendar year or the expiration of the calendar year in which it was issued, whichever is shorter.

        (b)    The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to:

        (1)    Ambulances operated at the request of a public safety agency during any “state of war emergency,” “state of emergency,” or “local emergency,” as defined in the Government Code.

        (2)    Ambulance service transporting a patient from a location outside of the City regardless of destination.

        (3)    Ambulance service transporting a patient by a fixed-wing airplane. (Added by Ord. 98-02, 2/24/98; amended by Ord. 04-02, 6/23/04)

 

5.24.040 Transfer and Term of License.
        No license issued pursuant to this Chapter can be transferred by operation of law or otherwise. The following shall be considered transfers for purposes of this Section:

        (a)    Any change in the business structure of a licensee, including, but not limited to, changes from or to:

        (1)    A sole proprietorship;

        (2)    A partnership, including any change in the partners; and

        (3)    A corporation, including any change in the shareholders, whether by operation of law or otherwise.

        (b)    Bankruptcy, an assignment for the benefit of creditors, or the appointment of a receiver.

        (c)    A sale or transfer of over ten percent (10%) of the assets of a licensee.

        A licensee may apply to the Health Officer for an amendment to the terms of the license, which request shall be processed in the same manner as an original application. Notwithstanding anything in this Section to the contrary, licenses may be suspended, revoked, or terminated prior to the expiration date, pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter. (Added by Ord. 98-02, 2/24/98; amended by Ord. 04-02, 6/23/04)

 

5.24.050 Applications.
        (a)    Each application for a license shall be accompanied by an application fee, if any, set by the Orange County Board of Supervisors, and be made upon forms prescribed by the Health Officer.

        (b)    Each applicant shall submit the following:

        (1)    The names and addresses of the applicant(s) and the owner(s) of the ambulance(s) and the business and any interest therein;

        (2)    The applicant’s training and experience in the transportation and care of patients;

        (3)    The names under which the applicant has engaged, does engage, and proposes to engage in ambulance service;

        (4)    A description of each ambulance including the make, model, year of manufacture, vehicle identification number, current state license number, the length of time the vehicle has been in use, and the color scheme, insignia, name, monogram and other distinguishing characteristics of the vehicles, a description of the company’s program for maintenance of the vehicle, and a description of the vehicle’s radio(s);

        (5)    Proof that the applicant has obtained all licenses and permits required by state or local law or regulation for the type of ambulance service proposed, excluding only a license to provide the service for which application is made;

        (6)    The names and qualifications of each attendant, driver, or dispatcher employed, or to be employed, in providing ambulance service;

        (7)    Proof that the applicant possesses and maintains currently valid California Highway Patrol inspection reports for each vehicle listed in the application;

        (8)    A description of the applicant company’s training and orientation programs for attendants, drivers and dispatchers;

        (9)    Evidence of such financial responsibility and insurance coverage as may be required by the Health Officer pursuant to regulations adopted in accordance with this Chapter;

        (10)  Identification of the geographical area to be served by the applicant, if required by the Department;

        (11)  As to new applications or transfers as specified in Section 5.24.040 of this Chapter, a fingerprint receipt for each principal of the applicant, issued by the Orange County Sheriff-Coroner indicating each principal of the applicant has undergone a complete criminal history check, followed by a report from the Orange County Sheriff-Coroner showing no conviction of crimes which would be violations of the provisions of Section 5.24.070(d)(2), (3), (4), (5), (6) or (7) of this Chapter;

        (12)  A list of all substations or offices where equipment and personnel are, or will be based, including hours of operation; and

        (13)  A description of whether the service proposed by the applicant will include basic life support services or advanced life support service, and if so:

        (A)   The number of basic life support service or advanced life support service units to be deployed on each shift;

        (B)   The emergency response area(s) to receive basic life support service or advanced life support service; and

        (C)   The provisions, if any, for continuing education of attendants.

        (14)  Such other information as the Health Officer may require in regulations adopted pursuant to this Chapter.

        (c)    Renewal applications shall be submitted in the same form and require the same materials as original applications except the requirement of Subsection (b)(11) of this Section. (Added by Ord. 98-02, 2/24/98; amended by Ord. 04-02, 6/23/04)

 

5.24.060 Investigations.
        Upon receipt of a completed application and the required fee, if any, the Health Officer shall make, or cause to be made, such investigation as the Health Officer deems necessary to determine if:

        (a)    The applicant is a responsible and proper person to conduct, operate or engage in the provision of ambulance services;

        (b)    The applicant meets the requirements of this Chapter and of other applicable laws, ordinances or regulations. (Added by Ord. 98-02, 2/24/98; amended by Ord. 04-02, 6/23/04)

 

5.24.070 Issuance or Denial of License.
        (a)    The Health Officer shall issue a license to an applicant if the Health Officer, after completing any investigation required pursuant to this Chapter, determines all requirements of this Chapter have been met and the license fee, if any, set by the Orange County Board of Supervisors, has been paid.

        (b)    In the event of denial, the applicant shall be informed by the Health Officer in writing of the reasons therefore.

        (c)    The licensee shall obtain and keep in force during the term of a license comprehensive automobile liability insurance and professional liability insurance issued by a company authorized to do business in the State of California, acceptable to the Health Officer, insuring the owner against loss by reason of injury or damage that may result to persons or property from negligent operation or defective construction of such ambulance, or from violation of this Chapter or any other law of the State of California, or the United States. Said comprehensive automobile liability policy shall be in the sum of not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for combined single limit, bodily injury and property damage. Said professional liability insurance shall be in the sum of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per person and one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) annual aggregate or other liability coverage acceptable to the City and approved by the City Attorney and the City’s designated risk manager. Worker’s compensation insurance shall be carried covering all employees of the license holder. Before the Health Officer shall issue a license, copies of the policies, or certificates evidencing such policies, shall be filed with the Health Officer. All policies shall contain a provision requiring a thirty (30) day notice to be given to the Department prior to cancellation, modification or reduction in limits. The amount of comprehensive automobile liability insurance shall be subject to review and adjustment by the Health Officer pursuant to regulations adopted under this Chapter. In the use of helicopters, the equivalent insurance requirements shall apply.

        (d)    Grounds for denial of a license application shall be:

        (1)    Failure to meet the requirements of any provision of this Chapter;

        (2)    Violation by any principal of an applicant of Penal Code Section 290;

        (3)    Use of narcotics or other controlled substances;

        (4)    Conviction during the preceding seven (7) years of any crime relating to the use, sale, possession or transportation of narcotics, or other controlled substances;

        (5)    Habitual or excessive use of intoxicating beverages;

        (6)    Conviction during the preceding seven (7) years of any crime punishable as a felony in the State of California;

        (7)    Conviction of any crime involving moral turpitude, including, but not limited to, fraud or intentional dishonesty for personal gain.

        (e)    In determining the effect of any criminal acts on the issuance or denial of a license, the Health Officer shall consider whether the criminal acts are related to the activities of an ambulance service and shall evaluate the rehabilitation of the person(s) involved. The Health Officer shall not consider crimes of which the applicant is, or was, accused but not convicted. (Added by Ord. 98-02, 2/24/98; amended by Ord. 04-02, 6/23/04)

 

5.24.080 License Suspension or Revocation.
        (a)    The Health Officer may suspend or revoke a license for failure by the licensee to comply with, and maintain compliance with, or for violation of, any applicable provision, standard, or requirement of state law or regulation of this Chapter, or of any regulations promulgated hereunder. Suspension of a license is not a condition precedent to revocation of a license.

        (b)    Before issuing a suspension or revocation, the Health Officer shall give written notice to the licensee. Said notice shall:

        (1)    Specify the reason(s) for which the proposed action is to be taken;

        (2)    Set a hearing for not more than fifteen (15) days nor less than seven (7) days after the date of the notice;

        (3)    Specify the date, time and place of the hearing; and

        (4)    Be served on the licensee either by delivery to its principal place of business or to its designated agent for service of such notices, if any.

        (c)    If the licensee, subsequent to service of a suspension or revocation notice under this Section, remedies some or all of the conditions to which the notice refers, the Health Officer may rescind the suspension or revocation at any time.

        (d)    At the hearing, the Health Officer has the burden of proof and may present evidence as to why such action should be taken and to answer the evidence presented by the licensee.

        (e)    The Health Officer may reduce the period of time for hearing under a suspension or revocation notice to no less than twenty-four (24) hours when the Health Officer makes written preliminary findings that such action is necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare. When, as a result of such an emergency proceeding, a license is suspended or revoked, the licensee may request an additional hearing at which the licensee will have the burden of establishing renewed compliance justifying reinstatement of the license. Such additional hearing will be commenced within five (5) days of the licensee’s request. The request for, and the scheduling of, an additional hearing shall not stay operation of the suspension or revocation order.

        (f)    Hearings conducted pursuant to this Section shall be conducted before a Hearing Officer designated by the Department. At the conclusion of said hearing, the Hearing Officer shall expeditiously prepare a written summary of the evidence and proposed findings and conclusions for consideration by the Health Care Agency Director.

        (g)    The Health Care Agency Director shall issue a written decision within thirty (30) days after receiving the Hearing Officer’s findings and conclusions. (Added by Ord. 98-02, 2/24/98; amended by Ord. 04-02, 6/23/04)

 

5.24.090 Appeal to Orange County Board of Supervisors.
        In the event of denial, suspension or revocation of a license, the applicant or licensee shall have the right to request a hearing before the Orange County Board of Supervisors, which hearing shall be requested and conducted in the manner specified in Section 5-2-19 of the Codified Ordinances of Orange County. (Added by Ord. 04-02, 6/23/04)

 

5.24.100 Notification.
        The licensee shall notify the Health Officer within twenty-four (24) hours after any change in ownership or management of the licensee, or any interruption of service of more than twenty-four (24) hours duration, or any substantial change in staffing or equipment. For purposes of this Section, the term “substantial change” shall be as defined by regulation adopted pursuant to this Chapter. (Added by Ord. 98-02, 2/24/98; amended by Ord. 04-02, 6/23/04)

 

5.24.110 Personnel Standards.
        (a)    A licensee shall only employ personnel performing tasks described in this Chapter who comply with the requirements of this Section.

        (b)    Attendants shall be at least eighteen (18) years of age and trained and competent in the proper use of all equipment, and shall hold current Emergency Medical Technician-1A (“EMT-1A”), or state educational equivalent, certification in compliance with all state laws, rules, and regulations. Additionally, each attendant shall hold a license from the Health Officer indicating compliance with this Section. Applications for such licenses shall be in a form required by the Health Officer and shall be accompanied by the fee, if any, established therefore. All applicants for licenses as an attendant shall be subject to the same criminal history review as required for principals of ambulance companies pursuant to this Chapter no less than once every four (4) years. Certificates may be denied, suspended or revoked in the same form and manner as that specified for ambulance service licensees in this Chapter. Licenses shall be valid for two (2) years from the date of issuance or certification as an Emergency Medical Technician-1A, whichever is less. Renewal of a license shall be in the same manner as issuance of a new license.

        (c)    Each licensee shall have at least one dispatcher. Emergency ambulance service licensees shall have a dispatcher on a twenty-four (24) hour-per-day basis and shall adequately train the dispatcher in radio operation and protocols and to the emergency response area(s) served before said dispatcher begins dispatching emergency calls. For purposes of this Section, “adequate” training of a dispatcher shall be that which meets state standards, if any, or County requirements.

        (d)    Ambulance drivers shall, in addition to the requirements of this Chapter for attendants, maintain an appropriate license issued by the California Department of Motor Vehicles and, if applicable, the Federal Aviation Administration. (Added by Ord. 98-02, 2/24/98; amended by Ord. 04-02, 6/23/04)

 

5.24.120 Rates.
        No licensee shall charge more than the maximum BLS rates approved by the Orange County Board of Supervisors. No licensee shall charge more than the maximum ALS rates approved by the Orange County Board of Supervisors or the Orange County Fire Authority. (Added by Ord. 98-02, 2/24/98; amended by Ord. 04-02, 6/23/04)

 

5.24.130 Selection of Ambulance Service Licensees for Exclusive Operating Areas.
        (a)    The Orange County Fire Authority shall administer the competitive process, on behalf of the local EMS agency, for the award of EOA contracts within the City. The Orange County Fire Authority shall select and shall enter into contracts with licensees for the provision of ambulance service in response to emergencies in each EOA, unless the City has provided written notification to the Orange County Fire Authority of its intention to retain licensee selection and contracting authority for itself. Such contracts shall provide for one primary contractor per EOA, with such other back-up service by other emergency ambulance service providers as deemed necessary by the Fire Chief. In awarding these contracts, the Orange County Fire Authority, or City if it elects to retain licensee selection and contracting authority, shall consider the comparative value of competing proposals in the same fashion as would be the case were the County evaluating proposals from prospective service providers for other governmental activities, including consideration of:

        (1)    The quality of service to be provided;

        (2)    The level of service to be provided;

        (3)    The rates charged for services to be provided; and

        (4)    The cost, if any, to the awarding agency.

        (b)    The Fire Chief shall administer the contracts for ambulance service awarded by the Orange County Fire Authority, or by the City if applicable, under this Section. The Fire Chief shall also prepare and keep current EOA lists specifying contract providers for each EOA. The Fire Chief shall include on the list for each EOA the provider which has entered into an ambulance service agreement with the Orange County Fire Authority, or the City if applicable, as the primary contractor as well as the emergency ambulance service provider(s) who will provide back-up emergency ambulance service for that area.

        (c)    In the event no proposals acceptable to the Orange County Fire Authority, or to the City if it elects to retain licensee selection and contracting authority under the provisions of this Section, are received for one or more EOA’s, the Orange County Fire Authority, or the City if applicable, shall designate one or more licensees to provide emergency ambulance services for the EOA. From the date of such designation until a regular emergency ambulance service agreement is signed for the affected area(s), provision of emergency ambulance service shall be an express condition of the license and unreasonable or unjustified refusal of such calls shall be a violation of this Chapter.

        (d)    No person shall provide ambulance service in response to, or as a result of, an emergency, unless that person is a licensee specified in each instance by a physician or public safety agency. A licensee thus specified by a physician need not be a contractor selected pursuant to this Section. Any ambulance service operator receiving a request for emergency ambulance service from other than a public safety agency shall immediately, by telephone, notify a public safety agency designated by regulation of the request.

        No licensee responding to an emergency shall transport a patient unless:

        (1)    A paramedic is present at the location of the patient; or

        (2)    A physician is present at the location of the patient and directs transportation in the absence of a paramedic; or

        (3)    A safety qualified employee of the Orange County Fire Authority, or an appropriate employee of a public safety agency designated by regulation, directs transportation in the absence of a paramedic.

        Unless otherwise directed by a physician present at the location of the patient, a licensee shall transport a patient pursuant to regulations adopted under Section 5.24.140 of this Chapter. (Added by Ord. 04-02, 6/23/04)

 

5.24.140 Rules and Regulations.
        (a)    As to all sections of this Chapter except Section 5.24.130, the Health Officer shall make such rules and regulations and as may be necessary to implement this Chapter. Prior to adoption, proposed rules and regulations shall be submitted to the Orange County Emergency Medical Care Committee for comment.

        (b)    As to Section 5.24.130 of this Chapter, the Fire Chief shall make such rules and regulations and as may be necessary to implement this Chapter. Prior to adoption, the Fire Chief’s rules and regulations shall be submitted to the Orange County Emergency Medical Care Committee for comment.

        (c)    The Health Officer or the Fire Chief or their respective designee(s) may inspect the records, facilities, transportation units, equipment and method of operating of each licensee whenever necessary and, by the Health Officer, at least annually. (Added by Ord. 98-02, 2/24/98; amended by Ord. 04-02, 6/23/04)

 

5.24.150 Complaints.
        The Department, the City, any user, subscriber, public safety agency or consumer who believes, or has reason to believe, that an individual has been required to pay an excessive charge for services, received inadequate services, or services provided were not in compliance with the provisions of this Chapter, may file a written complaint with the Department and the Fire Chief setting forth such allegations. The Department and Fire Chief shall notify the ambulance service operator of such complaint. The ambulance service operator shall file a written response within fifteen (15) calendar days after receipt of the notification. (Added by Ord. 98-02, 2/24/98; amended by Ord. 04-02, 6/23/04)

 

5.24.160 Variance.
        As to all but Section 5.24.130 of this Chapter, the Health Officer may grant variances from the terms of this Chapter if he or she finds such action is necessary to protect the public health, safety or welfare. As to Section 5.24.130 of this Chapter, the Fire Chief may grant variances from the terms of this Chapter if he or she finds such action is necessary to protect the public health, safety or welfare. As to the Health Officer, such variances may include the issuance of a temporary license. No temporary license shall exceed one hundred and eighty (180) days in duration. (Added by Ord. 98-02, 2/24/98; amended by Ord. 04-02, 6/23/04)

 

5.24.170 Violations—Penalty.
        Violation of any provision of this Chapter by an ambulance service operator shall be a misdemeanor. (Added by Ord. 98-02, 2/24/98; amended by Ord. 04-02, 6/23/04)

Chapter 5.28 BINGO GAMES
5.28.010 Bingo Defined.
        As used in this Chapter, “bingo” means a game of chance in which prizes are awarded on the basis of designated numbers or symbols on a card which conform to numbers or symbols selected at random. The game of bingo shall include cards having numbers or symbols which are concealed and preprinted in a manner providing for distribution of prizes. The winning cards shall not be known prior to the game by any person participating, in the playing or operation of the bingo game. All pre-printed cards shall bear the legend “For sale or use only in a bingo game authorized under California law and pursuant to local ordinance.” (Added by Ord. 01-07, 12/11/01)

 

5.28.020 Organizations Eligible for License.
        Organizations which are exempted from the payment of the bank and corporation tax by Revenue and Taxation Code Sections 23701a, 23701b, 23701d, 23701e, 23701f, 23701g and 23701l, mobile home park associations and senior citizen organizations are eligible to apply to the City for a license to conduct bingo games in the City, if the receipts of such games are used only for charitable purposes. (Added by Ord. 01-07, 12/11/01)

 

5.28.030 Application for License.
Eligible organizations desiring to obtain a license to conduct bingo games in the City shall file an application in writing with the City Manager or his or her designee. The City Manager shall recommend to the City Council whether to approve or deny each application. The City Council shall be the issuing authority for bingo licenses. The license issued shall be for a term of one year from the date of issuance, subject to renewal and an annual fee of fifty dollars ($50.00). If an application for a license is denied, one-half of any license fee paid shall be refunded to the organization. (Added by Ord. 01-07, 12/11/01)

 

5.28.040 Qualifications for License.
        No license shall be issued to any organization unless such applicant is an eligible organization under Section 5.28.020 and its application conforms to the requirements, terms and conditions of this Chapter. (Added by Ord. 01-07, 12/11/01)

 

5.28.050 Contents of Application.
        (a)    The application for a license shall contain the following:

        (1)    The name of the applicant organization and a statement that applicant is an eligible organization under Section 5.28.020;

        (2)    The name and signature of at least two (2) officers of the applicant organization;

        (3)    The proposed location of the bingo game, including occupancy capacity;

        (4)    Whether the applicant owns or leases the proposed location of the bingo game;

        (5)    Whether the proposed location of the bingo game is used by the applicant as an office or for performance of the purposes for which the applicant is organized;

        (6)    Proposed days of week and hours of day for conduct of bingo games;

        (7)    A statement that the applicant agrees to conduct bingo games in strict accordance with the provisions of Penal Code section 326.5 and this Chapter as they may be amended from time to time, and agrees that the license to conduct bingo games may be revoked by the City Manager upon violation of any such provisions.

        (b)    The application shall be signed by the applicant under penalty of perjury.

        (c)    The annual license fee shall accompany the application.

        (d)    The applicant shall also submit with its application a certificate or determination of exemption or other proof of its exemption under the Revenue and Taxation Code sections referred to in Section 5.28.020. (Added by Ord. 01-07, 12/11/01)

 

5.28.060 Contents of License.
        Upon being satisfied that the applicant is qualified under law to conduct bingo games in the City, the City Council shall issue a license to the applicant, which shall contain the following information:

        (a)    The name and nature of the organization to whom the license is issued;

        (b)    The address where bingo games are authorized to be conducted;

        (c)  The occupancy capacity of the room in which bingo games are to be conducted;

        (d)    The date of the expiration of such license;

        (e)    Such other information as may be necessary or desirable for the enforcement of the provisions of this Chapter. (Added by Ord. 01-07, 12/11/01)

 

5.28.070 Suspension or Revocation of License.
        (a)    Whenever it appears to the City Manager that the licensee is conducting a bingo game in violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter, the City Manager shall have the authority to summarily suspend the license and order the licensee to immediately cease and desist any further operation of any bingo game.

        (b)    Any person who continues to conduct a bingo game after any summary suspension under subsection A of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor for each day on which a bingo game is held in violation of this section.

        (c)            The order issued under subsection (a) of this Section shall also notify the licensee that it shall have five (5) days from the date of such order to request a hearing to determine whether such license shall be revoked. Failure to request, in writing, such hearing before the City Manager within the five (5) day period, shall result in revocation of the license.

        (d)    Upon such request by the licensee whose license has been suspended under subsection A for a hearing to determine whether such license shall be revoked, the City Manager shall provide such hearing within ten (10) days after receipt of such request. At which hearing, the suspended licensee may appear before the City Manager for the purpose of presenting evidence why the license should not be revoked. No license shall be revoked under this section unless notice of the time and place of such hearing has first been given at least five (5) days before the hearing by depositing in the United States mail a notice directed to the suspended licensee at the address given in the application. The notice shall set forth a summary of the reason or reasons for the suspension and revocation.

        (e)    Any organization whose license is revoked under this section shall not conduct any bingo game in the City until such time as the City Council, on appeal, determines to overrule the decision of the City Manager. (Added by Ord. 01-07, 12/11/01)

 

5.28.080 Appeal.
        (a)    Any organization whose license is revoked by the City Manager may appeal the decision of the City Manager pursuant to Sections 2.04.100—2.04.130.

        (b)    Any organization whose license is finally revoked may not again apply for a license to conduct bingo games in the City for a period of one year from the date of such revocation. If the ground for revocation is cancellation of the exemption granted under the appropriate Revenue and Taxation Code section set forth in Section 5.28.020, such organization may again apply for a license upon proof of reinstatement of the exemption. (Added by Ord. 01-07, 12/11/01)

 

5.28.090 Maximum Amount of Prize.
        The total value of prizes awarded during any bingo game shall not exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) in cash and/or prizes for each separate game which is held. (Added by Ord. 01-07, 12/11/01)

 

5.28.100 Profits to be Kept in Separate Fund or Account.
        All profits derived from a bingo game shall be kept by licensee in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. Profits from bingo shall only be used for charitable purposes. The licensee shall keep full and accurate records of the income and expenses received and disbursed in connection with its operation, conduct, promotion, supervision and any other phase of bingo games, which are authorized by this Chapter. The City and its authorized agents shall have the right to examine and audit such record at any reasonable time. Licensee shall fully cooperate with the City by making such record available. (Added by Ord. 01-07, 12/11/01)

 

5.28.110 Financial Interest in Conduct of Bingo Game.
        No individual, corporation, partnership or other legal entity except the licensee shall hold a financial interest in the conduct of such bingo game. (Added by Ord. 01-07, 12/11/01)

 

5.28.120 Exclusive Operation by Licensee.
        A bingo game shall be operated and staffed only by members of the licensee organization, who shall not receive a profit, wage or salary from any bingo game. The licensee organization may, however, employ security personnel to provide security services at bingo games and pay for such personnel from game proceeds. Only the licensee shall operate such game and participate in the promotion, supervision or any other phase of such game. (Added by Ord. 01-07, 12/11/01)

 

5.28.130 Open to Public.
        All bingo games shall be open to the public, not just to the members of the licensee organization. (Added by Ord. 01-07, 12/11/01)

 

5.28.140 Attendance Limited to Occupancy Capacity.
        Notwithstanding that bingo games are open to the public, attendance at any bingo game shall be limited to the occupancy capacity of the room in which such game is conducted as determined by the fire department and building department of the City. A licensee shall not reserve seats or space for any person. (Added by Ord. 01-07, 12/11/01)

 

5.28.150 Game Only on Licensee’s Property.
        (a)    A licensee shall conduct a bingo game, only on property owned or leased by it or property whose use is donated to the organization. This property must also be used by such organization for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized. Bingo games shall not be played on any property owned by the City of Dana Point, other than the Del Obispo Community Center.

        (b)    The license issued under this Chapter shall authorize the licensee to conduct bingo games only at the address, which is stated in the application. The license shall be prominently displayed on the property where the bingo games are conducted and shall be presented immediately upon demand by a peace officer or an authorized agent of the City. In the event the described property ceases to be used as an office and as a place for performance of the purposes for which the licensee is organized, the license shall have no further force or effect.

        (c)    A new license may be obtained by an eligible organization, upon application under this Chapter, when it again owns or leases property used by it for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized. Nothing in this section shall be construed to require that the property owned or leased by the organization be used or leased exclusively by such organization. (Added by Ord. 01-07, 12/11/01)

 

5.28.160 Minor Not to Participate.
        No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be allowed to participate in any bingo game. (Added by Ord. 01-07, 12/11/01)

 

5.28.170 Intoxicated Persons Not to Participate.
        No person who is obviously intoxicated shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game. (Added by Ord. 01-07, 12/11/01)

 

5.28.180 Hours of Operation.
        No licensee shall conduct any bingo games more than six hours out of any twenty-four-hour period. No bingo game shall be conducted before t10:00 a.m. nor after t10:00 p.m. of any day. (Added by Ord. 01-07, 12/11/01)

 

5.28.190 Participant Must be Present.
        No person shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game unless the person is physically present at the time and place in which the bingo game is being conducted. (Added by Ord. 01-07, 12/11/01)

 

5.28.200 City May Enjoin Violation.
        The City may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin a violation of Penal Code section 326.5 or of this Chapter. (Added by Ord. 01-07, 12/11/01)

 

5.28.210 Penalties for Violation of Chapter.
        Any violation of this Chapter is a misdemeanor. Any violation of Section 5.28.120 is punishable by a fine of up to ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), which shall be deposited in the general fund of the City. (Added by Ord. 01-07, 12/11/01)

Chapter 5.30 CABLE COMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISES
5.30.010 Title.
        This Chapter is known and may be cited as the “Cable Communications Franchise Ordinance.” (Added by Ord. 03-12, 6/11/03)

 

5.30.020 Definitions.
        Various terms and phrases used in this Chapter are defined in Section 5.30.160. (Added by Ord. 03-12, 6/11/03)

 

5.30.030 Grant of Franchise.
        (a)    Authority to Grant Franchises. The Grantor may grant a franchise to provide Cable Service to any person who offers to provide a system pursuant to this Chapter.

        (b)    Form. A franchise may, at Grantor’s sole option, take the form of an Ordinance, license, permit, contract, resolution, or any other form elected by Grantor.

        (c)    Grants Not Required. Consistent with applicable state and federal law, no provision of this Chapter requires the granting of a franchise when, in the opinion of the Grantor, it is in the public interest not to do so.

        (d)    Purpose. The purpose of a franchise is to identify and authorize the operation of a Cable Communications System by a specific Grantee, and to identify and specify those terms, conditions, definitions, itemizations, specifications and other particulars of the agreement between the Grantor and a Grantee. In so doing, a franchise may clarify, extend, and interpret the provisions of this Chapter. Where a franchise and this Chapter conflict, both shall be liberally interpreted to achieve a common meaning or requirement. In the event this is not possible within reasonable limits, the franchise shall prevail. Unless otherwise specifically stated, no provision of this Chapter shall be deemed to be contractually incorporated into any franchise granted hereunder.

        (e)    Compliance with Law. Neither this Chapter nor a franchise granted under it relieves a Grantee of any requirement of Grantor, or of any Ordinance, rule, regulation, or specification of Grantor now or hereafter in effect pursuant to Grantor’s police power, including, but not limited to, the obtaining of a business license, and the payment of all permit and inspection fees required from time to time by the Grantor.

        (f)    Franchise Non-Exclusive. Grantor may, at its option, grant one or more franchises to construct, operate, maintain, and reconstruct a system. Said franchises shall constitute both a privilege and an obligation to provide the system and services required by this Chapter and the franchise.

        (g)    Duration. The term of any franchise, and all rights, privileges, obligations and restrictions pertaining thereto, shall be specified in the franchise. The effective date of any franchise shall be as specified in the franchise.

        (h)    Use of Public Streets and Rights-of-Way. For the purposes of operating and maintaining a system in the franchised service area, a Grantee may place and maintain within the public rights-of-way such property and equipment as meets with the approval and conforms to the standards of the City and as are necessary and appurtenant to the operation of the Cable Communications System. Prior to construction or alteration of the plant in public rights-of-way, a Grantee shall apply for, pay all applicable fees, and receive all necessary permits.

        (i)     Use of Other Utilities. Any person who provides a system or services as defined herein shall be deemed a Grantee and must obtain a franchise. If such Grantee uses distribution channels furnished by any telephone company, other public utility, or any other entity which are functionally equivalent to those used by a Cable Operator, said Grantee shall be required to comply with all of the provisions of this Chapter.

        (j)     Assignment, Transfer or Sale of Franchise.

        (1)    There shall be no assignment of a franchise, in whole or in part, or any change in control of a Grantee, without the prior express written approval of the Grantor.

        (2)    Any assignment or transfer, or any change in control, without the Grantor’s prior written consent shall constitute a default which will cause a franchise to terminate.

        (3)    At least one hundred twenty (120) days before a proposed assignment or change in control of the franchise is scheduled to become effective, a Grantee shall request in writing the Grantor’s written consent. A Grantee shall submit to the Grantor (concurrently with the submission of its written request) an FCC 394 Form (or successor form) together with: (i) any other information or documentation required by the state or federal government (including the FCC); (ii) the information referenced in subsection (7) of this paragraph; (iii) unedited and unredacted copies of the sale or transfer documents with all schedules and exhibits thereto; and (iv) information regarding the financial ability and stability of the proposed assignee with respect to being able to perform all obligations of the existing franchise.

        (4)    The Grantor shall not unreasonably withhold its consent to such an assignment or change in control. However, in evaluating the request for assignment, transfer, sale, or change in control, the Grantor may, in its sole discretion and among other things, undertake a technical inspection and audit of the system to determine whether the system complies with all applicable technical and safety codes, this Chapter, and the franchise.

        (5)    If the Grantor determines (as a result of the technical inspection and audit) that the system does not comply with federal, state, or local standards, then a Grantee shall be provided with an opportunity to correct or cure the non-compliance either prior to or after the transfer or change of control. In the alternative, the Grantor may work with both the current and proposed Grantee to cure the non-compliance. The Grantor shall be under no obligation to approve any transfer or assignment if a Grantee is in breach.

        (6)    Before an assignment or change in control is approved by the Grantor, the proposed assignee, transferee, or buyer shall execute an affidavit acknowledging that it has read, understood, and will abide by both this Chapter and the applicable franchise.

        (7)    In the event of any approved assignment or change in control, the assignee or transferee shall assume all obligations and liabilities of the former Grantee relating to the franchise unless specifically relieved by the Grantor at the time the assignment or change in control is approved.

        (8)    If the Grantor disapproves a request for consent, then a Grantee may submit another request or an amended request for consent or seek whatever address is permitted under applicable law. In such a situation, a new one hundred twenty (120) day time-frame begins to run from the date of the submission of the new, amended, or modified request or application.

        (k)    Reimbursement of Processing and Review Costs. Grantee shall reimburse Grantor for Grantor’s reasonable processing and review expenses in connection with a transfer of the franchise or a change in control of the franchise, including without limitation, costs of administrative review, financial, legal, and technical evaluation of the proposed transferee, costs of consultants (including technical and legal experts), notice and publication costs, and document preparation expenses. A reasonable deposit in an amount determined by the City may be required by the City. In addition, prior to any transfer or change in control, Grantee shall reimburse Grantor for all of Grantor’s expenses in connection with evaluating or negotiating a renewal of Grantee’s franchise, whether or not said renewal was ever finalized or granted. Grantor may send Grantee an itemized description of all such charges, and Grantee shall pay such amount within twenty (20) days after the receipt of such description.

        (l)     Violation. If a Grantee violates any provision of paragraph (j) of this Section, the franchise shall automatically terminate. The procedures contained in Section 5.30.130 of this Chapter shall not apply to an unlawful transfer or change in control, and the franchise shall automatically terminate upon the occurrence of that violation. (Added by Ord. 03-12, 6/11/03)

 

5.30.040 Rights Reserved to the Grantor.
        (a)    Reservation. Grantor reserves every right it may have in relation to its power of eminent domain over Grantee’s franchise and property.

        (b)    Non-waiver or Bar. Neither the granting of any franchise, nor any provisions of this Chapter, shall constitute or be construed as a waiver or bar to the exercise of any governmental right or power by Grantor.

        (c)    Delegation of Powers. Any right or power in, or duty retained by or imposed upon Grantor, or any commission, officer, employee, department, or board of Grantor, may be delegated by Grantor to any officer, employee, department or board of Grantor, or to such other person or entity as Grantor may designate to act on its behalf.

        (d)    Right of Inspection of Construction. The Grantor shall have the right to inspect and approve all construction, installation, or other physical work performed by Grantee in the public rights-of-way and on private property consistent with its generally applicable building codes, so long as said inspection and testing does not unreasonably interfere with Grantee’s operations.

        (e)    Right to Require Removal of Property. Consistent with applicable law, at the expiration of the term or any renewal term or extension for which the franchise is granted, or upon its lawful revocation, expiration, or termination, the Grantor shall have the right to require a Grantee to remove, at Grantee’s expense, all portions of its system and any other property from all streets and public rights-of-way within the franchise service area within a reasonable period of time.

        (f)    Right of Intervention. The Grantor shall have the right of intervention in any suit, proceeding or other judicial or administrative proceeding in which the Grantor has any material interest, and to which a Grantee is party.

        (g)    Place of Inspection. The Grantor shall have the right to inspect Grantee’s local premises, and to request copies of all relevant information that is reasonably necessary for the exercise of Grantor’s regulatory authority, upon reasonable notice at any time during normal business hours. Any Grantee records kept at another place shall, within ten (10) days of Grantor’s request, be made available at Grantee’s local premises within the County of Orange for Grantor’s inspection and copying. All reports and records required pursuant to this Chapter shall be furnished at the sole expense of Grantee, except as otherwise provided in this Chapter or the franchise. (Added by Ord. 03-12, 6/11/03)

 

5.30.050 Rights of Subscribers.
        (a)    Discriminatory Practices Prohibited. A Grantee shall not deny Cable Service or otherwise discriminate against subscribers or others on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age, handicap, or other protected classes. A Grantee shall strictly adhere to the equal employment opportunity requirements of federal, state, or local governments and shall comply with all applicable laws and executive and administrative orders relating to non-discrimination.

        (b)    Tapping and Monitoring. A Grantee shall not tap or monitor, or permit any other person controlled by Grantee to tap or monitor, any cable, line, signal input device, or subscriber outlet or receiver, for any purpose whatsoever without the express written consent of the subscriber or a court order therefor; provided, however, that a Grantee may monitor customer service calls for quality control purposes and may conduct system-wide or individually addressed “sweeps” for the purpose of verifying system integrity, monitoring signal levels, or checking for unauthorized connections to the Cable Television System, service levels, or billing-for-pay services.

        (c)    Data Collection.

        (1)    Except for its own use, or in connection with the provision of Cable Services or for release of data to the Grantor, the Grantee shall not permit its system to be used for data collection purposes, nor shall it otherwise collect data which would reveal the commercial product or other preferences or opinions of an individual subscriber, members of their families, or their guests, licensees or employees, unless the Grantee shall have received the prior written consent of such subscriber.

        (2)    In any event, the Grantee shall not disclose or permit the release or sale of data on individual subscribers or groups thereof, but may disclose or permit the release or sale of aggregate data only.

        (3)    Disclosure of Subscriber Lists. The Grantee shall not disclose, or sell, or permit the disclosure or sale of its subscriber list without the prior written consent of each subscriber on such list; provided that Grantee may use its subscriber list as necessary for the construction, marketing, and maintenance of the Grantee’s services and facilities authorized by a franchise, and the billing of subscribers for Cable Services; and provided further, that consistent with applicable law, Grantor may use Grantee’s subscriber list for the purpose of communication with subscribers in connection with matters relating to the operation, management, and maintenance of the Cable System.

        (4)    Grantee shall not disclose individual subscriber preferences, viewing habits, beliefs, philosophy, creeds, or religious beliefs to any third person, firm, agency, governmental unit, or investigating agency without court authority or the prior written consent of the subscriber.

        (d)    Terms of Subscriber Consent.

        (1)    Any written consent, if given, shall be limited to a period of time not to exceed one year, or a term agreed upon by the Grantee and the subscriber.

        (2)    The Grantee shall not condition the delivery or receipt of Cable Services to any subscriber on any such consent.

        (3)    A subscriber may at any time revoke, without penalty or cost, any consent previously given by delivering to the Grantee in writing a statement of the subscriber’s intent to so revoke.

        (e)    Other Persons Affected. The prohibitions contained in paragraphs (a) through (d), inclusive, of this Section apply to Grantee, as well as to all of the following:

        (1)    Officers, directors, employees, agents, and general and limited partners of the Grantee;

        (2)    Any person or combination of persons owning, holding, or controlling any corporate stock or other ownership interests in the Grantee;

        (3)    Any affiliated or subsidiary entity owned or controlled by Grantee, or in which any officer, director, stockholder, general, or limited partner, or person or group of persons owning, holding or controlling any ownership interest in the Grantee, shall own, hold or control any corporate stock or other ownership interests; and

        (4)    Any person, firm, or corporation acting or serving in the capacity of a holding or controlling company of the Grantee.

        (f)    Subscriber Bill of Rights. Grantee shall provide to all subscribers, at the time of initial connection and annually thereafter, a notice in a form previously approved by Grantor (which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld) describing, in understandable language, the subscriber’s rights and obligations that are generally provided under the franchise and federal law, including a description of how to contact the Grantee and, if necessary, the Grantor, in the event of an unresolved subscriber complaint.

        (g)    Notice to New Subscribers. Before providing Cable Service to any subscriber, Grantee shall provide a written notice to the subscriber containing substantially the following information:

 

“Subscriber understands that Company uses public rights-of-way and other facilities of the City of Dana Point in providing service and that this continued use cannot be guaranteed. Subscriber agrees not to make any claims against the City of Dana Point or its officers or employees in the event that such use is denied for any reason, and Company is unable, in its discretion, to provide service over alternate routes.”

 

(Added by Ord. 03-12, 6/11/03)

 

5.30.060 Finance.
        (a)    Payments to the Grantor.

        (1)    As compensation for any franchise to be granted, and in consideration of permission to use the Grantor’s streets and public rights-of-way for the construction, operation, maintenance, and reconstruction of a system, the Grantee shall pay to the Grantor the amounts specified in the franchise.

        (2)    Payments due the Grantor shall be computed quarterly, and shall be paid within thirty (30) days after the close of each calendar quarter. The payment shall be accompanied by a report showing the basis for the computation and such other relevant facts as may be required by the Grantor to determine the accuracy of the payment. A final annual reconciliation, and payment if any, shall be delivered to Grantor by Grantee within ninety (90) days after the end of each calendar year.

        (3)    If any franchise payment or recomputed amount is not made on or before the dates specified above in subsection (2), Grantee shall pay as additional compensation the greater of the following:

        (A)   An interest charge, computed from the applicable due date, at an annual rate equal to the prevailing commercial prime interest rate in effect upon the due date, plus three percent (3%).

        (B)   A sum of money equal to four thousand dollars ($4,000.00) for each month, or part thereof, of delay, which sum shall also bear interest from the due date at an annual rate equal to the prevailing commercial prime interest rate in effect upon the due date, plus one percent (1%).

        (4)    In addition to any late payment made pursuant to subsection (3) above, if a payment is late by sixty (60) days or more, Grantee shall pay a sum of money equal to five percent (5%) of the amount due in order to defray additional expenses and costs incurred by Grantor as a result of such delinquent payment.

        (5)    No acceptance of any payment shall be construed as a release of, or an accord, or satisfaction of, any claim that the Grantor might have for further or additional sums payable under the terms of this Chapter, or for any other performance by Grantee of an obligation hereunder.

        (6)    Payments of compensation made by a Grantee to the Grantor pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter are in addition to, and exclusive of, any and all authorized taxes, business license fees, and other fees, levies, or assessments now in effect, or subsequently adopted in accordance with state and federal law.

        (b)    Security Fund.

        (1)    Within thirty (30) days after the effective date of the franchise, a Grantee shall deposit into a bank account established by a Grantee, for the benefit of Grantor, and shall maintain on deposit through the term of the franchise, a sum specified in the franchise as security for the faithful performance by Grantee of all of the provisions of the franchise, and compliance with this Chapter and with all orders, permits and directions of the Grantor, or any designated representative of the Grantor having jurisdiction over Grantee’s acts or defaults under the franchise or this Chapter, and as security for the payment by a Grantee of any claims, fees, liens, or taxes due the Grantor which arise by reason of the construction, operation, maintenance or reconstruction of the system pursuant to the franchise or this Chapter, and to satisfy any actual or liquidated damages arising out of a franchise breach.

        (2)    Except as otherwise provided in the franchise, if a Grantee fails, after twenty (20) days written notice, to pay to the Grantor any fees that are due and unpaid, or fails to repay within such twenty (20) days, any damages, costs or expenses which the Grantor is compelled to pay by reason of any act or default of grantee in connection with its franchise; or if Grantee fails to comply with any provision of the franchise or this Chapter and the Grantor determines that such failure was without just cause and, in a manner consistent with the procedures specified in Section 5.30.140 of this Chapter, Grantor reasonably determines it can be remedied by a withdrawal from the security fund or is nevertheless subject to liquidated damages, then, in any such event, the Grantor may immediately withdraw the amount thereof from the security fund, with interest and any liquidated damages. Upon such withdrawal, the Grantor shall notify a Grantee of the amount and the date of withdrawal.

        (3)    Within thirty (30) days after notice to Grantee that any amount has been withdrawn by Grantor from the security fund, a Grantee shall deposit a sum of money sufficient to restore such security fund to the original amount.

        (4)    Grantee shall be entitled to the return of the security fund, or portion thereof, with interest, that remains on deposit at the expiration or termination of the franchise, once all amounts due to the Grantor have been paid. Grantee shall also retain its right to challenge any withdrawal from such security fund.

        (5)    The rights reserved to the Grantor with respect to the security fund are in addition to all other rights of the Grantor, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right with respect to such security fund shall affect any other right the Grantor may have.

        (c)    Faithful Performance Bond. Within thirty (30) days after the effective date of the franchise, a Grantee shall furnish proof of the posting of a faithful performance bond in favor of the Grantor, with corporate surety approved by the Grantor in the sum specified in the franchise and conditioned that a Grantee shall well and truly observe, fulfill, and perform each term and condition of the franchise; provided, however, that such bond shall not be required after certification by Grantor of the completion of construction of Grantee’s Cable System. The corporate surety must be authorized to issue such bonds in the State of California, and the bond must be obtained and secured through an authorized agent in the County of Orange. During the course of construction, the amount of the bond may from time to time be reduced, as provided in the franchise. Written evidence of payment of premiums shall be filed with the Grantor.

        (d)    Letter of Credit.

        (1)    At the option of the Grantor, a Grantee may be authorized, in lieu of creating a security fund or obtaining a faithful performance bond, to post an irrevocable letter of credit, issued by a bank approved by the Grantor, in the amount specified in the franchise. Said letter of credit shall incorporate wording approved by the Grantor enabling it to draw from time to time such funds as the Grantor may determine to be necessary to satisfy any material defaults of Grantee or to make any payments due Grantor under or in connection with this Chapter or Grantee’s franchise, upon not more than ten (10) days written notice to the issuer of the letter of credit. Said letter of credit shall further provide for sixty (60) days written notice by certified mail from its issuer to Grantor of any pending expiration or cancellation, and said notice shall without further cause constitute reason for the Grantor to draw the full sum to be held in its own accounts until such letter of credit is reestablished in a form satisfactory to Grantor.

        (2)    If Grantor requires such a letter of credit, Grantee shall pay all fees or other charges required to keep it in force and shall, within thirty (30) days of any draw by Grantor, restore its face value to the original amount.

        (3)    All provisions herein applicable to bonds or security funds shall also apply to letters of credit. (Added by Ord. 03-12, 6/11/03)

 

5.30.070 Services.
        (a)    Services to be Provided. A Cable System shall provide, as a minimum, the broad programming categories specified in the franchise.

        (b)    Changes in Services. Grantee shall inform Grantor and its subscribers at least thirty (30) days in advance of making any change in a Cable Service, or in the rates charged therefor.

        (c)    Non-discrimination. Grantee shall not discriminate between or among subscribers within one type or class in the availability of services, at either standard or differential rates according to published rate schedules, except as otherwise authorized by law. No charges may be made for services except as listed in published schedules which are available for inspection by anyone at Grantee’s office, quoted by Grantee on the telephone, and displayed or communicated to all potential subscribers.

        (d)    Prepayment. Grantee may not charge subscribers for services more than one (1) month in advance unless an individual subscriber requests a longer period. Bills may be due and payable upon mailing but shall not be delinquent, and no late charge penalties shall be assessed, until the later of: (i) twenty-two (22) days from postmark; or (ii) service has actually been provided for the billed period. All bills and billing statements shall clearly indicate the billing period, the actual due date, and the delinquent or late payment or assessment.

        (e)    Disconnect for Cause. Grantee may disconnect a subscriber only for cause, which shall include, without limitation, the following:

        (1)    Payment delinquency in excess of forty-five (45) days.

        (2)    Willful or negligent damage to or misappropriation of Grantee’s property.

        (3)    Monitoring, tapping, or tampering with Grantee’s system, signals, or service.

        (4)    Threats of violence to Grantee’s employees or property.

        (f)    Reconnection. Grantee shall, upon subscriber’s written request, reconnect service which has been disconnected for payment delinquency when payment has removed the delinquency. If authorized by applicable law, a published standard charge may be made for reconnection. Grantee shall not be required to make more than three (3) reconnections for the same subscriber if the disconnections involved were caused by payment delinquency within any previous twenty-four (24) month period. Reconnection for disconnects covered by subsections (e)(2), (3), and (4) of this Section shall be at Grantee’s sole discretion.

        (g)    Installations.

        (1)    Grantee shall promptly provide and maintain service as specified in the franchise to the residential, commercial, and industrial structures in the franchise service area, as defined in the franchise, upon request of the lawful occupant or owner.

        (2)    Where a new drop is required to provide service, Grantee shall advise each subscriber that the subscriber has the right to require that installation be done over any route on the subscriber’s property, and in any manner the subscriber may elect which is technically feasible and consistent with proper construction practices. If the subscriber requests installation other than a standard installation, then the subscriber may be required to pay a reasonable fee for the time and materials occasioned by that installation.

        (3)    For purposes of this paragraph, a standard installation shall include installation of drop cable with fittings up to one hundred and fifty (150) feet from the CATV distribution system measured along the cable from the center line of the street or utility easement through the house wall or, at the subscriber’s option, through the floor from a house vent or crawl space directly to the subscriber’s television set with five (5) feet of cable from the wall or floor entry to the TV set. Also included as part of a standard installation is the grounding cable, fine tuning of the television set, and the provision by the Grantee of the appropriate literature and information.

        (4)    After Cable Service has been established by activating trunk or distribution cables for any area, Grantee shall provide service to any person requesting service in that area within seven (7) days from the date of request, provided that the Grantee is able to secure all access rights necessary to extend service to that potential subscriber within that seven (7) day period on reasonable terms and conditions.

        (h)    Non-Standard Installations. For each non-standard installation, a Grantee may charge the subscriber for the cost of material and labor in excess of that required for a standard installation. Grantee shall provide each subscriber a written estimate of all charges for a non-standard installation prior to installation and obtain subscriber’s written authorization in advance for all nonstandard installation charges.

        (i)     Converters/Terminals. At such time as a converter or terminal is required for subscribers to have access to all services on its system, Grantee shall make them available to subscribers for a fee. Grantee may require each subscriber who elects to install a converter or terminal to furnish a security deposit therefor.

        (1)    Each converter or terminal device shall be and remain the property of the Grantee unless Grantor approves or requires its sale to the subscriber. Grantee shall be responsible for maintenance and repair of all equipment owned by Grantee and may replace it as Grantee may from time-to-time elect, except that subscriber shall be responsible for loss of or damage to any such device while in the subscriber’s possession.

        (2)    Upon termination or cancellation of subscriber’s service, subscriber shall promptly return Grantee’s property to Grantee in the same condition as received, reasonable wear and tear excepted.

        (3)    Grantee may apply the security deposit against any sum due from subscriber for loss of or damage to such converter or terminal exceeding reasonable wear and tear. In the event that no security deposit has been required, the Grantee may charge the subscriber for any such damage exceeding reasonable wear and tear.

        (4)    If Grantee has no claim against the subscriber’s security deposit, Grantee shall return it, or the balance, to the subscriber within twenty (20) days of return of the converter or terminal. (Added by Ord. 03-12, 6/11/03)

 

5.30.080 Design and Construction.
        (a)    System Construction. The system shall be constructed in accordance with the provisions of the franchise.

        (b)    Construction Components and Techniques. Construction components and techniques shall be in accordance with the franchise and all applicable law.

        (c)    Construction Notice. Grantee shall give at least forty-eight (48) hours advance notice to all property owners and to the Grantor prior to installing any above-ground or underground structures upon easements located on private property. Grantee shall be a member of Underground Service Alert (“USA”).

        (d)    System Construction.

        (1)    The Grantee shall begin to offer Cable Service and any other service authorized by the franchise no later than the date specified in the franchise.

        (2)    A Grantee shall provide a detailed construction plan including an estimated progress schedule, area construction or reconstruction maps, a system testing plan, and projected dates for offering service to subscribers.

        (3)    A Grantee shall remove or relocate, at the request of the Grantor and without expense to the Grantor, any facilities installed, used and maintained under any franchise if and when made necessary by any lawful change of grade, alignment or width of any public street, way, alley or place, including the construction of any subway or viaduct by the Grantor.

        (4)    The City Engineer shall be authorized to direct a Grantee to locate any conduits and appurtenances as may be reasonably necessary to avoid sewers, waterpipes, conduits or other structures lawfully in or under the streets; and before the work of constructing any pipes and appurtenances is commenced, the Grantee shall file with said Engineer plans showing the location thereof, which shall be subject to the approval of said Engineer; and all such construction shall be subject to the inspection of said Engineer and done to his reasonable satisfaction. All street coverings or openings of traps, vaults, and manholes shall at all times be kept flush with the surface of the streets; provided, however, that vents for underground traps, vaults and manholes may extend above the surface of the streets when said vents are located in parkways, between the curb and property lines. All above-ground facilities including, but not limited to, pedestals, nodes, and boxes shall only be placed in those locations specified by the City Engineer and shall be screened in a manner as specified by the City Engineer, to minimize any visual impacts. Installations shall not interfere with pedestrian and traffic flow and shall be consistent with ADA requirements.

        (5)    If any portion of any street shall be damaged by reason of defects in any of the conduits and appurtenances maintained or constructed pursuant to a franchise, or by reason of any other cause arising from the operation or existence of any pipes and appurtenances constructed or maintained under any other grant, said Grantee shall, at its own cost and expense, immediately repair any such damage and restore such street, or portion of street, to as good condition as existed before such defect or other cause of damage occurred, such work to be done under the direction of the City Engineer, and to his or her satisfaction.

        (6)    A Grantee shall guarantee the integrity, durability and structural integrity of any street cut repairs necessary for the installation or repair of grantee’s facilities for the life of the street. Grantee shall repair or replace, at no expense to the City, any failed street cut completed by Grantee or Grantee’s subcontractor, as determined by the City Engineer.

        (e)    Geographical Coverage. A Grantee shall construct the Cable System so that it is capable of providing Cable Service to every residential dwelling unit and other structures specified in the franchise within the franchise service area. A Grantee shall take reasonable steps to accommodate future annexations to the franchise service area (as defined and provided by the franchise), with any exceptions requiring specific Grantor approval. Service shall be provided to subscribers in accordance with the schedules specified in the franchise. The route of separate cables serving institutional subscribers shall be as approved by Grantor and specified in the franchise.

        (f)    Construction Default. Upon the failure, refusal or neglect of Grantee to cause any construction, repair, or the terms of any construction permit, or other necessary work to comply with the terms of the franchise, thereby creating an adverse impact upon public safety, Grantor may (but shall not be required to) cause such work to be completed in whole or in part, and upon so doing shall submit to Grantee an itemized statement of costs. Grantee shall be given reasonable advance notice of Grantor’s intent to exercise this power, and fifteen (15) days to cure the default. Grantee shall, within thirty (30) days of billing, pay to Grantor the actual costs incurred.

        (g)    Vacation or Abandonment. In the event any street, alley, public highway, or portion thereof used by a Grantee shall be vacated by the Grantor, or the use thereof discontinued by a Grantee, upon written notice a Grantee shall forthwith remove its facilities therefrom unless specifically permitted to continue the same. On the removal thereof, Grantee shall restore, repair or reconstruct the area where such removal has occurred, to such condition as may be required by the Grantor. In the event of any failure, neglect or refusal of a Grantee, after thirty (30) days’ notice by the Grantor, to do such work, Grantor may cause it to be done, and Grantee shall, within thirty (30) days of billing, pay to Grantor the actual costs incurred.

        (h)    Abandonment in Place. Grantor may, upon written application by Grantee, approve the abandonment of any property in place by Grantee, under such terms and conditions as Grantor may approve. Upon Grantor-approved abandonment of any property in place, Grantee shall cause to be executed, acknowledged, and delivered to Grantor such instruments as Grantor shall prescribe and approve, transferring and conveying the ownership of such property to Grantor.

        (i)     Removal of System Facilities. In the event that Grantee’s plant is deactivated for a continuous period of thirty (30) days, without prior written notice to and approval by Grantor, then Grantee shall, at Grantor’s option and demand, and at the sole expense of Grantee, promptly remove from any streets or other areas all property of Grantee. Grantee shall promptly restore the streets or other areas from which such property has been removed to its condition existing prior to Grantee’s use thereof; provided that Grantee shall not be required to remove conduit from underground, where Grantor has determined that no damage to the surface of any structures will result from such nonremoval.

        (j)     Movement of Facilities. In the event it is necessary, at Grantor’s discretion, to temporarily move or remove any of a Grantee’s property for a public purpose, Grantee, upon reasonable notice, shall move, at the expense of Grantee, its property as may be required to facilitate such public purpose. No such movement shall be deemed a taking of Grantee’s property. Nothing herein shall limit the right of Grantee to seek reimbursement from any party other than Grantor.

        (k)    Undergrounding of Cable. Cables shall be installed underground at Grantee’s cost. Previously installed aerial cable shall be installed underground at Grantee’s pro rata cost in concert with other utilities, when those other utilities convert from aerial to underground construction.

        (l)     Facility Agreements. No franchise shall relieve Grantee of any obligations involved in obtaining pole or conduit space from any department of Grantor, any utility company, or from others maintaining utilities in Grantor’s streets.

        (m)   Extension of Franchise Service Area. If Grantor elects to grant one or more franchises hereunder, and if thereafter one or more of the franchises expires or is otherwise terminated, Grantor may, if it so elects, require a remaining Grantee, or more than one, to extend its system to provide service to the franchise service area previously served under the terminated franchise, unless Grantee demonstrates to Grantor’s reasonable satisfaction that it is not commercially practicable to do so. The terms and requirements of such extension shall not exceed those contained in this Chapter or in Grantee’s franchise.

        (n)    Repair of Streets and Public Ways. Grantee shall not cut, trench, or excavate any street which has been constructed or overlaid for five (5) years or slurry-sealed for two (2) years from said construction, overlay, or slurry-seal, as the case may be, without the advance written permission of the City Engineer. The City Engineer’s consent shall be conditioned, among other things, upon a requirement that Grantee overlay or slurry-seal, as determined by the City Engineer, the entire width of the affected street for the entire length of the project. Any and all streets and public ways, and improvements located within such streets and public ways, disturbed or damaged by a Grantee or its contractors during the construction, operation, maintenance, or reconstruction of the system, shall be restored at Grantee’s expense, and within the time frame and limits specified by Grantor, to their original condition unless otherwise authorized in writing by Grantor. Grantee may be required subsequent to completion of construction, from time to time as determined by the City Engineer, to overlay or slurry-seal the affected street in order to maintain the structural integrity and/or aesthetics of the street. All decorative sidewalks (pavers, tiles, etc.) shall be replaced in like kind pursuant to the written direction of the City Engineer.

        (o)    Erection of Poles Prohibited. Grantee shall not erect any pole on or along any street or public way. If additional poles in an existing aerial route are required, Grantee shall negotiate with the public utility for their installation. Any such installation shall require the advance written approval of the Grantor. Subject to applicable federal and state law, a Grantee shall negotiate the lease of pole space and facilities from the existing pole owners for all aerial construction, under mutually acceptable terms and conditions.

        (p)    Reservation of Street Rights. Nothing in a franchise shall prevent the Grantor from constructing, repairing, or altering any public work. All such work shall be done, insofar as practicable, in such manner as not to unnecessarily obstruct, injure or prevent the free use and operation of any property of Grantee. However, if any property of Grantee shall interfere with the construction, maintenance, or repair of any public improvement, that property shall be removed or replaced in such manner as directed by Grantor so that the same shall not interfere with the public work, and such removal or replacement shall be at the expense of a Grantee.

        (q)    No Interference. Grantee shall not place equipment where it will interfere with existing and future uses of the streets, public right-of-way, or public property, with the rights of private property owners, with gas, electric, or telephone fixtures, with water hydrants or mains, with wastewater stations, with any traffic control system, or any other service or facility that benefits the Grantor’s or its residents’ health, safety or welfare.

        (r)    Protection of Streets. Grantee, at its own expense and in a manner as directed by the City Engineer, shall protect streets and public rights-of-ways, easements, and support or temporarily disconnect or relocate at its sole cost in the same street or other street or public right-of-way, any property of such Grantee when necessitated by reason of:

        (1)    Traffic conditions;

        (2)    Public safety;

        (3)    Temporary or permanent street closing;

        (4)    Street construction or resurfacing;

        (5)    A change or establishment of street grade;

        (6)    Installation of sewers, drains, water pipes, storm drains, lift stations, force mains, power or signal lines, and any traffic control system; or

        (7)    Any improvement, construction or repair or any improvement related to the Grantor’s residents’ health, safety or welfare.

        (s)    Marking of Facilities. It shall be the responsibility of a Grantee to locate and mark or otherwise visibly indicate and alert others to the location of its underground cable before employees, agents, or independent contractors of any entity perform work in the marked-off area. A Grantee shall participate in and adhere to the practices of Underground Services Alert (“USA”) and provide at least forty-eight (48) hours prior notice to USA prior to any excavation.

        (t)     Construction Standards.

        (1)    All construction, installation, maintenance and repair shall treat the aesthetics of the property as a priority, shall not substantially affect the appearance or the integrity of the structure, and shall not be installed on private property without the property owner’s permission subject to Section 621 of the Cable Act.

        (2)    All underground drops shall follow (to the greatest extent possible) property lines, and cross property only at right angles unless otherwise permitted by the property owner, or required due to the physical characteristics of the subsurface, or required under applicable law. The Grantor may, either by way of a generally applicable resolution or through the imposition of routing conditions in any franchise determine the routing or placement of cable, conduit, nodes, pedestals, power supplies, vaults, and other equipment relating to the system.

        (3)    All construction shall be accomplished between the hours specified by the Grantor in the approved permit or ordinances.

        (u)    Payment of Fees.

        (1)    Grantee shall obtain, at its own expense, all permits and licenses required by local law, rule, regulation or applicable ordinance.

        (2)    As a condition of obtaining all necessary permits and licenses, the Grantee shall pay all applicable permit fees and, in addition, all of the Grantor’s direct labor and supervisory costs, including customary and reasonable overhead (the “Labor Payment”). The City Council may, from time to time by resolution, establish the amount of said permit fees. To the extent not inconsistent with applicable law, the permit fees shall be sufficient to reimburse the Grantor for its costs, including the costs of staff, independent consultants, and related overhead, to review the proposed project, processing permits, plan check, inspecting the project including the costs of an outside inspector and, where applicable, the costs of an outside soils engineer or compaction testing expert, and the costs of any required testing to ensure that the construction adheres to standards of this Chapter, any franchise, any permit, and any other requirement of the Grantor.

        (3)    Both Grantee and Grantor may hire contractors, at Grantee’s sole expense, to carry out any work under this agreement. Grantee shall make payment within ten (10) days of billing from the Grantor. Grantee shall be responsible for any damage caused by the construction including, but not limited to, damage to the public right-of-way, private property, streets, existing utilities, curbs, gutters and sidewalks. Grantee shall pay the Grantor any costs incurred as a result of such damages including repairs made by the Grantor except for costs incurred as a result of the Grantor’s sole negligence or its employees’ and agents’ sole negligence. Grantee shall complete restoration of or repairs to any damage caused by the construction within ten (10) days from the date of written notice from the Grantor.

        (4)    In lieu of the inspection portion of the Labor Payment or permit fees described above, at the Grantor’s sole option, the Grantor may require Grantee at Grantee’s sole expense, to hire a consultant, who is acceptable to and under the supervision of the Grantor (“Consultant”), to inspect the installation of the facilities on behalf of the Grantor, or provide other services as mutually agreed to by the parties.

        (v)    Progress of the Construction. Grantee, with the Grantor’s assistance, shall develop a construction schedule and submit it to the Grantor at least ninety (90) days prior to the start of work. Prior to the underground construction of any of the facilities or the installation of any of the nodes or power supplies, unless otherwise agreed to, Grantee shall furnish detailed plans of the proposed construction and changes thereto to the Grantor. The proposed node sites must be approved by the Grantor prior to construction of the underground plant. Depending on health and safety issues, and input from residents, the Grantor, at its sole discretion, may require proposed node sites to be relocated by Grantee. In the installation of the facilities, nodes or power supplies, Grantee shall comply with the Grantor’s standard construction requirements relating to telephone facilities and other comparable utility installations.

        (w)   Construction Notification.

        (1)    Construction Plan. Unless otherwise governed by Grantor’s construction regulations and Ordinances, at least one hundred eighty (180) days prior to any construction, and from time to time thereafter, Grantee shall file with the City Manager or other designated employees of the City, a general construction plan describing in detail the Facilities construction plans, areas to be served, and an estimated time schedule for such construction (“Construction Plan”). Grantee reserves the right to modify or change its Construction Plan at any time in its sole discretion, provided Grantee provides written notice to the Grantor. Any modifications to construction plans must be reviewed and approved by the Grantor before modifications can be implemented by Grantee.

        (2)    Notice to the Grantor. The Grantor shall have thirty (30) days following receipt of the Construction Plan, or changes thereto, to approve or disapprove the Construction Plan.

        (3)    Notice to Other Providers. Grantee shall provide the Grantor with general engineering base maps identifying existing underground and aerial utility routes, streets, parcels, poles, and construction needs including points of connections for existing residences, potential trench routes, and potential locations for nodes, amplifiers, and taps at least four (4) months in advance of any underground construction, unless otherwise agreed to, which may be reviewed in advance by any interested party for the purpose of reducing the impact on the Grantor’s infrastructure and for the public’s convenience and shall be approved or disapproved by the Grantor within sixty (60) days of receipt.

        (4)    Traffic Control Plans. Grantee shall furnish detailed traffic control plans, which shall include site-specific hours of construction, to the City Engineer no later than thirty (30) days prior to the commencement of any construction activities which may affect or impact traffic (the “Traffic Control Plan”). The City Engineer shall provide (if any) comments to Grantee within ten (10) business days of receipt. The City Engineer may specify and limit hours of construction in order to avoid traffic congestion during peak periods. No construction related activities may be conducted in the public right-of-way without an approved Traffic Control Plan. Grantee shall indemnify the City against any claims or actions brought against City as a result of the Traffic Control Plan.

        (5)    Telephone Contact. During construction, Grantee shall provide the Grantor a telephone contact number, and staff it during regular business hours, to enable the Grantor to report any concerns regarding construction of the Facilities. After business hours such calls will be routed to an on-call supervisor. In the event that the Grantor reports any concerns to Grantee, Grantee shall respond in a timely manner. Grantee shall correct within two (2) business days any adverse impact to the Grantor’s use or operations or the use or operations of a third party caused by Grantee’s construction activities in the public right-of-way at no cost to the Grantor.

        (6)    Daily Notice. Every working day during construction, Grantee shall notify the designated Grantor staff member of the location of that next day’s construction activities. The number of concurrent construction locations may be limited by the Grantor.

        (7)    Project Overview. No later than one hundred and fifty (150) days prior to commencement of construction, Grantee shall file with the City Manager or other designated employee of the Grantor a project overview which shall contain an assessment of the operation of the nodes and power supplies, including without limitation, a noise study prepared by a licensed engineer approved by the Grantor documenting noise generated from the nodes.

        Once the project has been satisfactorily defined by Grantee as determined by the Grantor, the Grantor will conduct an initial study to determine the appropriate level of environmental review. Grantee will submit the final engineering plans to the Grantor for review and approval prior to the issuance of any permits.

        (8)    Public Communication Plans.

        (A)   Grantee agrees to develop a public communication plan (“Communication Plan”) and submit it to the Grantor for the Grantor’s review at least one hundred and twenty (120) days prior to commencement of construction. The Grantor shall approve or disapprove the Communication Plan within thirty (30) business days of its receipt. The Communication Plan shall include the following:

        (i)     A written notification of property owners adjacent to nodes, power supplies, amplifiers and taps not less than sixty (60) days prior to the installation indicating the proposed location, a photograph of all above-ground or below-ground pedestals and other visible equipment from which their size must be apparent, and a detailed description of the equipment included within the node including: the electronic components, natural gas generator, electrical fans, and the anticipated noise levels during winter and summer months and emergency backup operations. Grantee will provide its non-toll telephone number and a telephone number of the Grantor which may be called if the property owner is concerned about the installation.

        (ii)    A mailing to all residents in a construction area thirty (30) days in advance of construction activity.

        (iii)   The hanging of door hangers on all residences in the construction area seven (7) days prior to immediate construction activity.

        (iv)   A second written notice to the adjacent property owner(s) not less than fifteen (15) days prior to installation of such nodes, amplifiers and taps which shall have the same information as set forth in subparagraph (8)(i) above as well as the actual date of the installation of such nodes, amplifiers, power supplies and taps.

        (B)   Grantee shall furnish the Grantor with the specific locations of the nodes, amplifiers and power supplies at least sixty (60) days in advance of the installation of the nodes. The Grantor will provide notice to property owners at Grantee’s expense. Grantee agrees to participate in any public hearings or meetings scheduled by the Grantor and will be prepared to answer questions concerning Grantee’s proposed construction of the facilities. Grantee shall have available at such meetings visual aids as appropriate such as slides, maps and diagrams. The proposed node locations in the City must be approved by the Grantor prior to construction of the underground cable plant. Depending upon health and safety issues, and input from residents, the Grantor, at its sole discretion, may require proposed node, amplifier and power supply sites be relocated by Grantee.

        (9)    Maps and Plans. Grantee shall maintain accurate maps and improvement plans of the Facilities, in a manner consistent with telecommunications industry standards and which can be integrated into the Grantor’s Geographic Information System (“GIS”). Grantee shall furnish to the Grantor two complete sets of as-built construction drawings and a copy of the drawings in AUTOCAD usable format within sixty (60) days of completion of the construction of the Facilities. Maps and improvement drawings shall be furnished to the Grantor and other parties interested in performing work within the public right-of-way, upon request, at no cost to the Grantor. Grantee shall pothole its facilities, at its expense, within fifteen (15) days of receipt of a written request from the Grantor unless Grantee can certify, with an associated indemnity approved by the City Attorney, the exact location and depth of the facilities at the location where potholing is requested.

        (10)  Certification of Completed Facilities. Grantor shall provide Grantee written notice of any street improvement project within Grantor’s service area. Upon receipt of said written notice, Grantee shall certify in writing to Grantor that its facilities located in the street improvement project are complete and require no further construction for a period of five (5) years, other than maintenance, or Grantee shall apply for all necessary permits and authorizations so that any necessary facilities will be installed and completed prior to completion of the street improvement project. (Added by Ord. 03-12, 6/11/03)

 

5.30.090 Operations and Maintenance.
        (a)    Customer Service.

        (1)    A Grantee shall maintain an office in the franchise service area, or at such other location as is approved by the Grantor in writing, or as described in the franchise. That office must be open during all usual business hours, but in no case less than forty eight (48) hours per week, including during at least one weekend day per week. Grantor shall have a publicly listed, non-long-distance-charge telephone number that is in operation to receive subscriber complaints and requests on a 24-hour basis. Current information shall be maintained of all complaints and their disposition, and a summary thereof shall be submitted to Grantor.

        (2)    The Grantee shall respond to requests as follows: (i) within eight (8) hours after receipt of a request for repairs relating to a service interruption affecting at least ten (10) percent of the subscribers of the system; (ii) within twenty-four (24) hours after receipt of requests for service related to all other service interruptions; (iii) and within forty-eight (48) hours for all other complaints and requests for repair. All Cable System related problems shall be resolved within five (5) business days unless technically infeasible. No charge shall be made to a subscriber for such service or repairs, except that Grantee may charge for service calls not related to its Cable System, or that are caused by the subscriber or members of its household, or the subscriber’s agents or guests.

        (3)    The Grantee shall provide a telephone service system to receive all construction and service complaints. A sufficient number of customer service representatives shall be provided so that callers are not required to wait more than thirty (30) seconds before being connected to a customer service representative ninety percent (90%) of the time, measured quarterly, or to receive busy signals more than three (3) percent of the time, measured quarterly. The telephone number of the local office shall be listed in the telephone directory serving the City of Dana Point. The telephone service system shall accept complaints twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week. The telephone service system shall be capable of generating reports relating to answer times, response times, hold times, and abandoned calls.

        (4)    Customer service personnel shall identify themselves by first names immediately.

        (5)    Customers shall have the right to speak with a supervisor, and if none is available, a supervisor shall return the customer’s call within one working day.

        (6)    All officers, agents, or employees of the Grantee, including its contractors or subcontractors, who come into contact with members of the public shall wear on their outer clothing a photo-identification card in a form reasonably acceptable to Grantor. Grantee shall account for all identification cards at all times. Every vehicle of Grantee, or its major subcontractors, shall be clearly identifiable as working for Grantee.

        (7)    Grantee shall provide subscribers with the option of scheduling a four (4) hour period, either in the morning or afternoon, in which a service call will be made.

        (8)    If a Grantee representative is running late for an appointment with a customer, or will not be able to keep the appointment as scheduled, the customer will be contacted and the appointment will be rescheduled, as necessary, at a time which is convenient for the customer. The customer has the option of rescheduling the appointment within a specified two (2) hour period.

        (b)    Remedies for Inadequate Performance. Except for rebuild or planned service interruptions for which Grantee receives prior approval from the Grantor, in the event that one-third or more of its service to any subscriber is interrupted for six (6) consecutive hours, or for a total of twelve (12) nonconsecutive hours within any thirty (30) day period, and subscriber notifies Grantee of said service interruption within twenty-four (24) hours of subscriber discovery thereof, Grantee shall provide a ten percent (10%) rebate of the monthly fees to affected subscribers for each such consecutive six-hour or nonconsecutive twelve-hour service interruption period. Grantor shall provide a fifty percent (50%) rebate of the monthly fees to all affected subscribers for each failure to make a service call within the specified four (4) hour period. In no case shall such rebate exceed the monthly fee charged to the subscriber.

        (c)    Biennial Audit of Performance.

        (1)    Grantor may require, at its option, that performance audits of the system be conducted every two (2) years by an independent technical consultant selected and employed by Grantor to verify that the system complies with all technical standards and other specifications of the franchise.

        (2)    Upon completion of a performance audit, the Grantor and Grantee shall meet to review the performance of the Cable System. The reports required by this Chapter regarding subscriber complaints, the records of performance audits and tests, and the opinion survey report shall be utilized as the basis for review. In addition, any subscriber may submit complaints prior to or during the review meetings, either orally or in writing, and these shall also be considered.

        (3)    Within thirty (30) days after the conclusion of the system performance review meetings, Grantor shall issue findings with respect to the adequacy of system performance and quality of service. If areas of non-compliance are found, Grantor may direct Grantee to correct the non-compliance within such period of time as Grantor determines is reasonable.

        (4)    Participation by the Grantor and the Grantee in this process shall not waive any rights they may possess under applicable federal or state law.

        (5)    In addition to the biennial audit described above, Grantor may conduct an annual audit of the same or lesser magnitude, at its sole expense, when and if determined necessary or appropriate by Grantor.

        (d)    System Technical Data. Grantee shall provide Grantor with a computer disk or other data storage device requested by Grantor, in format approved by Grantor, which details and documents all of Grantee’s equipment and facilities and their geographic location in the City. Such computer disk or other device shall be in a format specified by the City and data shall be updated annually and whenever there have been significant changes in the location of Grantee’s equipment and facilities. In addition, Grantee shall maintain in its local office, a complete and up-to-date set of as-built system maps upon completion of construction or reconstruction, equipment specification and maintenance publications, and signal level diagrams for each active piece of electronic equipment in the system. As-built drawings shall show all lines and installed equipment, and tap values and spigots. The scale of maps and drawings shall be sufficient to show the required details in easily readable form and size. Technical data at the local office shall also include approved pole applications, details and documentation of satellite and microwave equipment, mobile radio units, heavy construction vehicles and equipment, and video and audio equipment normally used in the operation of the system. If Grantor requires use of technical data in its own offices, it may make copies of any items at Grantor’s expense.

        (e)    Availability of Technical Data. All technical data reasonably necessary to demonstrate a Grantee’s compliance with FCC regulations and the franchise shall be available for Grantor’s inspection during normal business hours upon two (2) business days notice. In the event of system failure or other operating emergency, the technical data will be made available at any time, so long as the provision of said data does not unreasonably interfere with Grantee’s operations.

        (f)    Emergency Repair Capability. It shall be Grantee’s responsibility to assure that its personnel, qualified to make repairs, are available at all reasonable times and that they are supplied with keys, equipment location instructions, and technical information necessary to begin repairs upon notification of the need to maintain or restore continuous service to the system.

        (g)    Customer Service Standards and Procedures.

        (1)    Information to Customers. The Grantee shall, at the time service is initiated, provide each new subscriber with written information covering:

        (A)   The time allowed to pay outstanding bills.

        (B)   Grounds for termination of service.

        (C)   The steps the Grantee must take before terminating service.

        (D)   How the customer can resolve billing disputes.

        (E)   The steps necessary to have service reconnected after involuntary termination.

        (F)    The fact that customer service personnel must identify themselves by first names immediately.

        (G)   The fact that subscribers have the right to speak with a supervisor, and if none is available, a supervisor shall return the subscriber’s call within one (1) working day.

        (H)   The appropriate regulatory authority with which to register a complaint and how to contact that authority.

        In addition, at least once each calendar year, Grantee shall notify each subscriber that information is available upon request concerning items (A) through (H) above.

        (2)    Written Notices. Written notice of all terms of the customer agreement, the name, address and telephone number of the Cable Operator, all equipment and fee options, the availability of A/B switches, the availability of parental control devices, any reduced rates for seniors or other subscribers, company billing and credit practices, company practices with respect to privacy of subscribers, the telephone numbers for customer complaints, the telephone number of the Grantor, and other relevant information, shall be made by Grantee to subscribers before service is commenced, at least once each calendar year, at any time upon the request of the subscriber, and whenever changes to such policies are made.

        (3)    Advance Notice of Changes. Except as otherwise provided by applicable law, advance notice of increases in fees or charges, and changes in channel lineup of stations or services, shall be sent to Grantor and to subscribers at least thirty (30) days before the changes are made, except for changes not known sufficiently in advance by Grantee and not under Grantee’s control, or where Grantor’s waiver is obtained. Notices must be clearly identified and in print large enough to be easily readable.

        (4)    Billing.

        (A)   Billing Frequency and Format. Bills for service shall be rendered monthly unless service is rendered for a period less than one (1) month. All bills shall contain a telephone number and a mailing address for billing inquiries or disputes and shall clearly delineate all changes and the basis for those changes.

        (B)   Disputed Bills.

        (i)     In the event of a dispute between a subscriber and the Grantee regarding the bill, the Grantee shall promptly make such investigation as is required by the particular case and report the results to the subscriber. If the dispute is not resolved to the satisfaction of both parties, the Grantee shall inform the subscriber of the Grantee’s complaint procedures. If the subscriber wishes to obtain the benefits of subparagraphs (2) and (3) of this paragraph, notification of the disputed bill must be given by the subscriber to the Grantee in writing within thirty (30) days after the bill date.

        (ii)    The subscriber shall not be required to pay the disputed portion of the bill until the earlier of the following:

        (I)    Resolution of the dispute; or

        (II)   Expiration of the forty-five (45) day period beginning on the date of the subscriber’s written notification, provided that the procedures established in subparagraph (1) above have been followed.

        (5)    Suspension of Collection Efforts. Pending resolution of the billing dispute, Grantee shall ensure that no termination notices are issued for the disputed portions of the bill, and that no other collection procedures are initiated for the disputed amount. Any such activity may be interpreted as an attempt to avoid the provisions of these rules and may constitute a violation of these rules.

        (6)    Referral of Accounts to Collection Agencies.

        (A)   Uncollected accounts may be referred to private collection agencies for appropriate action if the bill has not been paid by the earlier of (i) thirty (30) days following date of involuntary termination; or (ii) the sixty-first (61st) day following the billing date of the original uncollected amount, provided that no notification of a billing dispute has been made.

        (B)   If the account was voluntarily terminated by subscriber, for any reason, the account may not be referred to a private collection agency until at least thirty (30) days following submission of the final bill. If notification of a billing dispute is made, all collection procedures shall be delayed as required in subsection (4)(B) above entitled “Disputed Bills.” Referral to a collection agent shall then occur no sooner than the ninety-first (91st) day following the billing date of the original uncollected amount.

        (7)    Termination for Non-Payment. Bills shall not be delinquent earlier than twenty-two (22) days from the date of the bill, which must be mailed to subscribers within five (5) working days prior to the stated due date. subscribers must be notified in writing of a proposed disconnection for non-payment at least fifteen (15) days prior to disconnection.

        (h)    Refund. When a subscriber voluntarily discontinues service, Grantee shall refund, within twenty (20) days of the discontinuance of service, the unused portion of any advance payments after deducting any charges currently due through the date of such discontinuance. Unused payment portions shall be the percentage of time for which subscriber has paid for service and will not receive it because of the subscriber’s discontinuation of service. (Added by Ord. 03-12, 6/11/03)

 

5.30.100 Violations.
        (a)    Use of Public Streets. From and after the effective date of this Chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install, or maintain in any public place within Grantor’s territory, or upon any easement owned or controlled by a public utility, or within any other public property of Grantor, or within any privately-owned area within Grantor’s jurisdiction which is not yet, but is designated as, a proposed public place on a tentative subdivision map approved by Grantor, any equipment, facilities, or system for distributing signals or services through a cable television system, unless a franchise has first been obtained hereunder, and is in full force and effect.

        (b)    Unauthorized Connections. It shall be unlawful for any person to make or use any unauthorized connection to, or to monitor, tap, receive or send any signal or service via a franchised system, or to enable any person to receive or use any service, television or radio signal, picture, program, or sound, or any other signal without payment to the owner of said system.

        (c)    Tampering with Facilities. It shall be unlawful, without the consent of the owner, to willfully attach to, tamper with, modify, remove or injure any physical part of or signals on a franchised Cable Television System. (Added by Ord. 03-12, 6/11/03)

 

5.30.110 Termination and Forfeiture.
        (a)    Revocation. Consistent with applicable law, and in addition to any rights set out elsewhere in this Chapter, the Grantor reserves the right to revoke a franchise, subject to the procedural guidelines set forth in Section 5.30.140 of this Chapter, in the event that:

        (1)    A Grantee willfully or negligently, on a repeated basis, violates any material provision of this Chapter or its franchise.

        (2)    A Grantee’s construction schedule, as set forth in any franchise, is materially delayed, and such delay is within the control of Grantee.

        (b)    Forfeiture. Upon failure of a Grantee to comply with any material term of this Chapter or its franchise, the Grantor may, subject to the procedural guidelines set forth in Section 5.30.140 of this Chapter, declare a forfeiture. A Grantee may be required to remove its structures or property from the Grantor’s streets and to restore those streets to their prior condition within a reasonable period of time. Upon failure to do so, the Grantor may perform the work and collect all costs, including direct and indirect costs, from a Grantee. At Grantor’s discretion, the cost thereof may be placed as a lien upon all plant, property, or other assets of a Grantee. (Added by Ord. 03-12, 6/11/03)

 

5.30.120 Franchise Applications.
        Applicants for a franchise shall submit to the Grantor, or to its designated representative, written application in a format provided by the Grantor, at the time and place specified by the Grantor for accepting applications, and accompanied by the designated application fee. A nonrefundable application fee, established by resolution of the Grantor, shall accompany the application to cover all costs associated with processing the application, including without limitation, costs of administrative review, financial, legal and technical evaluation of the applicant, the costs of consultants (including technical and legal experts), notice and publication requirements, and document preparation expenses. In the event such costs exceed the application fee, the applicant shall pay the difference to Grantor within twenty (20) days following receipt of an itemized statement of such costs. This provision is procedural and shall not constitute the grant of any right to a Grantee. (Added by Ord. 03-12, 6/11/03)

 

5.30.130 Records; Reports; Right to Inspect and Audit; Experts.
        (a)    Grantee to Provide Records. All reports and records required under this Section shall be furnished at the sole expense of Grantee.

        (b)    Records. Grantor must maintain in its local offices, and make available for inspection during normal business hours, a separate and complete set of business records for the franchise. The Grantee shall provide that information in such form as may be required by the Grantor, as well as copies of any records of Grantee upon Grantor’s request, so long as said information is directly or indirectly related to the scope of Grantor’s rights under this Chapter, the franchise, or Grantor’s regulatory functions.

        (c)    Maintenance and Inspection of Records. Grantee shall keep true and accurate books and records in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles, consistently applied, located in the franchise area that reasonably demonstrate a Grantee’s compliance with the obligations set forth in its franchise. Grantor shall, upon two (2) business days notice, have the right to inspect said records and receive copies thereof to the extent said information is reasonably related to the scope of the Grantor’s rights under this Chapter, the franchise, or the Grantor’s regulatory functions. Any Grantee records kept at another place shall, within ten (10) days of Grantor’s request, be made available at Grantee’s local premises within the County of Orange.

        (d)    Reports of Financial and Operating Activity.

        (1)    No later than ninety (90) days after the close of Grantee’s fiscal year, Grantee shall submit an audited written report to the Grantor which shall include:

        (A)   A financial report, audited and certified by a financial officer of Grantee, for all Cable System activity during the previous fiscal year, including gross receipts from all sources and gross subscriber revenues from each service. The report must set out separately all gross receipts from all sources in the City and gross subscriber revenues from each service in the City, and all payments, deductions, and computations of franchise fees.

        (B)   A summary of the previous year’s activities, including, but not limited to, subscriber totals and new services offered and system construction activity.

        (C)   A current list of Grantee’s officers, directors, and other principals if there has been any change in the previous year.

        (D)   A list of stockholders or other equity investors holding five percent (5%) or more of the voting interests in Grantee if there has been any change in the previous year.

        (E)   A summary of complaints received and remedial actions taken.

        (2)    Performance Tests and Compliance Reports. No later than April 15 of each year, the Grantee shall provide a written report of any FCC or other performance tests required or conducted. In addition, the Grantee shall provide reports of the test and compliance procedures required by its franchise, or by this Chapter, no later than thirty (30) days after the completion of those tests and compliance procedures.

        (3)    Additional Reports. The Grantee shall prepare and furnish to the Grantor in writing, at the times and in the form prescribed by Grantor, such additional reports or information as Grantor may reasonably require to confirm and verify Grantee’s compliance with the provisions of its franchise and this Chapter.

        (e)    Examination of Facilities. Upon two (2) business days notice, and during normal business hours, Grantee shall permit examination, by any duly authorized representative of Grantor, of all franchise property and facilities, together with any appurtenant property and facilities of Grantee situated within the public rights-of-way which are directly or indirectly related to the Cable System.

        (f)    Right to Audit.

        (1)    In addition to any other inspection rights under this Chapter or the franchise, upon thirty (30) days prior written notice, Grantor shall have the right to inspect, examine, or audit, during normal business hours, all documents pertaining to a Grantee or any affiliated person which are reasonably necessary to ascertain a Grantee’s compliance with its franchise or this Chapter. Grantor may not exercise said right more frequently than once in any twelve (12) month period. All such documents shall be made available at the local office of a Grantee. All such documents pertaining to financial matters which may be the subject of an audit by the Grantor as set forth herein shall be retained by a Grantee for a minimum of five (5) years during the term of and following the termination of a franchise. Access by the Grantor to any of the documents covered by this paragraph shall not be denied by the Grantee on grounds that such documents are alleged by the Grantee to contain proprietary information.

        (2)    Grantor may require written certification by a Grantee’s directors, officers, or other employees with respect to all documents referred to in this paragraph.

        (3)    Any audit conducted by the Grantor pursuant to this paragraph shall be conducted at the sole expense of the Grantor, and the Grantor shall prepare a written report containing its findings, a copy of which shall be mailed to a Grantee; provided, however, that a Grantee shall reimburse the Grantor for the expense of any such audit if, as the result of said audit, it is determined that there is a shortfall of more than two percent (2%) in the amount of franchise fees or other payments which have been made or will be made by a Grantee to the Grantor pursuant to the terms of the franchise.

        (g)    Retention of Experts. In the exercise of its rights under this Chapter, the Grantor shall have the further right to retain technical experts and other consultants on a periodic basis for the purpose of monitoring, testing, and inspecting any construction, operation, maintenance or reconstruction of the system, and all parts thereof, or to ensure compliance with and enforcement of the provisions of this Chapter and the franchise. The Grantor shall bear the cost of retaining such experts, provided that the Grantee shall reimburse the Grantor for all expenses related to the retention of said experts where this Chapter or the franchise so provide, or under either of the following circumstances:

        (1)    The Grantee has initiated proceedings which would normally require the Grantor to retain such experts, such as the filing of a request for approval of a transfer or change in control, renewal to the extent allowed by law, expansion of the franchise service area, or the modification or amendment of the franchise; or

        (2)    The reports of such experts submitted to the Grantor reveal that the Grantee has failed to substantially comply with the terms and conditions of this Chapter or of the franchise.

        If Grantee is required to reimburse Grantor pursuant to this paragraph, Grantor shall send Grantee an itemized description of such charges, and Grantee shall pay such amount within twenty (20) days after the receipt of such description. (Added by Ord. 03-12, 6/11/03)

 

5.30.140 Enforcement Mechanism.
        (a)    Notice and Hearing for Franchise Default.

        (1)    Unless otherwise provided in this Chapter or in the franchise, prior to formal consideration by Grantor of termination, revocation, or forfeiture of Grantee’s franchise, or any other penalty or administrative remedy available to the Grantor, including liquidated damages, attributable to Grantee’s failure, willful, negligent, or otherwise, to adhere to the terms and conditions of the franchise or this Chapter, Grantor shall make written demand on Grantee to correct the alleged default. Such written demand shall identify with specificity the alleged default, including the provision of the franchise, Ordinance, or regulation that is being violated, and the necessary action to cure the default. Grantor and Grantee shall expeditiously meet to discuss the alleged default, at which time Grantee shall indicate, in writing, the amount of time necessary to resolve the alleged problem. Giving due consideration to Grantee’s request, Grantor shall, in writing, state the amount of time Grantor will allow Grantee to resolve the problem. During this time period, but in no event less than ten (10) days before the final date for correction, Grantee may request additional time to correct the problem, and Grantor shall grant said request if Grantor determines, in the exercise of its discretion, that such time is necessary due to delays beyond Grantee’s control. If the default continues for a period of ten (10) days following the deadline for corrections, plus any extension thereof, a hearing before the legislative body of the Grantor shall be scheduled by Grantor on such franchise termination, revocation, forfeiture, or any other penalty or administrative remedy.

        (2)    The Grantor shall provide written notice of such hearing, to a Grantee no less than ten (10) days before the hearing on the matter. Within five (5) days after the receipt of said notice, Grantee shall file any written objections to said notice. Any objections not raised within said five (5) day periods shall be deemed waived. At the hearing, Grantor shall hear Grantee, and any person interested in the matter, and shall determine, at that or subsequent public meetings, an appropriate course of action for enforcement or termination of Grantee’s franchise.

        (b)    Delegation of Enforcement Mechanisms. Such liquidated damages as Grantor may assess against Grantee pursuant to a Grantee’s franchise which do not include loss of the franchise may, at Grantor’s option, be determined by an officer or agency of the Grantor to which it may delegate such administrative decisions, subject to due process and the criteria contained in this Chapter and the franchise, and subject to appeal to the City Council. (Added by Ord. 03-12, 6/11/03)

 

5.30.150 Miscellaneous Provisions.
        (a)    Captions. The section, subsection, paragraph, and subparagraph numbers and letters, and the captions throughout this Chapter, are intended to facilitate reading and reference. Such numbers, letters, and captions shall not affect the meaning or interpretation of any part of this Chapter.

        (b)    Franchise References. A franchise which cites, refers to, or otherwise incorporates this Chapter, or portions thereof, shall be deemed to be a franchise issued under and subject to this Chapter.

        (c)    Filing. When not otherwise specified in this Chapter, all documents required to be filed with Grantor shall be filed with the Grantor’s representative as designated by Grantor.

        (d)    Non-enforcement by the Grantor. A Grantee shall not be relieved of its obligation to comply with all provisions of this Chapter, and of its franchise, and all laws and regulations, by reason of any failure of the Grantor to demand prompt compliance.

        (e)    Continuity of Service. It is the right of all subscribers to receive Cable Services so long as their financial and other obligations to a Grantee are honored. In the event that a Grantee elects to rebuild, modify, or sell the system, a Grantee shall use due diligence and reasonable care to ensure that all subscribers receive continuous, uninterrupted service. In the event of a transfer of the system by Grantee, the current Grantee shall cooperate with the Grantor or new Grantee to operate the system for a temporary period, in order to maintain continuity of service to all subscribers. In the event that Grantee, through its own fault, discontinues system-wide service for seventy-two (72) continuous hours, and Grantee is in material default of its franchise, or if the franchise is revoked by Grantor (but not if Grantor fails to renew the franchise), Grantor may, by resolution, when it deems reasonable cause to exist, assume operation of the system for the purpose of maintaining continuity of service. Grantor’s operation of the system may continue until the circumstances which, in the judgment of the Grantor, threaten the continuity of service are resolved to Grantor’s satisfaction. Grantor shall be entitled to the revenues for any period during which it operates the system.

        (f)    Operation By Grantor. During any period when the system is being operated by Grantor pursuant to paragraph e above, Grantor shall, as it may deem necessary, make any changes in any aspect of operations that, in Grantor’s sole judgment, are required for the preservation of quality of service and its continuity.

        (g)    Management By Grantor. Grantor may, upon assuming operation of a system franchised hereunder, appoint a manager to act for it in conducting the system’s affairs. Such manager shall have such authority as may be delegated by Grantor and shall be solely responsible to Grantor for management of the system. Grantee shall reimburse Grantor for all its reasonable costs, in excess of system revenues, incurred during Grantor’s operation if the franchise is in full force and effect during the period of Grantor’s operation.

        (h)    Notices. All notices and other communications to Grantee shall be addressed to it at the local address at which Grantee conducts its business or as otherwise set forth in the franchise. All notices and other communications to Grantor shall be addressed to Dana Point City Hall, or such other address as may be designated by Grantor.

        (i)     Force Majeure; Grantee’s Inability to Perform. In the event Grantee’s performance of any of the terms, conditions, obligations, or requirements of this Chapter, or any franchise granted hereunder, is prevented or impaired due to any cause beyond its reasonable control and not reasonably foreseeable, such inability to perform shall be deemed to be excused, and no penalties or sanctions shall be imposed as a result thereof. Such causes beyond Grantee’s reasonable control and not reasonably foreseeable shall include, but not be limited to, any acts of God, civil emergencies, labor unrest, strikes, utility interruptions, inability to obtain access to an individual’s property on reasonable terms, and any inability of a Grantee to secure all required authorizations or permits to utilize necessary poles or conduits, so long as Grantee uses due diligence to timely obtain said authorization or permits.

        (j)     Application. All of the provisions of this Chapter shall be applicable to all Cable Operators and Cable Systems to the greatest extent permissible under applicable law.

        (k)    Severability. If any provision of this Chapter is determined to be void or invalid by any administrative or judicial tribunal, said provision shall be deemed severable and such invalidation shall not invalidate the entirety of this Chapter or any other provision thereof. (Added by Ord. 03-12, 6/11/03)

 

5.30.160 Definitions.
        (a)    For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words, terms, phrases, and their derivations have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, and words in the singular number include the plural number.

        “Additional Service” means any service not included in “Basic service” or “Institutional service.”

        “Administrative Officer” means the City Manager or the City Manager’s designee.

        “Affiliated Person” or “Affiliates” means each person who falls into one or more of the following categories: (i) each person having, directly or indirectly, a controlling interest in Grantee; (ii) each person in which Grantee has, directly or indirectly, a controlling interest; (iii) each officer, director, general partner, limited partner holding an interest of five percent (5%) or more, joint venturer, or joint venture partner in Grantee’s Cable System in the City; and (iv) each person, directly or indirectly, controlling, controlled by, or under common control with Grantee; provided that “affiliated person” excludes the Grantor, any limited partner holding an interest of less than five percent (5%) in a Grantee, or any creditor of Grantee, solely by virtue of its status as a creditor, and which is not otherwise an affiliated person by reason of owning a controlling interest in, being owned by, or being under common ownership, common management, or common control with Grantee.

        “Agency Subscriber” means a subscriber who receives a service in a government or public agency, school, or nonprofit corporation facility.

        “Basic Service” or “Basic Cable Service” or “Basic Service Tier” means the lowest service tier which includes the retransmission of local television broadcast signals and public, educational, and governmental access channels.

        “Broadcast Signal” means a signal transmitted over the air to a geographically dispersed public audience and received by a Cable System.

        “1984 Cable Act” means the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984.

        “1992 Cable Act” means the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992.

        “Cable Act” means the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended by the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992 and by the Telecommunications Act of 1996.

        “Cable Operator” means any person or group of persons (i) who provides Cable Service over a Cable System in the City and, directly or through one or more affiliates, owns a significant interest in that Cable System; or (ii) who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of a Cable System in the City.

        “Cable Service” means (i) the one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or other programming service; and (ii) subscriber interaction which is required for the selection of or use of such video programming or such other programming service.

        “Cable System” or “Cable Communications System” or “System” means a facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide Cable Service, which includes video programming, and which is provided to multiple subscribers within the City; but this term does not include: (i) a facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations; (ii) a facility that serves subscribers without using any public right-of-way; (iii) a facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. § 201 et seq.), except that such facility shall be considered a Cable System (other than for purposes of Section 621(c) of the Cable Act) to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers, unless the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive on-demand services; (iv) an open video system that complies with Section 653 of the Cable Act; or (v) any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility systems.

        “Cablecast Signal” means a Non-Broadcast Signal that originates within the facilities of the Cable System, whether from a live or recorded source.

        “City” means the City of Dana Point, California.

        “Closed Circuit” or “Institutional Service” means services provided to institutional users on an individual or collective basis. The information contained in such a service may or may not be simultaneously available to other system subscribers or users.

        “Channel” means a frequency band capable of carrying a standard video signal or some combination of video signals.

        “Commercial Subscriber” means a subscriber who receives a Cable Service in a place other than a residential dwelling unit.

        “Complaint” means a dispute in which a subscriber notifies Grantee of an outage or degradation in picture quality, billing or other issue pertaining to the subscriber’s Cable Service which is not corrected during the initial telephone or service call.

        “Control” or “Controlling Interest” means actual working control in whatever manner exercised, including, without limitation, working control through ownership, management, debt instruments, or negative control, as the case may be, of the Cable System or a Grantee. A rebuttable presumption of the existence of control or a controlling interest shall arise from the beneficial ownership, directly or indirectly, by any person or group of persons acting in concert (other than underwriters during the period in which they are offering securities to the public) of twenty percent (20%) or more of any person (which person or group of persons is referred to as “Controlling Person”), or being a party to a management contract.

        “Converter” or “Terminal” means a device located at a subscriber’s premises that converts signals from one frequency to another or otherwise processes signals for use by subscribers.

        “Drop” means the cable connecting the Cable System’s plant to equipment at the subscriber’s premises.

        “Education Channel” means any channel capacity where non-profit, non-commercial educational institutions are the primary designated Programmers.

        “Facilities” shall mean any equipment located, in whole or in part, in, above, or below streets, public rights-of-way, or other public property used by the Grantor in its system including without limitation, conduits, cables, cabinets, nodes, structures, headend equipment, receive only earthstations, down link equipment and antennas, electronics, fiber cable, coaxial cable, drops and switching equipment.

        “FCC” means the Federal Communications Commission or its designated representatives.

        “Franchise” means a written legal undertaking or action of the Grantor which authorizes a specific person to use the Grantor’s streets and public ways for the purpose of installing, operating, maintaining, or reconstructing a Cable System to provide Cable Service.

        “Government Channel” means any channel capacity where local government agencies are the primary designated programmers, and programming is informational programming regarding government activities and programs.

        “Grantee” means the person granted a franchise to install, operate, maintain, or reconstruct a Cable System and the lawful successors, transferees, or assignees of that person.

        “Grantor” means the City, acting by and through its elected governing body, or such representative as the governing body may designate to act on cable matters in its behalf.

        “Gross Annual Revenue” or “Gross Annual Receipts” or “Gross Receipts” means all revenue, as determined in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, which is received, directly or indirectly, by Grantee and by each affiliated person from or in connection with the distribution of any Cable Service, and any other service which may, under now or then applicable federal law, be included in the Cable Act definition for the purpose of calculating and collecting the maximum allowable franchise fee for operation of the system, whether or not authorized by any franchise, including, without limitation, leased or access channel revenues received, directly or indirectly, from or in connection with the distribution of any Cable Service. It is intended that all revenue collected by the Grantee, and by each affiliated person, from the provision of Cable Service over the system, whether or not authorized by the franchise, be included in this definition. Gross Annual Revenue also specifically includes: (i) the fair market value of any nonmonetary (i.e., barter) transactions between Grantee and any person, other than an affiliated person, but not less than the customary prices paid in connection with equivalent transactions; (ii) the fair market value of any nonmonetary (i.e., barter) transaction between Grantee and any affiliated persons, but not less than the customary prices paid in connection with equivalent transactions conducted with persons who are not affiliated persons; (iii) any revenues generated from the provision of internet and/or broadband services which utilize the Cable System for delivery and must not be excluded pursuant to applicable law; and (iv) any revenue received, as reasonably determined from time to time by the Grantor, through any means which is intended to have the effect of avoiding the payment of compensation that would otherwise be paid to the Grantor for the franchise granted. Gross Annual Revenue also includes any bad debts recovered. Gross Annual Revenue also includes all advertising revenue which is received directly or indirectly by Grantee, any affiliated person, or any other person from or in connection with the distribution of any service over the system or the provision of any service-related activity in connection with the system. Gross Annual Revenue does not include: (i) the revenue of any person to the extent that said revenue is also included in the Gross Annual Revenue of Grantee; (ii) taxes imposed by law on subscribers which Grantee is obligated to collect; and (iii) amounts which must be excluded pursuant to applicable law.

        “Headend” means that central portion of the system where signals are introduced into the system.

        “Institutional Network” or “Institutional System” means a system or portion of a system intended primarily to service non-residential subscribers.

        “Lease Channel” means any channel where someone other than Grantor or Grantee is sold the rights to air programming.

        “Local Origination Channel” means any channel where a Grantee is the primary designated programmer.

        “Monitoring” or “Tapping” means observing or receiving a signal, where the observer is neither the sending nor receiving party and is not authorized by the sending or receiving party to observe said signal, whether the signal is observed or received by visual, electronic, or any other means whatsoever.

        “Node” shall mean the cabinet or housing and equipment, power supply, fans, gas generators, batteries and optical to electrical converters, which is the point where fiber facilities and coaxial facilities are connected.

        “Non-Broadcast Signal” means a signal that is not involved in over-the-air broadcast for general public reception.

        “Open Channel” means any channel that can be received by all subscribers without the use of special equipment not normally possessed by, or available to, anyone who may become a subscriber.

        “Pay Cable,” “Pay Service,” “Premium-Service” or “Pay Television” means signals for which there is a fee or charge to users over and above the charge for basic service, including any tiers of service; provided, however, the sale or lease of studio facilities, equipment, or tapes to local users shall not be deemed pay or premium services.

        “Pedestal” shall mean an above-ground or below-ground enclosure which houses active and/or passive electronic equipment used to serve subscribers.

        “PEG Channel” means collectively, the channel capacity dedicated Public, Education or Government channel.

        “Person” means any corporation, partnership, proprietorship, individual, or organization authorized to do business in the State of California.

        “Plant” means the transmitting medium and related equipment which transmits signals between the headend and subscribers, including drops.

        “Pole Attachment Agreement” or “Attachment Agreement” means any agreement with the Grantor, any other governmental entity, or any public utility relating to a Grantee’s use of any utility poles, ducts, or conduits.

        “Program” or “Programming” means the information content of a signal and the act or process of creating such content, whether that content is intended to be pictures and sound, sound only, or any other form of information whatsoever.

        “Programmer” means any person who provides program material or information for transmission by means of a system.

        “Property of Grantee” means all property owned or leased within the franchise service area by Grantee in the conduct of its system business under a franchise.

        “Public Channel,” “Access Channel,” “Community Service Channel” or “Community Channel” means any channel capacity for which members of the public, or any community organization, may provide non-advertiser supported programming; provided, however, sponsorship identification fees may be paid and accepted to further community programming.

        “Public Right-of-Way” means any public street, public way, public place or rights-of-way, now laid out or dedicated, and the space on, above or below it, and all extensions thereof, and additions thereto, under the jurisdiction of Grantor.

        “Pull Box” shall mean a flush mounted or above-ground housing which encloses one or more conduit openings.

        “Resident” means any person residing in the franchise service area, or as otherwise defined by applicable law.

        “Residential Dwelling Unit” or “Dwelling Unit” means a home, mobile home, condominium, apartment, cooperative unit, and any other individual dwelling unit.

        “Residential Subscriber” means a subscriber who receives a service in a dwelling unit.

        “Service” means any kind of service or type of benefit provided by Grantee, or any group of related benefits obtained or made available to any person, involving the use of a signal transmitted via a Cable Communications System, whether the signal and its content constitute the entire service or comprise only a part of a service which involves other elements of any number or kind.

        “Service Area” or “Franchise Service Area” means the entirety of the City of Dana Point.

        “Service Interruption” means the loss of picture or sound on one or more cable channels.

        “Service Tier” or “Tier” means a category of Cable Service or other services provided by a Cable Operator and for which a separate rate is charged by the Cable Operator, other than per channel or per event programming or legitimate packages of per channel or per event programming.

        “Streets and Public Ways” means the surface of, and the space above and below, any public street, sidewalk, alley, or other public way or right-of-way of any type whatsoever.

        “Subscriber” means any person that lawfully subscribes to and receives, a Cable Service provided by Grantee by means of or in connection with its Cable System.

        “Tap” means the point of interconnection between that portion of the Cable System located in the public rights-of-way and a drop.

        “Telecommunications Act” means the Telecommunications Act of 1996.

        “Unit” means a discrete place where system services are used, such as a residence, apartment, office, store, etc.

        “User(s)” means any person who either receives services from a Cable System or who accomplishes any purpose by, in part or in whole, transmitting or receiving information via a Cable System, or who creates programming for that purpose, or who receives and uses programming.

        (b)    Terms Not Defined. Words, terms, or phrases not defined herein shall first have the meaning as defined in the Cable Act, and then the special meanings or connotations used in any industry, business, trade, or profession where they commonly carry such special meanings. If those special meanings are not common, they will have the standard definitions as set forth in commonly used and accepted dictionaries of the English language. (Added by Ord. 03-12, 6/11/03)

Chapter 5.32 ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESSES
5.32.010 Intent.
        (a)    The intent of this chapter is to regulate adult-oriented businesses which, because of their very nature, are believed to have any of the recognized significant secondary effects on the community which include, but are not limited to: depreciated property values and increased vacancies in residential and commercial areas in the vicinity of the adult-oriented businesses; higher crime rates, noise, debris or vandalism in the vicinity of adult-oriented businesses; and blighting conditions such as low-level maintenance of commercial premises and parking lots which thereby have a deleterious effect upon adjacent areas. Special regulation of these uses is necessary to insure that these adverse effects will not contribute to the blighting or downgrading of the neighborhoods in the vicinity of the adult-oriented businesses. It is neither the intent, nor effect of this section to impose limitations or restrictions on the content of any communicative material. Similarly, it is neither the intent, nor effect of this section to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually-oriented materials or merchandise protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors or exhibitors of adult-oriented business to their intended market.

        (b)    Nothing in this section is intended to authorize, legalize or permit the establishment, operation or maintenance of any business, building or use which violates any City ordinance or any statute of the state regarding public nuisances, unlawful exposure, sexual conduct, lewdness or obscene or harmful matter or the exhibition or public display thereof. (Added by Ord. 03-06, 4/9/03)

 

5.32.020 Permit Required.
        No adult-oriented business shall be permitted to operate, engage in, conduct or carry on business within the City unless the owner of the business first obtains both an adult-oriented business permit and a business license from the City. (Added by Ord. 03-06, 4/9/03)

 

5.32.030 Application Requirements.
        (a)    Persons Eligible. The property owner, or authorized agent of the property owner, is eligible to request an adult-oriented business permit. A single adult-oriented business permit shall suffice for the operation of any adult-oriented business within the City.

        (b)    The following information is required at the time an adult-oriented business permit is submitted to the Community Development Department:

        (1)    A completed adult-oriented business permit application signed by the property owner or authorized representative;

        (2)    A nonrefundable deposit or fee as set forth by ordinance or resolution of the City Council;

        (3)    A letter of justification describing the proposed project and explaining how it will comply with the findings/requirements contained in Section 5.32.050;

        (4)    Information required for public hearings pursuant to Section 9.61.050 of this code; and

        (5)    All other information as required by the City adult-oriented business permit information sheet. (Added by Ord. 03-06, 4/9/03)

 

5.32.040 Determination on Application.
        (a)    Determination of Completeness. The City Manager or his or her designee shall, within seven (7) days of receipt of an application for an adult-oriented business, determine whether the application contains all the information required by the provisions of Section 5.32.030. If it is determined that the application is not complete, the applicant shall be notified in writing within ten (10) business days of the date of receipt of the application that the application is not complete and the reasons therefor, including any additional information necessary to render the application complete. The applicant shall have thirty (30) calendar days to submit additional information to render the application complete. Failure to do so within the thirty (30) day period shall render the application null and void. Within five (5) business days following the receipt of an amended application or supplemental information, the City Manager or his or her designee shall again determine whether the application is complete in accordance with the procedures set forth above. Evaluation and notification shall occur as provided above until such time as the application is found to be complete. Once the application is found to be complete, the applicant shall be notified within five (5) business days of that fact. All notices required by this chapter shall be deemed given upon the date they are either deposited in the United States mail, or the date upon which personal service of such notice is provided.

        (b)    Issuance of Permit. The City Manager shall issue an adult-oriented business permit within fifteen (15) calendar days of receipt of a completed application if he or she finds that the application fully complies with the findings/locational and operational requirements contained in Section 5.32.150. The applicant shall be notified within five (5) business days of the date the City Manager issues the adult-oriented business permit in the manner provided above. The decision of the City Manager to issue or deny a permit shall be final. Failure to render a decision prior to the expiration of that period shall result in the permit being deemed issued unless the applicant agrees in writing to an extension of that time.

        (c)    Prompt Judicial Review. Any applicant whose permit has been denied pursuant to this chapter has the opportunity to petition the court for review of the City’s decision as provided by Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8. (Added by Ord. 03-06, 4/9/03)

 

5.32.050 Findings and Requirements.
        The City Manager issue an adult-oriented business permit if it finds that:

        (a)    The adult-oriented business shall be located in the City’s Community Commercial/Vehicle (CC/V), Visitor/Recreation Commercial (V/RC), and/or Industrial/Business (I/B) zoning districts.[1]

        (b)    An adult-oriented business shall not be located within three hundred (300) feet of any residentially zoned property or any residential use properly approved by the City.

        (c)    The adult-oriented business shall not be located within three hundred (300) feet of any lot upon which there is properly located a religious institution, public park or school.1

        (d)    The adult-oriented business shall not be located within three hundred (300) feet of any lot upon which there is located another adult oriented business.

        (e)    An adult-oriented business may not be operated in the same building, structure, or portion thereof, containing another adult-oriented business.

        (f)    The adult-oriented business complies with the City’s parking standards for the underlying use (i.e. an adult bookstore shall comply with the parking regulations for a bookstore). Where no City parking standards exist for a particular underlying use, the applicant shall prepare a parking study for the use in question. The study shall demonstrate that the adult-oriented business for which the applicant is seeking approval provides adequate parking.

        (g)    The adult-oriented business shall not be located completely or partially within any mobile structure or pushcart.

        (h)    The adult-oriented business shall not stage any special events, promotions, festivals, concerts or similar events which would increase the demand for parking beyond the approved number of spaces for the particular use.

        (i)     The adult-oriented business shall not conduct any massage, acupressure, or escort services on the premises.

        (j)     The adult-oriented business shall provide a security system that visually records and monitors all parking lot areas. All indoor areas of the adult-oriented business shall be open to public view at all times with the exception of restroom facilities. “Accessible to the public” shall include but not be limited to those areas which are only accessible to members of the public who pay a fee and/or join a private club or organization.

        (k)    The adult-oriented business complies with the objective requirements of the City’s sign regulations.

        (l)     The adult-oriented business complies with the objective development and design requirements of the zone in which it is to be located.

        (m)   The adult-oriented business shall not display any sexually-oriented material or sexually-oriented merchandise which would be visible from any location other than from within the adult-oriented business.

        (n)    The adult-oriented business shall not allow admittance to any person under the age of eighteen (18) if no liquor is served, or under the age of twenty-one (21) if liquor is served.

        (o)    The adult-oriented business shall not operate between the hours of ten (10:00) p.m. and seven (7:00) am.

        (p)    Neither the applicant, if an individual, nor any of the officers or general partners, if a corporation or partnership, of the adult-oriented business shall have been found guilty within the past two years of violating any of the provisions of an adult-oriented business permit or similar permit or license in any city, county, territory or state, or of any misdemeanor or felony classified by the state as a sex-related offence including but not limited to a violation of the following penal code sections and their subparts and subsections: 220, 261, 262, 264, 264.1, 265, 266, (inc. 266a-266k) 267, 286, 286.5, 288, 288a, 289, 647, 647b, 647d, 647.6.

        (q)    The adult-oriented business will provide separate restroom facilities for male and female patrons. The restroom will be free from adult-oriented materials and adult-oriented merchandise. Only one (1) person will be allowed in the restroom at any time unless otherwise required by law, in which case the adult-oriented business will employ a restroom attendant of the same sex as the restroom users who shall be present in the public portion of the restroom during operating hours. The attendant will insure that no person of the opposite sex is permitted into the restroom, that not more than one (1) person is permitted to enter a restroom stall, and, with the exception of urination and excretion, that no persons engage in any specified sexual activity in the public portion of the restroom.

        (r)    The interior of the adult-oriented business will be configured such that there is an unobstructed view, by use of the naked eye, and unaided by video, closed circuit cameras or any other means, of every public area of the premises, including but not limited to the interior of all individual viewing areas, from a manager’s station which is no larger than thirty-two (32) square feet of floor area with no single dimension being greater than eight (8) feet and located in a public portion of the establishment. No public area, including but not limited to the interior of any individual viewing area, will be obscured by any door, curtain, wall, two-way mirror, or other device which would prohibit a person from seeing into the interior of the individual viewing area, solely with the use of the naked eye and unaided by video, closed circuit cameras or any other means, from the manager’s station. A manager will be stationed in the manager’s station at all times the business is in operation or open to the public in order to enforce all rules and regulations. No individual viewing area will be designated or operated to permit occupancy of more than one person at any one time.

        (s)    All areas of adult-oriented businesses shall be illuminated at a minimum of the following foot candles, minimally maintained and equally distributed at ground level:

 

Book Stores

20 foot candles

 

 

Retail Establishments

20 foot candles

(other than those listed herein)

 

 

Theaters

5 foot candles

(except during performances at which time lighting shall be at least 1.25 foot candles)

 

 

Cabarets, Restaurants, etc.

5 foot candles

 

 

Motion Picture Arcade

10 foot candles

 

        (t)     The individual viewing areas of the adult-oriented business shall be operated and maintained with no holes, openings or other means of direct visual or physical access between the interior space of two (2) or more individual viewing areas.

        (u)    A traffic study has been prepared for the adult-oriented business in conformance with the City’s traffic study guidelines. The applicant shall comply with the recommendations of the traffic study necessary to ensure the adult oriented business project does not cause the streets, highways, or arterials to exceed their approved level of service as that level of service is contained in the circulation element of the City’s general plan. All required fees and improvements shall be made conditions of project approval.

        (v)    The adult-oriented business shall comply with the noise element of the General Plan, Interior and Exterior Noise Standards and any mitigation measures necessary to reduce the project’s noise impacts to the City’s articulated noise standard.

        (w)   The adult-oriented business shall comply with all building and construction standards of the Uniform Building Code, Title 8 of this Code, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations, and all other federal, state and City-adopted standards for the specific use.

        (x)    Live entertainment will only be performed either: (a) on a stage raised at least eighteen (18) inches above the floor and separated from patrons by a fixed rail at least thirty (30) inches in height placed at a distance of not less than six (6) feet around the perimeter of the stage; or (b) in a location other than on a stage such that no portion of the performer is, at any time within six (6) feet of any patron. This provision will not apply to an individual viewing area where the performer is completely separated from the area in which the performer is viewed by an individual by a permanent, floor to ceiling solid barrier which completely encases the performer.

        (y)    No patron will directly pay or give any gratuity to any performer, and no performer will accept any direct payment from any patron. For the purposes of this section, the phrase “directly pay” shall mean the person to person transfer of the gratuity. This section shall not prohibit the establishment of a non-human gratuity receptacle placed at least six (6) feet from the stage or area occupied by the performer.

        (z)    No performer will intentionally touch, fondle or caress (herein “touch”) any patron of the adult oriented business and no patron shall touch any performer as the terms touch, fondle or caress are defined in Kev, Inc. v. County of Kitsap (9th cir.) 793 F.2d 1053. This prohibition applies to touching accomplished between any part of the body of a patron and performer, and regardless of if the touching occurs through clothing.

        (aa)  At least one security guard will be on duty outside the premises, patrolling the grounds at all times the business is open to the public. The security guard shall be charged with preventing violations of law and enforcing the provisions of this chapter. All security guards will be uniformed so as to be readily identifiable as a security guard by the public. No person acting as a security guard shall act as a doorman, ticket taker or seller, or perform any other function while acting as a security guard. For all adult-oriented businesses providing live entertainment, an additional security guard will be required with each increase in maximum occupancy of fifty (50) persons. All security guards shall be licensed under the California State Private Security Services Act, Business and Professions Code Section 7580 et seq.

        (bb)  Public nudity will be prohibited on the premises at all times. For the purposes of this section, the term “public nudity” shall mean appearing in a state such that the individual is clothed in less than pasties and a G-string. The phrase “G-string” shall mean an article of clothing that opaquely covers the buttocks at least one inch on either side of the natal cleft and covers the entirety of the genitalia and pubis. The term “pasties” shall mean an article of clothing that opaquely covers the nipple and areola of the female breast and is not designed to nor appears to look like the nipple and/or areola of the female breast.

        (cc)  A person who has managerial control over the daily operation of the adult-oriented business shall inform each employee of the business of the requirements imposed under this Chapter. (Added by Ord. 03-06, 4/9/03)

 

5.32.080 Permits Nontransferable—Use Specific.
        No adult-oriented business permit may be sold, transferred, or assigned by any permittee or by operation of law, to any other person, group, partnership, corporation or any other entity. Any such sale, transfer or assignment or attempted sale, transfer or assignment shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of the permit and the permit shall be thereafter null and void. An adult-oriented business permit held by a corporation or partnership is subject to the same rules of transferability as contained above. Any change in the nature or composition of the adult-oriented business from one element of an adult-oriented business to another element of an adult-oriented business or any increase of ten (10) percent or more of the floor area of the adult-oriented business shall also render the permit null and void. An adult-oriented business permit shall only be valid for the exact location specified on the permit. (Added by Ord. 03-06, 4/9/03)

 

5.32.090 Enforcement and Revocation.
        (a)    Inspections. Due to the potential harm associated with the secondary effects found to be created by adult-oriented businesses, the permittee shall permit officers of the City of Dana Point, the County of Orange, and each of their authorized representatives to conduct unscheduled inspections of the premises of the adult-oriented business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law at any time the adult-oriented business is open for business or occupied.

        (b)    Revocation Grounds. The Director of Community Development may revoke an adult-oriented business permit when he or she discovers that any of the following have occurred:

        (1)    Any of the Findings and Requirements contained in Section 5.32.050 above ceases to be satisfied;

        (2)    The application contains incorrect, false or misleading information;

        (3)    The applicant, and/or any of the officers or general partners, if a corporation or partnership, of the adult-oriented business has been found guilty of violating any of the provisions of an adult-oriented business permit or similar permit or license in any city, county, territory or state, or of any misdemeanor or felony classified by the state as a sex-related offence including but not limited to a violation of the following Penal Code sections and their subparts and subsections: 220, 261, 262, 264, 264.1, 265, 266, (inc. 266a-266k) 267, 286, 286.5, 288, 288a, 289, 647, 647b, 647d, 647.6.

        (4)    Any person has been convicted of a sex-related offense as a result of his or her activity on the premises of the adult-oriented business.

        (c)    Revocation Notice. Upon determining that the grounds for permit revocation exist, the Director of Community Development shall furnish written notice of the proposed revocation to the permittee. Such notice shall summarize the principal reasons for the proposed revocation, shall state that the permittee may appeal the decision within fifteen (15) calendar days of the posting or the post-marked date on the notice. The notice shall be delivered both by posting the notice at the location of the adult-oriented business and by sending the same, certified mail, return receipt requested and postage pre-paid, to the permittee as that name and address appears on the permit. Not later than fifteen (15) calendar days after the latter of the mailing or posting of the notice, the permittee may file an appeal of the Director of Community Development’s determination with the City Clerk. If the appeal is filed within fifteen (15) calendar days of the mailing or posting of the notice referenced above, the appeal hearing shall be provided as contained in subsection (d) of this Section.

        (d)    Appeal. Upon receipt of a written appeal request, the City Clerk shall schedule an appeal to be heard before the City Council or, if determined appropriate by the City Manager, a Hearing Officer, within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of such request. Notice of the appeal hearing shall be provided in the manner required under Section 17.32.100 of this code. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be sent to the permittee via certified mail, return receipt requested and postage prepaid at least fifteen (15) calendar days in advance of the date set for the hearing. At the hearing, the permittee and the City shall be entitled to present relevant evidence, testify under oath, and call witnesses who shall testify under oath. The City Council, or Hearing Officer, as applicable, shall not be bound by the traditional rules of evidence in a hearing, except that hearsay evidence may not be the sole basis for the decision of the City Council or the Hearing Officer, as applicable. The City Council or the Hearing Officer, as applicable, may continue the hearing as it deems necessary. Within fifteen (15) calendar days after the conclusion of the hearing, the City Council or the Hearing Officer shall rule on the appeal.

        (e)    Rule Application After Revocation. No person, corporation, partnership or member thereof or any other entity may obtain an adult-oriented business permit within two (2) years of the date its permit has been revoked.

        (f)    Maintenance of Status Quo. The status quo shall be maintained pending conclusion of the revocation hearing. If a judicial action is commenced challenging the revocation, the status quo shall be maintained until such time as a judicial decision is rendered from the court in which the action is filed. (Added by Ord. 03-06, 4/9/03)

 

5.32.100 Violation—Penalty.
        Any establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter is unlawful and a public nuisance, and the City Attorney may commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for the abatement, removal and enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law, and/or institute any proceeding to revoke or suspend any and all permits issued to the adult oriented business and/or shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult-oriented business and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining such an establishment contrary to the provisions of this chapter. (Added by Ord. 03-06, 4/9/03)

 

5.32.110 Definitions.
        The following terms shall have the definitions ascribed below:

        (a)    “Adult Bookstore”: Any establishment, which as a regular and substantial course of conduct, displays and/or distributes sexually oriented merchandise, books, periodicals, magazines, photographs, drawings, sculptures, motion pictures, videos, slides, films, or other written, oral or visual representations which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on a matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical parts.

        (b)    “Adult Cabaret”: A nightclub, bar, lounge, restaurant or similar establishment or concern which features as a regular and substantial course of conduct, any type of live entertainment, films, motion pictures, videos, slides, other photographic reproductions, or other oral, written, or visual representations which are characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical parts.

        (c)    “Adult Hotel/Motel”: A hotel or motel, which as a regular and substantial course of conduct provides to its patrons, through the provision of rooms equipped with closed-circuit television or other medium, material which is distinguished or characterized by the emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical parts and which rents, leases, or lets any room for less than a 12-hour period and/or rents, leases or lets any room more than once in a 24-hour period and which advertises the availability of any of the above.

        (d)    “Adult Model Studio”: Any premises where as a regular and substantial course of conduct, there is furnished, provided or procured a figure model or models who pose in any manner which is characterized by its emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical parts for the purpose of being observed or viewed by any person or being sketched, painted, drawn, sculptured, photographed, filmed, or videotaped before any person who pays a fee, or any other thing of value, as a consideration, compensation, or gratuity for the right or opportunity to so observe the model or remain on the premises. Adult Model Studio shall not include any Live Art Class or any studio or classroom which is operated by any public agency, or any private educational institution authorized to issue and confer a diploma or degree under Section 94300 et seq. of the Education Code.

        (e)    “Adult Motion Picture Arcade”: Any business establishment or concern which as a regular and substantial course of conduct provides, for a fee, the use of manually or electronically controlled still, motion picture or video machines, projectors, computer generated or displayed images or other image producing devices which serve less than five (5) persons at any one time and are maintained to display images distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical parts.

        (f)    “Adult Entertainment Business”: Any business establishment or concern which as a regular and substantial course of conduct performs as an Adult Bookstore, Adult Theater, Adult Motion Picture Arcade, Adult Cabaret, Stripper, Adult Model Studio, Adult Motel/Hotel; or any other business establishment or concern which as a regular and substantial course of conduct offers to its patrons products, merchandise, services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical parts. “Adult Entertainment Business” does not include those uses or activities, the regulation of which is preempted by state law. “Adult Entertainment Business” shall also include any business establishment or concern which, as a regular and substantial course of conduct provides or allows performers, models, actors, actresses, or employees to appear in any place in lingerie or similar attire which does not opaquely cover specified anatomical parts. For the purposes of this Section, a business establishment or concern has established the provision of products, merchandise, services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical parts as a regular and substantial course of conduct when one or more of the following conditions exist:

        (1)    The area devoted to sexually-oriented merchandise and/or sexually-oriented material exceeds more than 25 percent of the total display area or floor space area open to the public;

        (2)    The business establishment or concern presents any type of live entertainment which is characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activity or specified anatomical parts on any ten or more days in a thirty consecutive day period;

        (3)    Twenty per cent (20%) of the businesses revenues are derived from the provisions of services or merchandise characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activity or specified anatomical parts.

        (g)    “Adult Motion Picture Theater”: a business establishment or concern with one or more viewing rooms with the capacity for fifty or more persons which, as a regular and substantial course of conduct, presents for any form of consideration films, motion pictures, videos, slide photographs, computer generated or displayed images or other pictures or visual reproductions which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical parts.

        (h)    “Adult Mini-Motion Picture Theater”: a business establishment or concern with one or more viewing rooms with the capacity of more than five, but less that fifty persons, where, for any form of consideration, films, motions pictures, video cassettes, slides, computer generated or displayed images or similar graphic reproductions are shown and material whose dominant or predominant character and theme is the depiction of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation is shown on any ten or more days in a thirty consecutive day period.

        (i)     “Live Art Class”: Any premises on which all of the following occur: there is conducted a program of instruction involving the drawing, photographing, or sculpting of live models exposing specified anatomical parts; instruction is offered in a series of at least two (2) classes; the instruction is offered indoors; an instructor is present in the classroom while any participants are present; and pre-registration is required at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance of participation in the class.

        (j)     “Performer”: any dancer, model, entertainer, and/or other person who publicly performs any specified sexual activities or publicly display any specified anatomical part in adult entertainment businesses.

        (k)    “Sexually-Oriented Material”: Any element of Sexually-Oriented Merchandise, or any book, periodical, magazine, photograph, drawing, sculpture, motion picture film, or other written, oral, or visual representation characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical parts. This definition also includes, but is not limited to sexual novelties depicting, designed or shaped as specified anatomical parts or which depict specific sexual activities.

        (l)     “Sexually-Oriented Merchandise”: Sexually-oriented implements and paraphernalia, such as, but not limited to: dildos, auto sucks, sexually-oriented vibrators, edible underwear, benwa balls, inflatable orifices, anatomical balloons with orifices, simulated and battery operated vaginas, and similar sexually-oriented devices which are designed or marketed primarily for the stimulation of human genital organs or sadomasochistic activity.

        (m)   “Specified Anatomical Parts”:

        (1)    Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals; pubic region; buttocks; or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or

        (2)    Exposed human male genitals or human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, regardless of whether they are completely and opaquely covered.

        (n)    “Specified Sexual Activities”:

        (1)    Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory function in the context of a sexual relationship, any of the following depicted sexually-oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerastia; or

        (2)    Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; or

        (3)    Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or masturbation; or

        (4)    Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; or

        (5)    Masochism, erotic or sexually-oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; or

        (6)    Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexually-oriented contact with an animal by a human being; or

        (7)    Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation.

        (8)    Striptease; or any act involving the public removal of clothing to the point where specified anatomical parts are displayed; or the public appearance of any person in a state where specified anatomical parts are displayed, or the public appearance of any person where specified anatomical parts are only covered by attire commonly referred to as pasties or a G-string, or any other opaque covering which does not expose the areola or nipples of the female breast, and while covering the natal cleft and pubic area covers less than one inch on either side of the entire length of the natal cleft and two inches across the pubic area. For the purposes of this definition, appearance in “public” shall include a situation when a single employee, agent or other non-patron of the adult entertainment business is in the presence of a single patron of the adult oriented business. (Added by Ord. 03-06, 4/9/03)

 

5.32.120 Severability.
        Should any section, subsection, clause or provision of Ordinance 1239, codified in Sections 5.32.040, 5.32.050 and 5.32.090, for any reason be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect the validity or constitutionality of the remaining portions of Ordinance 1239, codified in Sections 5.32.040, 5.32.050 and 5.32.090; it being hereby expressly declared that Ordinance 1239, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase thereof would have been prepared, proposed, approved, adopted and/or ratified irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared invalid or unconstitutional including, but not limited to, the locational and operational requirements contained in Section 5.32.050. In the event a court of competent jurisdiction renders a decision invalidating the permit issuance process contained in this chapter, any adult-oriented business which operates in the City shall be deemed to be operating under a de facto permit subject to the requirements contained in Section 5.32.050. The de facto permit shall remain subject to the remaining provisions of this chapter which have not been invalidated including but not limited to Section 5.32.080 (Permits Nontransferable-Use specific); Section 5.32.090 (Enforcement and Revocation); and Section 5.32.100 (Violation-Penalty). (Added by Ord. 03-06, 4/9/03)

Chapter 5.36 VIDEO FRANCHISE FEES, CUSTOMER SERVICE AND OTHER VIDEO-RELATED MATTERS
5.36.010 Regulation of State Video Franchises and City Video Franchises.
        Under State law effective January 1, 2007, the California Public Utilities Commission (“PUC”) will have the authority to grant State Video Franchises (“State Franchises”). The City of Dana Point (the “City”) will acquire certain rights and responsibilities with respect to State Video Franchise holders. These include the receipt of a franchise fee and a fee for Public, Educational and Government (“PEG”) purposes, both based on a percentage of the gross revenues of State Franchise holders, as well as the establishment and enforcement of penalties for violations of customer service rules. (Added by Ord. 07-08, 6/19/07)

 

5.36.020 State Video Franchise Fees.
        (a)    Any State Video Franchise holder (“State Franchisee”) operating within the boundaries of the City of Dana Point shall pay a fee to the City equal to five percent (5%) of the gross revenue of that State Franchisee.

        (b)    Any State Franchisee operating within the boundaries of the City of Dana Point shall pay an additional fee to the City equal to one percent (1%) of the gross revenue of that State Franchisee, which fee shall be used by the City for PEG purposes consistent with State and Federal law.

        (c)    Gross revenue, for the purposes of subsections (a) and (b) above, shall have the definition set forth in California Public Utilities Code Section 5860. (Added by Ord. 07-08, 6/19/07; amended by Ord. 17-02, 4/18/17)

 

5.36.030 Audit Authority.
        Not more than once annually, the City may examine and perform an audit of the business records of a State Franchisee to ensure compliance with Section 5.36.020. (Added by Ord. 07-08, 6/19/07)

 

5.36.040 Customer Service Penalties Under State Franchises.
        (a)    The holder of a State Franchise shall comply with all applicable State and Federal customer service and protection standards pertaining to the provision of video service.

        (b)    The City Manager, or designee, shall monitor the compliance of State Franchisee(s) with respect to State and Federal customer service and protection standards. The City Manager, or designee, shall provide the State Franchisee(s) written notice of any material breaches of applicable customer service standards, and shall allow the State Franchisee(s) thirty (30) days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach. Material breaches not remedied within the thirty (30) day time period shall be subject to the following penalties by the City Manager, or designee.

        (1)    For the first occurrence of a violation, a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) for each violation.

        (2)    For a second violation of the same nature within twelve (12) months, a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) for each violation.

        (c)    A State Franchisee may appeal a penalty assessed to the City Council within sixty (60) days. After relevant speakers are heard, and any necessary staff reports are submitted, the City Council will vote to either uphold or vacate the penalty. The City Council’s decision on the imposition of a penalty shall be final. (Added by Ord. 07-08, 6/19/07)

 

5.36.050 City Response to State Franchise Applications.
        (a)    Applicants for State Franchises within the boundaries of the City of Dana Point must concurrently provide complete copies to the City of any application or amendments to applications filed with the PUC. One (1) complete copy must be provided to the City Clerk, and one (1) complete copy to the City Manager.

        (b)    The City Manager shall provide any appropriate comments to the PUC regarding an application or an amendment to an application for a State Franchise. (Added by Ord. 07-08, 6/19/07)

Chapter 5.38 SHORT-TERM RENTAL PERMITS
5.38.010 Purpose.
        The purpose of this Chapter is to require the owner or owners of a residential dwelling unit that is used as a short-term rental, as defined herein, to apply for and secure a permit authorizing such use in the manner provided for by this Chapter in order to safeguard the peace, safety and general welfare of the residents of Dana Point and their visitors and guests by eliminating excessive noise, disorderly conduct, vandalism, overcrowding, traffic congestion, illegal vehicle parking, and the accumulation of refuse which are directly related to short-term rentals. (Added by Ord. 13-01, 4/2/13)

 

5.38.020 Definitions.
        For the purpose of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

        (a)    “Agent” shall mean the representative, if any, designated by the owner in accordance with Section 5.38.040.

        (b)    “City Manager” shall mean the City Manager of the City of Dana Point or designee.

        (c)    “Community Development Director” shall mean the Community Development Director of the City of Dana Point or designee.

        (d)    “Owner” shall mean the person(s) or entity(ies) that hold(s) legal and/or equitable title to the short-term rental.

        (e)    “Short-term rental” is defined as the rental of any structure or any portion of any structure for occupancy, dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes for at least two (2) consecutive nights, but no more than thirty (30), consecutive calendar days in duration in a zoning district where residential uses are allowed, including, but not limited to, detached single-family dwellings, condominiums, duplexes, triplexes, townhomes and multiple-family dwellings. “Short-term rental” historically and continues to be included in the definition of “hotel” for purposes of collecting transient occupancy tax pursuant to Chapter 3.25 of this Code.

        (f)    “Transient” means any person who occupies or is entitled to occupy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other agreement for a period of thirty (30) consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any such person so occupying space in a hotel is a transient until the period of thirty (30) days has expired unless there is an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy. In determining whether a person is a transient, an uninterrupted period of time extending both prior and subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Chapter may be considered. (Added by Ord. 13-01, 4/2/13)

 

5.38.030 Permit Required.
        No owner of a short-term rental located within a zoning district where residential uses are allowed shall rent, offer to rent, or advertise for rent the short-term rental to another person without a valid short-term rental permit approved and issued in the manner provided for by this Chapter. (Added by Ord. 13-01, 4/2/13)

 

5.38.040 Agents.
        An owner may retain an agent or a representative to comply with the requirements of this Chapter, including, without limitation, the filing of an application for a permit that has been signed and notarized by the owner, the management of the short-term rental, and the compliance with the conditions to the permit. The permit shall be issued only to the owner of the short-term rental. The owner of the short-term rental is responsible for compliance with the provisions of this Chapter and the failure of an agent to comply with this Chapter shall be deemed non-compliance by the owner. (Added by Ord. 13-01, 4/2/13)

 

5.38.050 Application for Permit.
        The owner or owners shall submit an application for a short-term rental permit to the Director of Community Development. The application for a short-term rental permit shall be upon forms provided by the City and shall contain the following information:

        (a)    The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the short-term rental for which the permit is to be issued.

        (b)    The name, address and telephone number of the agent, if any, of the owner of the short-term rental.

        (c)    Evidence of a valid transient occupancy tax registration certificate issued by the City for the short-term rental.

        (d)    Proof of general liability insurance in the amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) combined single limit and an executed agreement to indemnify, defend, and save the City harmless from any and all claims and liabilities of any kind whatsoever resulting from or arising out of the short-term rental.

        (e)    Acknowledgement of receipt and inspection of a copy of all regulations pertaining to the operation of a short-term rental within the City.

        (f)    Such other information as the Director of Community Development deems reasonably necessary to administer this Chapter. (Added by Ord. 13-01, 4/2/13)

 

5.38.055 Renewal of Permit
        The owner or owners shall apply for and renew annually at permit issuance anniversary date with any changes to the information or requirements set forth in Section 5.38.050 and shall provide a current proof of general liability insurance pursuant to Section 5.38.050(d). (Added by Ord. 13-01, 4/2/13)

 

5.38.060 Denial of Permit.
        No application for an original permit or a subsequent renewal shall be denied if it meets the conditions of permit issuance pursuant to Section 5.38.080 unless a permit for the same short-term rental has been revoked or is in the process of being revoked pursuant to Section 5.38.100 of this Chapter. (Added by Ord. 13-01, 4/2/13)

 

5.38.070 Filing Fee.
        An application for a short-term rental permit shall be accompanied by a fee established by resolution of the City Council; provided, however, the fee shall be no greater than necessary to defer the cost incurred by the City in administering the provisions of this Chapter. (Added by Ord. 13-01, 4/2/13)

 

5.38.080 Conditions of Permit Issuance and Renewal.
        (a)    All permits and renewals issued pursuant to this Chapter are subject to the following standard conditions:

        (1)    The owner shall ensure that the short-term rental complies with all applicable codes regarding fire, building and safety, and all other relevant laws and ordinances.

        (2)    The owner shall provide proof that short-term rentals are not prohibited by its Homeowners Association Conditions, Covenants and Restrictions (“CC&Rs”) or any other community standards/guidelines, applicable to the proposed short-term rental.

        (3)    The short-term rental unit in which a permit is being requested must pass an initial inspection by the City prior to permit issuance. The City may conduct additional inspections as deemed necessary or prudent prior to subsequent renewals.

        (4)    The owner shall provide a twenty-four (24) hour emergency contact located within a twenty-five (25) mile radius of the short-term rental that will be available to respond to issues at the short-term rental.

        (5)    The short-term rental must have a minimum of two (2) off-street parking spaces.

        (6)    The short term rental must have a visible house number easily seen from the street, day or night.

        (7)    Short-term rentals shall be used only for overnight lodging accommodations. They may not be used for weddings, parties, bachelor/bachelorette parties, conferences or similar events.

        (8)    All advertising for the short-term rental shall include the City issued permit number.

        (9)    The primary overnight and daytime occupant of the short-term rental must be an adult eighteen (18) years of age or older. This adult must provide a telephone number to the owner and shall be accessible to the owner by telephone at all times.

        (10)  Prior to occupancy, the owner shall obtain the name, address and driver’s license number or a copy of the passport of the primary adult occupant of the short-term rental. The owner shall require that same adult to sign a formal acknowledgment that he or she is legally responsible for compliance by all occupants and guests of the short-term rental with the provisions of this Chapter. This information shall be readily available upon request of any police officer or employee of the City authorized to enforce this Chapter or State law.

        (11)  The owner shall require all occupants to agree to a minimum stay of two (2) consecutive nights.

        (12)  The maximum overnight occupancy of the short term rental shall be limited to two (2) persons per bedroom plus two (2) additional persons within the short-term rental. The Director of Community Development may, when unusual size, interior layout, parking or other physical characteristics are shown, approve a greater maximum number of overnight occupants as part of a permit application or renewal.

        (13)  The maximum number of vehicles allowed at the short term rental shall be limited to one (1) vehicle per one (1) bedroom unit or two (2) vehicles maximum with two (2) or more bedrooms within the short term rental. The Director of Community Development may, when unusual size, parking or other physical characteristics are shown, approve a greater maximum number of vehicles as part of a permit application or renewal. The owner must make a sufficient number of parking spaces accessible to tenants to accommodate the maximum number of vehicles allowed.

        (14)  No on-site exterior signs are to be posted advertising a short-term rental.

        (15)  Trash and refuse shall not be left stored within public view, except in proper containers for the purpose of collection by the responsible trash hauler and between the hours of 5:00 p.m. the day before and 8:00 a.m. the day after the scheduled trash collection days, as provided in Chapter 6.10. The owner of the short-term rental shall provide sufficient trash collection containers and service to meet the demand of the occupants.

        (16)  Each lease or rental agreement for a short-term rental shall include the following terms, notifications and disclosures, which shall also be posted in a conspicuous location inside the short-term rental:

        (A)   The maximum number of occupants that are permitted and notification that failure to conform to the maximum occupancy is a violation of this Chapter.

        (B)   The number of parking spaces provided and, if not adjacent to the short-term rental, the location of assigned parking and maximum number of vehicles that are permitted.

        (C)   The trash pick-up day(s) and applicable rules and regulations pertaining to leaving or storing trash on the exterior of the property.

        (D)   Notification that the occupant may be cited or fined by the City and/or immediately evicted by the owner for violating any and all applicable laws.

        (E)   The name of the managing agency, agent, rental manager, local contact person or owner of the unit, and a telephone number at which that party may be reached at all times and 9-1-1 Emergency information.

        (F)    Summary of applicable Homeowners Association Conditions, Covenants and Restrictions (CC&Rs) and bylaws, including pool location and hours.

        (17)  The Owner shall ensure that the occupants of the short-term rental do not create unreasonable noise or disturbances, engage in disorderly conduct, or violate provisions of the Municipal Code or any State Law pertaining to noise, disorderly conduct, overcrowding, the consumption of alcohol, or the use of illegal drugs. Owners are expected to take any measures necessary to abate disturbances, including, but not limited to, directing the tenant, calling for law enforcement services, or City code enforcement officers, evicting the tenant, or any other action necessary to immediately abate the disturbance.

        (18)  The Owner shall, upon notification that occupants or tenants of his or her short-term rental have created unreasonable noise or disturbances, engaged in disorderly conduct, or committed violations of the Municipal Code or State Law pertaining to, but not limited to, noise, disorderly conduct, overcrowding to take action to prevent a recurrence of such conduct by those occupants or guests within twenty-four (24) hours.

        (b)    The Director of Community Development shall have the authority at any time to impose additional standard conditions, applicable to all short-term rentals, as necessary to achieve the objectives of this Chapter.

        (c)    The Director of Community Development shall have the authority to impose additional conditions on any permit in the event of any violation of the conditions to the permit or the provisions of this Chapter subject to compliance with the procedures specified in Section 5.38.100.

        (d)    The owner must maintain a valid transient occupancy tax registration certificate issued by the City for the short-term rental; the owner must collect and remit transient occupancy tax as required by Chapter 3.25 of the Municipal Code. (Added by Ord. 13-01, 4/2/13)

 

5.38.090 Violations/Penalties.
        (a)    Violations. Except as described in Section 5.38.080(c), the following conduct shall constitute a violation for which the penalties specified in Subsection (b) may be imposed, or the permit revoked:

        (1)    The owner and/or agent has failed to comply with the standard conditions specified in Section 5.38.080(a);

        (2)    The owner and/or agent has failed to comply with conditions imposed by the Director of Community Development pursuant to the provisions of Section 5.38.080(b) or (c);

        (3)    The owner and/or agent has willfully violated the provisions of this Chapter;

        (4)    The owner and/or agent has failed to comply and pay any fines imposed pursuant to Subsection (b) within thirty (30) days of the date of notification; or

        (5)    The owner and/or agent has failed to comply and pay the transient occupancy tax or submit a report as required by Chapter 3.25 of this Code within the required time limit.

        (b)    Penalties. The penalties for violations specified in subsection (a) shall be the responsibility of the owner as follows:

        (1)    For the first violation within any twelve (12) month period, the penalty shall range from a notice of violation to a fine not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00);

        (2)    For a second violation within any twelve (12) month period, the penalty shall range from a notice of violation to a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00);

        (3)    For a third violation within any twelve (12) month period, the penalty shall range from a notice of violation to a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00);

        (4)    For a fourth violation within any twelve (12) month period, the penalty shall range from a notice of violation to a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), to revocation of the permit within the provisions of Section 5.38.100. (Added by Ord. 13-01, 4/2/13)

 

5.38.100 Procedure for Imposition of Penalties/Revocation.
        Penalties, including a notice of violation, shall be imposed, and permits shall be revoked, only in the manner provided in this Section.

        The Director of Community Development, or designee, shall conduct an investigation whenever he or she has reason to believe that an owner has committed a violation described in Section 5.38.090(a). Should the investigation reveal substantial evidence to support a finding that a violation occurred, the Director of Community Development shall issue written notice of intention to impose a penalty and/or revoke the permit. The written notice shall be served on the owner, shall specify the facts which, in the opinion of the Director of Community Development, constitute substantial evidence to establish grounds for imposition of the penalties and/or revocation, and specify that the penalties will be imposed and/or the permit will be revoked within thirty (30) days from the date the notice is given unless the owner and/or operator files, with the City Clerk and before the penalties or revocation becomes effective, a request for hearing before the City Manager or designee. (Added by Ord. 13-01, 4/2/13)

 

5.38.110 Permits and Fees Not Exclusive.
        Permits and fees required by this Chapter shall be in addition to any license, permit or fee required under any other chapter of this Code. The issuance of any permit pursuant to this Chapter shall not relieve the owner of the obligation to comply with all other provisions of this Code pertaining to the use and occupancy of the short-term rental or the property on which it is located. (Added by Ord. 13-01, 4/2/13)

 

5.38.120 Amortization and Amnesty Period.
        Owners of short-term rentals shall apply for a permit pursuant to this Chapter by no later than January 15, 2014. Owners of short-term rentals who, prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Chapter, failed to obtain a transient occupancy registration certificate pursuant to Chapter 3.25 of this Code, may do so without penalty notwithstanding the provisions of Chapter 3.25, if an application for the certificate is filed by January 15, 2014. (Added by Ord. 13-01, 4/2/13)

Chapter 5.40 CANNABIS RELATED USES, COMMERCIAL CANNABIS ACTIVITIES, DELIVERIES, AND CULTIVATION PROHIBITED
5.40.010 Definitions.
        “Cannabis” shall mean all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa Linnaeus, Cannabis indica, or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. “Cannabis” also means the separated resin, whether crude or purified, obtained from marijuana. “Cannabis” also means “marijuana” as defined by Section 11018 of the California Health and Safety Code as enacted by Chapter 1407 of the Statutes of 1972. The term “Cannabis” shall also have the same meaning as set forth in Section 19300.5(f) of the California Business and Professions Code, as may be amended from time to time. “Cannabis” does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination. For the purpose of this chapter, “cannabis” does not mean “industrial hemp” as defined by Section 81000 of the California Food and Agricultural Code or Section 11018.5 of the California Health and Safety Code.

        “Caregiver” or “Primary Caregiver” shall have the same meaning as set forth in Section 11362.7 of the California Health and Safety Code, as may be amended from time to time.

        “Commercial Cannabis Activity” shall have the same meaning as set forth in Section 19300.5(k) of the California Business and Professions Code, as may be amended from time to time.

        “Cooperative” shall mean two (2) or more persons collectively or cooperatively cultivating, using, transporting, possessing, administering, delivering, or making available marijuana, with or without cultivation.

        “Cultivation” or “Cultivate” shall have the same meaning as set forth in Section 19300.5(l) of the California Business and Professions Code, as may be amended from time to time.

        “Delivery” shall have the same meaning as set forth in Section 19300.5(m) of the California Business and Professions Code, as may be amended from time to time.

        “Dispensary” shall have the same meaning set forth in Section 19300.5(n) of the California Business and Professions Code, as may be amended from time to time. For purposes of this Chapter, Dispensary shall also include a Cooperative. Dispensary shall not include the following uses: (1) a clinic licensed pursuant to Chapter 1 of Division 2 of the California Health and Safety Code; (2) a health care facility licensed pursuant to Chapter 2 of Division 2 of the California Health and Safety Code; (3) a residential care facility for persons with chronic life threatening illnesses licensed pursuant to Chapter 3.01 of Division 2 of the California Health and Safety Code; (4) a residential care facility for the elderly licensed pursuant to Chapter 3.2 of Division 2 of the California Health and Safety Code; (5) a residential hospice or home health agency licensed pursuant to Chapter 8 of Division 2 of the California Health and Safety Code.

        “Medical Cannabis” or “Cannabis” shall have the same meaning as set forth in Section 19300.5(ag) of the California Business and Professions Code, as may be amended from time to time.

        “Medical Marijuana Regulation and Safety Act” or “MMRSA” shall mean and refer to the following three bills signed into law on October 9, 2015, as the same may be amended from time to time: AB 243, AB 266, SB 643.

        “Qualifying Patient” or “Qualified Patient” shall have the same meaning as set forth in Section 11362.7 of the California Health and Safety Code, as may be amended from time to time. (Added by Ord. 16-01, 1/19/16)

 

5.40.020 Prohibitions.
        All cannabis related uses, including, but not limited to, dispensaries, deliveries, cultivation and all other commercial cannabis activities for which a State license is required under the MMRSA, are prohibited in all zones throughout the City. Accordingly, the City shall not issue any permit, or process any license or other entitlement for any cannabis related use or any other activity for which a State license is required under the MMRSA.

        (a)    Cannabis Related Uses. All cannabis related uses, including, but not limited to, cultivation, dispensaries, and deliveries are prohibited in all zones and all specific plan areas in the City, regardless of whether the cannabis is used for medicinal purposes or whether such uses qualify as commercial cannabis activities under the MMRSA. No person shall establish, operate, conduct, permit or allow any cannabis related use anywhere within the City.

        (b)    Medical Cannabis Uses. All medical cannabis related uses, including cultivation, dispensaries, and deliveries are expressly prohibited in all zones and all specific plan areas in the City, regardless of whether such uses qualify as commercial cannabis activities under the MMRSA. No person shall establish, operate, conduct, permit or allow any medical cannabis related land use anywhere within the City.

        (c)    Commercial Cannabis Activities. All commercial cannabis activities, including, but not limited to, cooperatives, dispensaries, cultivation, and deliveries, are expressly prohibited in all zones and all specific plan areas in the City. No person shall establish, operate, conduct, permit or allow a commercial cannabis activity anywhere within the City.

        (d)    Cannabis Deliveries. All deliveries of cannabis and medical cannabis are expressly prohibited in the City. No person shall conduct any deliveries of cannabis or medical cannabis that either originate or terminate at any location within the City.

        (e)    Cannabis Cultivation. The cultivation of cannabis, regardless of whether for commercial or non-commercial purposes, and including cultivation by a qualified patient or primary caregiver is expressly prohibited in all zones and all specific plan areas in the City. No person, including, but not limited to, a qualified patient or primary caregiver, shall cultivate any amount of cannabis in the City, regardless of whether or not the cannabis is intended to be used for medical purposes. (Added by Ord. 16-01, 1/19/16)

 

5.40.030 Public Nuisance.
        Any use or condition caused, or permitted to exist, in violation of any provision of this Chapter shall be, and is hereby declared to be, a public nuisance and may be summarily abated by the city pursuant to Section 731 of the California Code of Civil Procedure or any other remedy available at law. (Added by Ord. 16-01, 1/19/16)

 

5.40.040 Civil Penalties.
        In addition to any other enforcement permitted by the Dana Point Municipal Code, the City Attorney may bring a civil action for injunctive relief and civil penalties against any person who violates any provision of this Chapter. In any civil action that is brought pursuant to this Chapter, a court of competent jurisdiction may award civil penalties and costs to the prevailing party. (Added by Ord. 16-01, 1/19/16)

 

5.40.050 Provisions in Chapter Cumulative.
        The prohibitions and provisions in this Chapter are cumulative to any and all other prohibitions and regulations in the Dana Point Municipal Code concerning cannabis, medical cannabis, and marijuana, including, but not limited to, the City’s ban on marijuana related uses via its permissive zoning regulations. Nothing in this Chapter supersedes or shall be construed to conflict with any other prohibitions or regulations in the Dana Point Municipal Code. (Added by Ord. 16-01, 1/19/16)

Title 6 HEALTH AND SANITATION*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 18-07. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


Chapter 6.03 INDUSTRIAL WASTE DISPOSAL
Chapter 6.10 INTEGRATED WASTE MANAGEMENT
Chapter 6.12 CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS
Chapter 6.14 NUISANCES, GENERAL
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Chapter 6.15 LANDSCAPE AND MAINTENANCE OF VACANT PROPERTY IN COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Chapter 6.16 RESIDENTIAL HOUSING OCCUPANCY STANDARDS — OVERCROWDING
Chapter 6.20 REGULATION OF LEAF BLOWERS
Chapter 6.30 FOOD-HANDLING BUSINESSES
Chapter 6.34 HEALTH SERVICES FEES
Chapter 6.40 SMOKING REGULATED OR PROHIBITED
Chapter 6.44 TATTOO ESTABLISHMENTS
Chapter 6.45 ANTI-LITTERING
Chapter 6.46 EXPANDED POLYSTYRENE FOOD SERVICE WARE
Chapter 6.47 PLASTIC CARRY-OUT BAGS
Chapter 6.48 VESSEL REGULATIONS

Chapter 6.03 INDUSTRIAL WASTE DISPOSAL
6.03.148 Citation.
        The Ordinance codified in this Chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Industrial Waste Disposal Ordinance.

 

6.03.149 Enforcement and Administration.
        The County of Orange and all of its officers, employees, and agents hereby are authorized and empowered to enforce and administer the provisions of this Chapter within the City of Dana Point.

 

6.03.150 Definitions.
        As used in this Chapter, the following terms are defined as follows:

        (a)    “Board of Supervisors” means the Board of Supervisors of the County of Orange, California;

        (b)    “Department” means any department of the City or County;

        (c)    “Director” means the duly appointed administrator of Orange County Ordinance No. 703, appointed by the Board of Supervisors of the County;

        (d)    “Person” means any individual, firm, copartnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, municipality, district or other political subdivision, or any group or combination of the above acting as a unit;

        (e)    “Industrial Waste” means any and all liquid or solid waste substance from any producing, manufacturing, or processing operation of whatever nature. It shall include any such waste placed within containers of whatever nature prior to and for purposes of disposal. It shall also include sewage mixed with industrial waste but shall not include domestic sewage from residences, business buildings, and institutions containing only waste from water closets, wash water, baths, or kitchens;

        (f)    “Pollution of Underground or Surface Waters” means any condition resulting from the depositing or discharging of industrial waste which impairs or contributes to the impairment of the usefulness of waters for human or animal consumption or domestic, agricultural, industrial, or recreational purposes, or any other useful purpose;

        (g)    “Public Agency” means and includes the United States or any department or agency thereof, the State or any department or agency thereof, and any county, city, public corporation, municipal corporation, or public district;

        (h)    “Public Sewer” means the main line sewer, publicly owned or maintained, commonly constructed in a street, highway, alley, place, or right-of-way dedicated to public use;

        (i)     “Sewage” means all waste substances, liquid or solid, associated with human habitation or of human or animal origin, and includes sewage effluent and water contaminated with offal, filth, or feculent matter; and

        (j)     “Underground or Surface Water” means any surface or subterranean stream, watercourse, lake, or other body of water, and includes water wells and any underground or surface storage reservoir, whether natural or artificial.

 

6.03.151 Dumping of Waste Unlawful.
        The City does hereby declare that the dumping or discharging of industrial waste by any person in a manner which will or may cause or result in the pollution of any underground or surface waters is unlawful.

 

6.03.152 Permit—Required for Disposal of Industrial Waste.
        No person shall discharge or deposit, or cause or suffer to be deposited or discharged, any industrial waste into or upon any area in the City, or into any underground or surface waters in the City where such industrial waste is or may be deposited upon or may be carried through or over any area of the City except in conformity with the provisions of this Chapter, and unless said person first has secured in the manner hereinafter provided, a permit to do so from the Director; provided, however, a permit shall not be required for the disposal of industrial waste into a public sewer with an ocean outfall.

 

6.03.153 Permit—Application.
        Applications for permits required under this Chapter shall be filed with the Director upon printed forms to be prescribed and supplied by the Director. The Director may require any additional information, including plans and specifications, which the Director may deem necessary for the proper disposition of the application.

 

6.03.154 Permit—Action on Application.
        Within thirty days after receipt of all of the information requested of an applicant, the Director shall either grant or deny the permit and shall immediately notify the applicant by first-class mail of the action taken.

 

6.03.155 Permit—Issuance.
        (a)    The Director shall issue a permit for industrial waste disposal if it is determined that:

        (1)    The material to be discharged or deposited in the manner proposed will not cause or result in the pollution of any underground or surface waters, as herein prohibited; and

        (2)    Under existing circumstances and conditions, it is reasonable and necessary to dispose of the waste in the manner proposed.

        (b)    The Director may incorporate in any permit issued pursuant to this Chapter such limitations or conditions as may be reasonably necessary to effectuate the purpose of this Chapter and may, from time to time, review the limitations or conditions which have been incorporated in any permit therefor issued, giving consideration to changed conditions, and may, whenever in the Director's judgment it is advisable or required in order to maintain the waters of the City and County free from pollution, alter, revise, modify, delete, or add further limitations or conditions applicable to any permit theretofore issued. No such alterations, revision, modification, deletion, or addition of limitations or conditions shall be effective, however, until written notice thereof shall have been served upon the permittee in the manner provided by Section 6.03.175.

 

6.03.156 Permit—Certain Acts Not Authorized.
        A permit issued under this Chapter does not authorize any act or acts forbidden by any law, rule, regulation, or order of any public agency or department and such fact shall be so stated on the face of all permits issued.

 

6.03.157 Permit—Term.
        A permit for the disposal of industrial waste shall be valid until suspended or revoked in the manner hereinafter provided.

 

6.03.158 Permit—Transfer.
        The Director may transfer a permit to the successor in interest of a permittee upon the filing by the successor in interest of a written application therefor, together with such evidence of a transfer of title or interest as the Director may require; provided, however, a permit shall not be transferable from one location to another. The Director shall immediately notify, by first-class mail, the person requesting a transfer of a permit of the action taken.

 

6.03.159 Permit—Request for Hearing.
        A person who is dissatisfied with an action of the Director may request a hearing before the Board of Supervisors as hereinafter provided.

 

6.03.160 Permit—Suspension.
        (a)    The Director may suspend a permit by giving notice thereof to the permittee:

        (1)    When a permittee fails to rectify a violation within the time specified in a notice thereof; or

        (2)    When a violation is so aggravated as to require cessation of activities as provided in Section 6.03.174.

        (b) A permit suspended by the Director shall be reinstated by the Director when all of the violations charged in a notice thereof have been corrected.

 

6.03.161 Permit—Revocation.
        The Board of Supervisors may, after notice and hearing as hereinafter provided, revoke a permit on any one (1) or more of the following grounds:

        (a)    Fraud or deceit in obtaining a permit;

        (b)    Failure of a permittee to correct a violation within the time prescribed in a notice of violation;

        (c)    Willful violation of any provision of this Chapter, of a condition or limitation of a permit, or of any lawful order of the Director.

 

6.03.167 Permit—Proceedings for Revocation.
        Proceedings for the revocation of a permit may be initiated:

        (a)    By the Director by serving upon the Permittee a copy of and filing with the County Clerk a written recommendation of revocation setting forth the grounds therefor and requesting a hearing thereon before the Board of Supervisors;

        (b)    By the Board of Supervisors, on its own motion or upon the complaint of a third person, by serving or causing to be served upon the permittee and the Director a notice of intention to revoke, setting forth the grounds therefor and designating a time and place for hearing thereon.

 

6.03.168 Hearings—When and How Requested.
        Any person who feels himself or herself aggrieved by an action of the Director:

        (a)    Denying an application for a permit or incorporating limitations or conditions of a permit;

        (b)    Denying an application for the transfer of a permit;

        (c)    Ordering the correction of a violation of any provision of this Chapter, or of a condition or limitation of a permit issued hereunder;

        (d)    Directing the cessation of operations pending the correction of a violation; or

        (e)    Suspending or refusing to reinstate a permit suspended by the Director;

may within thirty days after receipt of a notice of the action complained of, serve upon the Director a copy of, and file with the County Clerk a written request for a hearing before the Board of Supervisors. The request shall set forth in concise language the particular action or actions complained of and the reasons why the person or permittee feels aggrieved thereby. Failure to file a request for hearing within the time prescribed herein shall constitute a waiver of any objection to the action of the Director and his action shall be final.

 

6.03.169 Hearings—Notice.
        When a request for hearing is filed with the County Clerk, the Board of Supervisors shall set the matter for hearing and give notice of the time and place thereof to the person requesting the hearing, the Director, and any other person or public agency requesting notice thereof. The hearing shall be held not more than thirty days after a written request therefor has been filed with the County Clerk and not less than ten days after the issuance of the notice thereof.

 

6.03.170 Hearings—Appearance.
        At the time and place set for hearing, the person requesting the hearing, the Director, and any interested person or public agency may appear and be heard either in person or by counsel.

 

6.03.171 Hearings—Decision.
        The Board of Supervisors shall, within thirty days after conclusion of the hearing, render its decision. The Board of Supervisors may:

        (a)    Confirm the action of the Director;

        (b)    Direct the Director to issue a permit with or without such conditions or limitations as the Board of Supervisors may deem appropriate;

        (c)    Vacate or modify the suspension of a permit;

        (d)    Cancel a notice of violation or modify such notice in such particulars as the Board of Supervisors may deem appropriate;

        (e)    Direct the Director to transfer a permit;

        (f)    Revoke a permit on any of the grounds specified in Section 6.03.161; and

        (g)    Make such other disposition of the matter heard as may be appropriate and in conformity with this Chapter.

 

6.03.172 Tests and Inspections.
        For the purpose of securing compliance with this Chapter, the Director shall make periodic tests of samples of industrial waste obtained from the place or places of discharge or deposit, and such other tests deemed necessary for proper administration thereof. For the purpose of making such tests or inspections, the Director shall be authorized, after consent is obtained, to enter any place or premises where industrial waste is being or is proposed to be discharged or deposited, or where there may be a violation of this Chapter. If permission to enter for the purpose of inspection or testing is refused, the Director shall proceed to obtain an inspection warrant. After obtaining such a warrant, the Director shall enter upon said premises and carry out any tests and inspections required by this Chapter.

 

6.03.173 Cooperation by Other Departments.
        In carrying out the duties imposed upon the Director, the Director may request and receive the aid of any other City or County Department.

 

6.03.174 Cessation of Activities—When Required—Notice.
        Whenever the Director finds that the continued violation of any provision of this Chapter or of the conditions of any permit issued under this Chapter is so aggravated that the prevention of pollution of underground or surface waters requires the immediate cessation of the activities causing the violation, the Director may so direct in the notice of violation. A person who has been so notified shall immediately cease all such activities and shall not resume them until the Director determines that all of the violations charged in the notice have been corrected.

 

6.03.175 Notice—Service.
        Unless otherwise expressly provided, any notice under this Chapter required to be given by the County or the Director shall be in writing and may be served either in the manner provided in the Code of Civil Procedure for the service of process or by certified mail. The notice shall be sent to the last address given to the Director.

 

6.03.176 Enforcement by Director.
        The Director shall enforce this Chapter and shall, upon the Director's own initiative, or may, upon the complaint of a third person, investigate any violation of this Chapter, or of any permit issued under this Chapter. For such purpose, the Director shall have the powers of a peace officer.

 

6.03.177 Notice of Violation.
        Whenever the Director finds that any person is acting in violation of any provision of this Chapter, or of any permit issued under this Chapter, the Director shall serve upon the person causing or suffering such violation to be committed, including the permittee, if a permit has been issued, a notice of violation. The notice shall state the act or acts constituting the violation and shall direct that the violation be corrected within such time to be specified in the notice as the Director may deem reasonable.

 

6.03.178 Failure to Comply With Notice of Violation.
        (a)    The failure to comply with a notice of violation issued and served pursuant to this Chapter shall constitute a willful violation of this Chapter and each day of willful violation shall constitute a separate offense punishable as provided in Subsection (b) hereof.

        (b)    It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this Chapter. Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of this Chapter or failing to comply with any of its requirements shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished in accordance with Section 1.01.200 to 1.01.260 of this Code. Each such person, firm, or corporation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each day during any portion of which any violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter is committed, continued, or permitted by such person, firm, or corporation, and shall be punishable therefor as provided for in this Chapter.

 

6.03.179 Severability.
        The City Council of the City of Dana Point hereby declares that should any section, paragraph, sentence, or word of this Chapter be declared for any reason to be invalid, it is the intent of the Council that it would have passed all other portions of this Chapter independent of the elimination herefrom of any such portion as may be declared invalid. (Ord. 89-11, 4/11/89)

Chapter 6.10 INTEGRATED WASTE MANAGEMENT
6.10.010 Findings.
        The City Council finds as follows:

        (a)    The Public Resources Code, including Section 40059, provides that aspects of solid waste handling of local concern include but are not limited to frequency of collection, means of collection and transportation, level of services, charges and fees, and nature, location and extent of providing solid waste services, and whether the services are to be provided by means of nonexclusive, partially exclusive or wholly exclusive franchise, contract, license or otherwise which may be granted by local government under terms and conditions prescribed by the governing body of the local agency; and

        (b)    The adoption of the regulations contained within this Chapter is necessary for the public health, safety and well-being, to prevent the spread of vectors, to limit adverse impacts on air quality and traffic from excessive numbers of collection vehicles, the implementation of measures consistent with the City's Source Reduction and Recycling Element and the protection of the City and its residents against environmental liability. (Amended by Ord. 92-12, 11/24/92; Ord. 97-11, 9/9/97)

 

6.10.020 Definitions.
        For the purposes of this Chapter the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this Chapter. Words and phrases not ascribed a meaning by this Chapter shall have the meanings ascribed by Division 30, Part 1, Chapter 2 of the Public Resources Code, Sections 40105—40200, and the regulations of the California Integrated Waste Management Board, if defined therein, and if not, to the definitions found in the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (“RCRA”), 42 U.S.C. Sections 6901, et seq. and the regulations implementing RCRA, as they may be amended from time to time.

        (a)    “AB 939” means the California Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989, (sometimes referred to as “AB 939”) as it may be amended from time to time.

        (b)    “Bulky items” means those items which can be handled by a two (2) man crew and would not otherwise be accommodated within the automated collection container furnished by contractor such as refrigerators, mattresses, rugs and water heaters.

        (c)    “City” means the City of Dana Point as it now exists or may hereafter exist.

        (d)    “City limits” means the boundaries of the City together with all amendments and changes thereto, which boundaries are shown by maps on file in the office of the City Clerk.

        (e)    “City manager” means the City Manager of the City of Dana Point, or the City Manager's designee.

        (f)    “Commercial premises” means all premises in the City, other than residential premises (as defined in this Chapter), where solid wastes are generated or accumulated.  The term “commercial premises” includes, but is not limited to, stores; offices; federal, State, county and local governmental offices and facilities, including, but not limited to schools, school districts, special districts and water districts (to the extent authorized by law); restaurants; rooming houses; hotels; motels; offices; manufacturing, processing, and assembling shops and plants; hospitals; clinics; nursing homes; convalescent centers; dormitories; barracks; card rooms; and multifamily dwellings with five or more units. The term “commercial premises” is a reference to location, and not to ownership.

        (g)    “Commercial bin” means a bin of 3.0 cubic yard capacity or greater, designed for the deposit of solid waste, and provided by contractor to a commercial subscriber or for temporary bin/rolloff service.

        (h)    “Construction and demolition waste” means discarded material from the construction, destruction or repair of buildings, roads, bridges and similar structures, and the clearing of lots, including concrete, rocks, asphalt, plasterboard, wood and other similar construction material.

        (i)     “Contractor” means a person, persons, firm or corporation authorized by a franchise agreement to receive, collect, handle, process, treat, recycle or dispose of solid waste or recyclables within the City.

        (j)     “Disposal” means to transfer, recycle, process or otherwise dispose of solid waste.

        (k)    “Franchise” means the right and privilege: (1) to make arrangements for the collection of and to collect, (2) to transport to landfill or other licensed solid waste disposal facilities and/or (3) to receive, process, or recycle from collected solid waste and recyclables all solid waste, including recyclables and green waste, kept, generated and/or accumulated within the City from the franchise area. Any franchise is subject to all of the provisions and to any rights held by any other solid waste enterprise which may hold rights pursuant to Public Resources Code Section 49520.

        (l)     “Franchise fee” means the fee or assessment imposed by the City on contractor because of its status as contractor.

        (m)   “Green waste” means leaves, grass clippings, brush, branches and other forms of organic waste generated from landscapes or gardens, separated from other solid waste.  “Green waste” does not include palm fronds, yucca or cactus, which are not suitable for composting.

        (n)    “Hazardous waste” means (1) all waste defined or characterized as hazardous waste by the Federal Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 USC 3251 et seq.), as amended, including the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (42 USC 6901 et seq.) as they may be amended from time to time, and all implementing regulations; (2) all waste defined or characterized as hazardous pursuant to the provisions of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act, 42 USC Section 9601 et seq., as it may be amended from time to time, and all implementing regulations, and (3) all waste defined or characterized as hazardous waste by agencies of the State of California (including without limitation the Department of Health Services, the Department of Toxic Substances Control and the California Integrated Waste Management Board) having jurisdiction over solid and hazardous waste. The term “hazardous waste” means, in addition to any substance included in any of the foregoing categories, those substances which are not normally permitted to be disposed of by generally accepted sanitary landfill disposal methods, but which in fact are contained in municipal solid waste streams. In the event of a conflict in the definitions employed by two or more governmental agencies having concurrent or overlapping jurisdiction over hazardous waste, the broader, more encompassing definition shall apply.

        (o)    “Person” means an individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, corporation, estate, trust, receiver, syndicate, municipality, district or other political subdivision, or any other group acting as an independent unit.

        (p)    “Recyclable solid waste” means source-separated solid wastes which can be processed into a form suitable for reuse through reprocessing or remanufacture consistent with the California Integrated Waste Management Act. “Recyclable solid waste” does not include recyclable materials, i.e., materials which have commercial value and which may be sold for compensation or given away without becoming part of the solid waste stream.  The term “recyclable solid waste” includes both mixed recyclable solid waste which has been kept separated from other solid wastes and source-separated single-category recyclable solid waste, e.g., clear glass jars. “Recyclable solid waste” does not include those potentially recyclable items which have been commingled with non-recyclable solid waste, i.e., commingled solid waste and potentially recyclable articles.

        (q)    “Recycling” means the process of collecting, sorting, cleansing, treating, and/or reconstituting solid waste materials or Recyclables for the purpose of reuse.

        (r)    “Residential premises” means a permanent single-family dwelling or one unit of a multifamily dwelling with four (4) or fewer units (each of which has separate cooking and bathing facilities), where solid waste is generated or accumulated. The term “residential premises” does not include multifamily dwellings with five (5) or more units, hotels, motels, rooming houses, hospitals, nursing homes, convalescent centers, dormitories or barracks or other group living places. The term “residential premises” is a reference to location, and not to ownership or to an interest in property.

        (s)    “Self-haulers” shall mean persons generating solid waste and properly disposing of generated waste through legally acceptable disposal methods. Self-haulers shall be further defined as “residential premises self-haulers” or “commercial premises self-haulers.”

        (t)     “Solid waste” means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid or semisolid wastes, including semiliquid or wet wastes with insufficient moisture to be free flowing, garbage, rubbish, ashes, construction material, green waste, construction and demolition waste, recyclables and other solid waste materials normally resulting from domestic, institutional, commercial, industrial, agricultural and community operations and activities, but shall not include solids or dissolved materials in domestic sewage or other significant pollutants in water resources.

        (u)    “Solid waste services exemption” shall mean an exemption or reduction of regular service from contractor services to collect and dispose of solid waste, granted to a person in charge of a residential premises.

        (v)    “Temporary bin/rolloff service” means any collection and disposal service provided by contractor on a twenty-four (24) hour, daily, weekly, or monthly basis, for solid waste, construction materials, demolition materials and lot clearing wastes by means of three (3) cubic yard bins and larger roll-off boxes. Any person shall have the right to make arrangements for such temporary service with contractor pursuant to the terms of the franchise agreement.

        (w)   “Vehicle” shall mean any truck, trailer, semitrailer, passenger car, station wagon, pickup or other conveyance used or intended to be used for the purpose of collecting, hauling or transporting solid waste upon the public streets or highways. (Amended by Ord. 92-12, 11/24/92; Ord. 95-01, 1/10/95; Ord. 97-11, 9/9/97)

 

6.10.030 Solid Waste Removal.
        (a)    In order to protect public health, safety, and well-being, and to prevent the spread of vectors, the person responsible for the day-to-day operation of each residential premises and each commercial premises where solid waste is generated or accumulated shall make arrangements with a contractor franchised by the City for the collection and disposal of solid waste or shall obtain a solid waste services exemption pursuant to Section 6.10.250.  It shall be the obligation of each person responsible for the day-to-day operation of each premises within the City at which solid waste is generated or accumulated to ensure that all solid waste accumulating or existing on said premises is removed from said premises pursuant to the requirements of this Chapter.

        (b)    Solid waste generated or accumulated in or about residential premises shall be removed from the premises not less often than once each week.  If conditions warrant, the City Manager may require more frequent removal.

        (c)    Solid waste generated or accumulated in or about commercial premises shall be removed not less often than once each week.  If conditions warrant, the person in charge of the commercial premises may require the collector to provide more frequent removal. (Amended by Ord. 92-12, 11/24/92; Ord. 97-11, 9/9/97)

 

6.10.040 Solid Waste Storage and Collection Locations.
        (a)    Every person responsible for the day-to-day operation of each premises within the City at which solid waste is generated or accumulated shall place or cause to be placed all solid waste generated or accumulated on those premises in containers approved by a contractor.  Such containers shall be kept in a sanitary condition and in good repair at all times.

        (b)    Green waste (including yard and tree trimmings and grass clippings), and construction and demolition waste shall be disposed of in approved solid waste containers, or may be disposed of as bulky items, disposed of through temporary bin/roll-off services or recycled as provided in a franchise agreement.

        (c)    To minimize interference with public rights-of-way, no person shall place a solid waste container adjacent to a street or public right-of-way for collection earlier than 5:00 p.m. on the day preceding collection.  To minimize interference with public rights-of-way, solid waste containers shall be removed from the street or right-of-way location not later than 8:00 a.m. the day after the collection day.  The contractor shall be responsible for the collection of all solid waste, including recyclable solid waste, placed for collection in a legal manner, at all such designated collection locations.

        The contractor shall notify the City Manager immediately of any condition at or near any collection location which creates a safety hazard or accessibility problem.  Upon authorization by the City Manager, the contractor shall discontinue collection from any such location until said safety hazard or accessibility problem is corrected.

        The contractor, without delay, after removing the solid waste from any container, shall replace said container in its designated location with the lid on and closed.

        (d)    Where a collection location is within an enclosure, the contractor shall be responsible for the removal and replacement of all solid waste containers placed therein.  The contractor shall repair at its own expense, and within fifteen (15) working days after notification from the person in charge of the premises that the enclosure or adjacent facilities or improvement has been damaged by contractor.

        (e)    To minimize interference with public rights-of-way, no person shall place any bulky items adjacent to a public right-of-way before 10:00 p.m. on the day before the regularly-scheduled pick-up day, and only pursuant to on-call pick-up arrangements or pursuant to separate contractual arrangement between the resident or business and the contractor, as provided for in the franchise agreement.  Violation of this Section 6.10.040(e) shall be an infraction. (Amended by Ord. 92-12, 11/24/92; Ord. 97-11, 9/9/97)

 

6.10.050 Authority to Grant Franchise.
        In order to protect public health, safety, and well-being, to control vectors and to carry out the mandatory duties imposed on the City by the State of California, the City Council may authorize one (1) or more contractors to make arrangements with generators of solid waste for the collection, transportation, recycling and disposal of solid wastes within and throughout the City. The City Council may, by duly executed written franchise agreement, approved by the City Council, by resolution, naming the contractor, grant to a qualified person the exclusive right to make arrangements for the collection, transportation, recycling and disposal of solid waste from residential premises, commercial premises, or both, within the entire City, or any designated portion of the City.  Notwithstanding the grant of an exclusive franchise agreement by the City Council, no provision of this Chapter shall be construed to prevent any person who generates recyclable materials from otherwise making separate arrangements for the sale or donation of their recyclable materials.  For the purposes of this Chapter, a person who receives a discount of, or reduction in, the solid waste service rates for unsegregated solid waste shall not be deemed to be selling or donating recyclable materials. (Amended by Ord. 92-12, 11/24/92; Ord. 97-11, 9/9/97)

 

6.10.060 Franchise Required; Exception.
        No solid waste enterprise or other person shall collect, transport or dispose of solid waste by use of any public right-of-way within the City without first obtaining a franchise granted by the City Council, in writing, by resolution, naming the contractor. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any person transporting solid waste generated by that person, such as persons transporting solid waste generated at the person's own residence, gardeners transporting green waste from their work sites, or building contractors (including roofers) transporting solid waste generated at their work-sites, shall not be required to obtain a franchise. (Amended by Ord. 92-12, 11/24/92; Ord. 97-11, 9/9/97)

 

6.10.070 Term.
        The term of each franchise shall be set forth in the franchise agreement. (Amended by Ord. 92-12, 11/24/92)

 

6.10.080 Rates.
        (a)    Except as provided in Subsections (b) and (c) of this Section, the maximum rates which may be charged by a contractor for solid waste collection, transportation, recycling and disposal services shall be approved by the City Council, and may be amended once each fiscal year during the term of the franchise or any extension thereof.  A formula for the equitable adjustment of the ceiling on solid waste rates shall be set forth in each franchise.  No rate ceiling may be increased without the prior approval of the City Council.

        (b)    A contractor may petition the City Council for an increase in a rate ceiling to offset unusual changes in said contractor's costs of doing business, such as revised federal, state or county laws, ordinances or regulations, significant changes in disposal charges, or change of disposal sites or materials recovery facilities (“MRFs”).

        (c)    The City Council may levy a fee upon any commercial or residential solid waste subscriber for the costs to the City of solid and household hazardous waste planning, collection, inspection, auditing, transportation, recycling and disposal, and the planning for and response to hazardous materials releases and spills.  Such fee may include charges for the use of landfills, and may include costs of preparing and implementing source reduction and recycling elements, household hazardous waste elements and integrated waste management plans.  The City may require contractors to collect said fee on behalf of the City or the City may collect all or part of such fee by such other means as the Council may elect. (Amended by Ord. 92-12, 11/24/92; Ord. 97-11, 9/9/97)

 

6.10.090 Franchise Fee.
        A reasonable franchise fee shall be included within every franchise granted pursuant to this Chapter. The amount and payment thereof shall be determined by the City Council, and shall be set forth in the franchise agreement. A penalty for late payments may be imposed. (Amended by Ord. 92-12, 11/24/92)

 

6.10.100 Faithful Performance.
        Each contractor shall be required to maintain a cash deposit, or irrevocable letter of credit or other such document evidencing an irrevocable cash deposit payable to the City, in an amount and form approved by the City Attorney, but in no event less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), guaranteeing the contractor's faithful performance of the terms of the franchise agreement, for the duration of said franchise agreement. (Amended by Ord. 92-12, 11/24/92)

 

6.10.110 Insurance.
        Each contractor shall be required to maintain the following insurance policies, in an amount and form approved by the City Attorney, during the term of any franchise: workers' compensation, employers' liability, bodily injury liability, automobile bodily injury and damage liability, and excess umbrella liability. (Amended by Ord. 92-12, 11/24/92)

 

6.10.120 Minimum Service Requirements.
        Any franchise agreement for the collection, transportation, recycling and disposal of solid waste shall be granted on such terms and conditions as the City Council shall establish in its sole discretion.  At a minimum, the franchise agreement shall address the following:

        (a)    Collection days and hours.

        (b)    Special collections such as on call Bulky Item service, Christmas tree collection and temporary bin/roll-off service.

        (c)    Complaints.

        (d)    City facilities pick-up and service by contractor.

        (e)    Minimum standards of service. (Amended by Ord. 92-12, 11/24/92; Ord. 97-11, 9/9/97)

 

6.10.130 Equipment and Maintenance Requirements.
        Any franchise agreement shall set forth minimum equipment standards and maintenance requirements as established by the City Council in its sole discretion. At a minimum, the franchise agreement shall address the following:

        (a)    Equipment and maintenance standards;

        (b)    Age of equipment;

        (c)    Identification markings on equipment. (Amended by Ord. 92-12, 11/24/92)

 

6.10.140 Employment Practices.
        No contractor shall discriminate against any person because of race, sex, age, creed, color, religion, or national origin. Each contractor shall, in all solicitations or advertisements for employees, and on all employment applications, in clear and easily readable print, state that all qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, sex, age, creed, color, religion, or national origin. (Amended by Ord. 92-12, 11/24/92)

 

6.10.150 Records and Audits.
        Each contractor shall maintain all records relating to the collection and disposal services provided, including but not limited to, subscriber lists, billing records, expenses, and customer complaints, for a period of not less than three (3) years. Such records shall be subject to examination by the City Manager, or other qualified person designated by the City Manager, during regular business hours, upon five (5) business days written notice from the City to the contractor. Such records may be made available to the City at the contractor's regular place of business, but in no event outside the County of Orange, California.

        Contractor shall provide City with all reports and information necessary to satisfy the reporting requirements of AB 939.

        Should any examination or audit of a contractor's records reveal an underpayment of any fee required under this chapter or any relevant franchise agreement, the amount of such underpayment shall become due and payable to the City in the manner provided by the franchise agreement. (Amended by Ord. 92-12, 11/24/92)

 

6.10.160 Delinquent Accounts.
        A contractor may discontinue service only as set forth in this Section or the relevant franchise agreement, and only with the prior approval of the City. Persons who have not remitted required payments within thirty (30) days after the date of billing shall be notified on forms approved by City. Said forms shall contain a statement that services may be discontinued fifteen (15) days from the date of notice if payment is not made before that time. Only after expiration of the fifteen (15) day notice period may collection services be discontinued. Upon payment of the delinquent fees, the contractor shall resume collection on the next regularly scheduled collection day. The contractor may charge a redelivery fee for containers removed due to nonpayment, and may also require payment in advance for reinstatement of future service. All such fees and payment shall be subject to the approval of City. (Amended by Ord. 92-12, 11/24/92; Ord. 95-06, 1/10/95)

 

6.10.170 Refunds.
        A contractor shall refund to each subscriber, on a pro rata basis, any advance service payments made by such subscriber for service not provided, when service is discontinued by the subscriber and the subscriber requests a refund for the services not provided. (Amended by Ord. 92-12, 11/24/92)

 

6.10.180 Default by Contractor.
        In addition to any other remedies provided by law or any relevant franchise agreement, including termination for default, where a contractor, for any reason, abandons or ceases to perform collection and disposal services for a period in excess of five (5) working days, and the City Manager determines that it is necessary for solid waste collection, transportation, recycling and disposal to be undertaken temporarily by other entities engaged by the City, the City shall:

        (a)    Notify the contractor by certified mail or personal service that the contractor has failed to perform solid waste collection, transportation, recycling and disposal services for a period in excess of five (5) working days, and of the City's intent to provide for the temporary provision of such services by another solid waste enterprise at the contractor's expense;

        (b)    The City shall have access to the contractor's route maps and other related records for the purposes of routing, and shall be entitled to all payments for solid waste services for the period during which temporary services are provided by another solid waste enterprise;

        (c)    Charge the contractor for the actual costs of such services as determined by the City's standard accounting practices.  Each franchise may contain a liquidated damages provision, in an amount deemed reasonable by the parties thereto.  Said liquidated damages shall be paid to the City in the event of temporary default by the contractor. (Amended by Ord. 92-12, 11/24/92; Ord. 97-11, 9/9/97)

 

6.10.190 Status of Contractor.
        Each contractor shall, for all purposes, be deemed an independent contractor and shall conduct its operations pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and any relevant franchise agreement in that capacity. (Amended by Ord. 92-12, 11/24/92)

 

6.10.200 Indemnity.
        No franchise shall be granted pursuant to this Chapter unless the contractor agrees to fully protect, defend, indemnify, and hold the City, its officers, agents, and employees harmless from and against any and all liability, suits, actions, legal proceedings, claims, demands, damages, costs and/or expenses, including attorney's fees, arising out of or alleged to arise out of any act or omission of the contractor, or its officers, agents or employees, including, specifically, liability under the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (42 USC 6901 et seq.) and the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act, 42 USC Section 9601 et seq., as they may be amended from time to time, and all regulations implementing these acts. (Amended by Ord. 92-12, 11/24/92)

 

6.10.210 Assignments of Franchise.
        Except as expressly provided in the franchise agreement, no franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall be assigned or otherwise transferred. (Amended by Ord. 92-12, 11/24/92)

 

6.10.220 Solid Waste Facilities.
        No person shall construct or operate a solid waste management facility (including but not limited to a materials recovery facility), landfill, composting facility, or buy-back recycling center without first satisfying all City requirements for land use and other approvals. (Added by Ord. 92-12, 11/24/92)

 

6.10.230 Self-haulers and Gardeners—Disposal at Authorized Sites—Reporting Requirements.
        (a)    Persons transporting and disposing of solid waste collected or accumulated at premises of which they are in charge of day-to-day operations, (“self-haulers”), and persons performing gardening and landscaping services for hire (collectively referred to as “gardeners”), shall deposit such solid waste only at permitted solid waste facilities or permitted (or permit-exempt) composting facilities.

        (b)    Before collecting, transporting or disposing of solid waste, self-haulers and gardeners, as those terms are used in this Section, may be required to report to the City, at such times as the City Manager may specify, the type, quantity, volume, and weight of solid waste to be removed, and to provide evidence of disposal at a permitted solid waste facilities or permitted (or permit-exempt) composting facility.

        (c)    No person shall cause, permit, or suffer the spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, injecting, escaping, leaching, dumping, or disposing into the environment, including the abandonment of or discarding of barrels, containers, and other closed receptacles, or otherwise dispose of such solid waste upon any street, alley, waterway, or other unauthorized or unpermitted place, or upon any unimproved lot or any other unlicensed place within or without the City. (Added by Ord. 92-12, 11/24/92; amended by Ord. 95-06, 1/10/95; Ord. 97-11, 9/9/97)

 

6.10.240 Liability for Fees.
        (a)    Every person required to arrange for solid waste or recyclables collection, transportation, recycling and disposal shall be liable for solid waste service fees for contractor collection, transportation, recycling and disposal services unless authorized as exempt by the City Manager or designee.

        (1)    Exemptions.

        (A)   Persons in charge of residential premises may apply to the City for a solid waste services exemption. The City Manager or designee is authorized to grant said exemptions for unique and special circumstances including, but not limited to: second homes, residential self-haulers, small quantity generators sharing containers with an adjacent residential premises and unoccupied residential premises.

        (B)   Persons granted solid waste services exemptions shall be responsible for the payment of fees associated with said application process and AB 939 solid waste monitoring costs.

        (C)   The City Manager or designee is authorized to waive solid waste services exemption application fees for any person granted this exemption as a small quantity generator sharing containers with only one other residential premises. Persons granted an exemption as a small quantity generator shall not qualify for additional trash or recycling containers.

        (D)   Persons in charge of residential premises granted an exemption for an unoccupied residential premises shall be required to pay the exemption application fee. If said residential premises becomes occupied within ninety (90) days, the exempted applicant may request reimbursement of the exemption application fee from the City.

        (b)    Solid waste services fees shall be determined by the City Council, by resolution. (Added by Ord. 92-12, 11/24/92; amended by Ord. 95-06, 1/10/95)

 

6.10.250 Solid Waste Services Exemption.
        The City Manager or designee is authorized to grant a solid waste services exemption to qualified persons in charge of a residential premises. Persons granted said exemption shall be responsible for the payment of fees associated with the application processing, annual renewal, and the added AB 939 solid waste management monitoring costs only. (Added by Ord. 95-06, 1/10/95)

 

6.10.260 Ownership of Recyclable Material.
        Upon placement by the owner of recyclable material at the designated recycling collection location or in a container for collection of recyclables by an authorized recycling contractor, the recyclable materials become the property of the authorized recycling contractor, by operation of State law. Nothing in this Chapter shall limit the right of any person, organization or other entity to donate, sell or recycle recyclable material owned by that person, organization or other entity; provided, that any such disposal is in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. (Added by Ord. 92-12, 11/24/92; amended by Ord. 95-06, 1/10/95)

 

6.10.270 Cleanup Responsibility.
        Until solid waste and/or recyclables have been picked up by a collector, each person shall be responsible for the cleanup of any and all solid waste and/or recyclables which that person has generated, deposited, released, spilled, leaked, pumped, poured, emitted, emptied, discharged, injected, dumped or disposed into the environment, including the abandonment of or discarding of barrels, containers and other closed receptacles, of solid or liquid waste of any kind whatsoever upon any property within the City, which has come to be located outside an authorized container for the collection of such solid waste and/or recyclables notwithstanding human or animal interference with bins or containers, wind or other natural forces, and whether during storage, collection, removal or transfer. The contractor shall be responsible for any solid waste and/or recyclables spilled or otherwise released or discharged into the environment during its collection, removal or transfer. (Added by Ord. 92-12, 11/24/92; amended by Ord. 95-06, 1/10/95)

 

6.10.280 Additional Terms.
        The requirements set forth in this Chapter are the minimum requirements with which any franchise granted pursuant to this Chapter must comply. The City Council may include such other requirements in each franchise agreement as it deems necessary to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of Dana Point. (Amended by Ord. 92-12, 11/24/92; Ord. 95-06, 1/10/95)

 

6.10.290 Value of Franchise.
        No franchise granted pursuant to this Chapter shall be given any value by any court or other authority, public or private, in any proceeding of any nature or character. (Amended by Ord. 92-12 11/24/92; Ord. 95-06, 1/10/95)

Chapter 6.12 CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS
6.12.010 Declaration of Purpose.
        The purpose of this Chapter is to promote the recycling of construction and demolition debris in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare and to meet the City’s obligations under both AB 939 and SB 1374, and to meet the requirements of the three (3) year extension approved by the California Integrated Waste Management Board under the provisions of Public Resources Code Section 41820 (Senate Bill 1066). (Added by Ord. 03-17, 12/10/03)

 

6.12.020 Definitions.
        For the purpose of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

        (a)    “Applicant” means any individual, firm, limited liability company, association, partnership, political subdivision, government agency, municipality, industry, public or private corporation, or any other entity whatsoever who applies to the City for the applicable permits to undertake any construction, demolition, or renovation project within the City.

        (b)    “C&D Compliance Official” means the person designated by the City Manager who is authorized and responsible for implementing this Chapter.

        (c)    “Construction” means the building, rehabilitation, remodeling, renovation or repair of any facility or structure or any portion thereof, including any tenant improvements to an existing facility or structure.

        (d)    “Construction and demolition debris” or “C&D debris” means all waste building materials resulting from construction or demolition operations as defined in Title XIV, Division VII, Article IV, Section 17381, subdivision e, of the California Code of Regulations.

        (e)    “Covered project” shall have the meaning set forth in Section 6.12.030 of this Chapter.

        (f)    “Demolition” means the decimating, razing, ruining, tearing down or wrecking of any facility, structure, pavement or building, whether in whole or in part, whether interior or exterior.

        (g)    “Divert,” “diverted,” or “diversion” means to use material for any purpose other than disposal in a landfill or transformation facility.

        (h)    “Security deposit” means the deposit required as security for performance for covered projects to ensure that the applicant complies with the requirements of this Chapter. (Added by Ord. 03-17, 12/10/03)

 

6.12.030 Covered and Non-Covered Projects.
        (a)    Covered projects: Except as otherwise set forth herein, all construction and demolition projects within the City requiring a building permit, demolition permit, or encroachment permit, are deemed to be covered projects for purposes of this Chapter. Concurrent permits at the same site shall be considered “one” covered project.

        (b)    Non-covered projects: the following shall not constitute covered projects for purposes of this Chapter:

        (1)    Construction or demolition on residentially zoned premises when the scope thereof is less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet;

        (2)    The construction on pools, spas, or retaining walls on residentially zoned premises;

        (3)    Construction or demolition on commercially zoned premises when the scope thereof is less than two hundred fifty (250) square feet;

        (4)    The construction of retaining walls on commercially zoned premises; and

        (5)    The re-roofing of any residential or commercial structure that does not include the tear-off of an existing roof. (Added by Ord. 03-17, 12/10/03)

 

6.12.040 Minimum Construction and Demolition Diversion Requirements.
        Every applicant shall divert from the landfills or disposal sites a minimum of seventy-five percent (75%), measured by tonnage, of all construction or demolition debris generated as a result of any covered project. (Added by Ord. 03-17, 12/10/03)

 

6.12.050 Waste Reduction and Recycling Plan Required.
        (a)    Prior to issuance of a building, demolition or encroachment permit for any covered project, the applicant shall complete and submit a Waste Reduction and Recycling Plan (“WRRP”) to the C&D Compliance Official.

        (b)    The C&D Compliance Official is authorized to create guidelines setting forth the information to be included in a WRRP, as well as the form thereof. At a minimum, the WRRP shall delineate all of the following:

        (1)    The estimated weight of C&D debris to be generated by the covered project, listed by material types;

        (2)    The estimated weight of C&D debris generated by the covered project to be diverted, listed by material types;

        (3)    The facility or facilities to which C&D debris will be taken, listed by material types; and

        (4)    The estimated weight of C&D debris generated by the covered project that will be landfilled, listed by material types. (Added by Ord. 03-17, 12/10/03)

 

6.12.060 Security Deposit Required.
        Except as otherwise specified in this Chapter, each applicant who applies for a building, demolition or encroachment permit for a covered project, shall remit a security deposit in the amount set forth by Resolution of the City Council. The security deposit shall be remitted at the same time the permit application is filed, and shall be in the form of cash or cash equivalent such as a cashier’s check or credit card payment to the City. (Added by Ord. 03-17, 12/10/03)

 

6.12.070 Review of WRRP.
        (a)    Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter, no building or demolition permit shall be issued by the City for any covered project prior to approval of the WRRP by the C&D Compliance Official. Approval shall not be required if an emergency demolition is required to protect public health or safety.

        (b)    The C&D Compliance Official shall approve a WRRP only if:

        (1)    The WRRP provides all the information set forth in Section 6.12.050 and complies with all guidelines as may be established by the C&D Compliance Official; and

        (2)    The applicant has paid the security deposit required by Section 3.12.060.

(Added by Ord. 03-17, 12/10/03)

 

6.12.080 Exemptions.
        (a)    Neither a Waste Reduction and Recycling Plan nor a security deposit shall be required for, and the provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to any otherwise covered project which meets one or more of the following criteria:

        (1)    Work for which only a plumbing permit, only an electrical or only a mechanical permit is required;

        (2)    Seismic tie-down projects;

        (3)    Installation of pre-fabricated patio enclosures and covers where no foundation or other structural building modifications are required;

        (4)    Installation of pre-fabricated accessories such as signs or antennas where no structural building modifications are required;

        (5)    Other work that the C&D Compliance Official determines will not produce a significant quantity of construction or demolition waste;

        (6)    Projects less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet in size;

        (7)    Projects which have a valuation of less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00); or

        (8)    Roofing projects that do not include the tear-off of the existing roof.

        (b)    In order for an applicant to receive an exemption from an otherwise covered project on the basis it falls within one of the exempt categories noted in Subsection (a) of this Section 6.12.080, the applicant shall submit an application for exemption, stating the grounds for the requested exemption, to the C&D Compliance Official who shall grant the exemption request if he or she determines that the otherwise covered project meets one or more of the criteria set forth in Subsection (a) of this Section 6.12.080. (Added by Ord. 03-17, 12/10/03)

 

6.12.090 Summary Report Required.
        (a)    Within sixty (60) days following the completion of a covered project, the applicant shall, as a condition precedent to release of the applicant’s security deposit, submit a Construction and Demolition Waste Recycling and Disposal Report Summary to the C&D Compliance Official, summarizing the applicant’s compliance with the requirements of its Waste Reduction and Recycling Plan.

        (b)    The C&D Compliance Official is authorized to create guidelines setting forth the information to be included in a Construction and Demolition Waste Recycling and Disposal Report Summary, as well as the form thereof. At a minimum, the Construction and Demolition Waste Recycling and Disposal Report Summary shall contain the following:

        (1)    The actual weight of C&D debris generated by the covered project that was diverted, by material type, the diversion method utilized, and the actual weight of C&D debris that was not diverted, supported by evidence deemed reasonably satisfactory by the C&D Compliance Official to demonstrate the accuracy of the information supplied (such as originals or photocopies of receipts and weight tags or other records of measurement from recycling companies, contractors and/or landfill and disposal companies);

        (2)    The identity of any processing facility utilized to divert C&D debris generated at the covered project;

        (3)    Any barriers encountered that prohibited diversion of C&D debris; and

        (4)    Any recommended actions that would further the efforts to divert and or recycle C&D debris; or

        (c)    As an alternative to providing a Construction and Demolition Waste Recycling and Disposal Report Summary, the applicant may file a certification under penalty of perjury that all C&D debris generated by the covered project was processed at a City Certified C&D Processing Facility, accompanied by copies of receipts, weight tickets, or other evidence deemed reasonably satisfactory by the C&D Compliance Official to demonstrate that the material in question was processed by a City Certified C&D Processing Facility. (Added by Ord. 03-17, 12/10/03)

 

6.12.100 Refund of Security Deposit.
        (a)    The C&D Compliance Official shall authorize the refund of any security deposit which he or she determines was erroneously paid or collected.

        (b)    The C&D Compliance Official shall authorize the refund of any security deposit when the building permit, demolition permit, or encroachment permit application is withdrawn or cancelled before any work has begun.

        (c)    The C&D Compliance Official shall authorize the refund of any security deposit if the applicant submits documentation in compliance with Section 6.12.090, Subsection (c), demonstrating that all C&D debris generated by the covered project was processed at a City Certified C&D Processing Facility.

        (d)    The C&D Compliance Official shall authorize the refund of any security deposit if the applicant submits a Construction and Demolition Waste Recycling and Disposal Report Summary in compliance with Section 6.12.090, and demonstrates that the seventy-five percent (75%) minimum diversion requirement set forth in Section 6.12.040 has been met.

        (e)    The C&D Compliance Official shall authorize the refund of any security deposit if the applicant submits a Construction and Demolition Waste Recycling and Disposal Report Summary in compliance with Section 6.12.090, and demonstrates that the applicant is a resident of the City, that the covered project is the applicant’s primary residence, and that the applicant personally hauled all C&D debris generated at the covered project to a lawful disposal or processing facility (and specifically did not pay any commercial enterprise to remove any of the C&D debris generated at the covered project from that location.

        (f)    If a covered project involves both demolition and construction, and if the applicant does not meet the seventy-five percent (75%) minimum diversion requirement for the demolition phase, the C&D Compliance Official may, as an alternative to the other remedies set forth in this Chapter, and as a prerequisite to the return of any security deposit, require a diversion rate for the construction phase of the covered project which is high enough to ensure that the combined diversion rate for entirety of the covered project (i.e., both demolition and construction) meets the seventy-five percent (75%) minimum diversion requirement. (Added by Ord. 03-17, 12/10/03)

 

6.12.110 Forfeiture of Security Deposit.
        If the C&D Compliance Official determines that the applicant has failed to submit the documentation required by Sections 6.12.090 and 6.12.100 within the required time periods, then the security deposit shall be forfeited to the City.  (Added by Ord. 03-17, 12/10/03)

 

6.12.120 City Certified C&D Processing Facilities.
        (a)    A City Certified C&D Processing Facility means a recycling, processing, composting, materials recovery, or re-use facility for which the C&D Compliance Official has issued a certification pursuant to regulations promulgated by the C&D Compliance Official.

        (b)    The regulations promulgated by the C&D Compliance Official to certify a facility as a City Certified C&D Processing Facility shall at a minimum require that the owner or operator of the facility demonstrate to the reasonable satisfaction of the C&D Compliance Official:

        (1)    That the facility will be able to obtain a diversion rate of not less than seventy-five percent (75%) for all C&D debris delivered to it from covered projects in the City; and

        (2)    That the facility will provide satisfactory documentation to the C&D Compliance Official, at such intervals as he or she may require, demonstrating a diversion rate of not less than seventy-five percent (75%) has been achieved for all C&D debris delivered to it from covered projects in the City.

        (c)    The C&D Compliance Official may revoke any certification it grants pursuant to the regulations he or she promulgates.

        (d)    The City shall make available to each applicant a list of City Certified C&D Processing Facilities. (Added by Ord. 03-17, 12/10/03)

 

6.12.130 Administrative Fee.
        As a part of any application for, and prior to the issuance of, any building or demolition permit that involves the creation of construction and demolition debris, every applicant for covered projects, unless exempt, shall pay to the City a cash fee sufficient to compensate the City for all expenses incurred in reviewing the Waste Reduction and Recycling Plan and reviewing performance of the plan. The amount of this fee shall be set forth in a Resolution of the City Council. (Added by Ord. 03-17, 12/10/03)

 

6.12.140 Appeals.
        The applicant or any interested person may appeal to the City Manager any decision of the C&D Compliance Official. Notice of any appeal from the decision of the C&D Compliance Official must be filed with the City Manager’s office within ten (10) calendar days of the date of the decision being appealed. The notice of appeal shall set forth in concise language that particular decision or decisions complained of and the reason why the person feels aggrieved thereby. Failure to file a notice of appeal within the time prescribed herein shall constitute a waiver of any objection to the decision(s) of the C&D Compliance Official and such decision(s) shall be final; otherwise the decision of the City Manager shall be final. The fee for any appeal authorized herein shall be as set forth by City Council Resolution. (Added by Ord. 03-17, 12/10/03)

 

6.12.150 Violations.
        (a)    Violation of any provision of this Chapter may be enforced by civil action including an action for injunctive relief.

        (b)    Violations of any provision of this Chapter shall constitute an infraction punishable by a fine as outlined in Section 1.10 of the City of Dana Point Municipal Code. Where the violation is the failure to achieve the seventy-five percent (75%) minimum diversion requirement and the C&D debris from the covered project has already been landfilled, the violation shall be deemed to have ceased after a period of ten (10) days. (Added by Ord. 03-17, 12/10/03)

Chapter 6.14 NUISANCES, GENERAL
Article 1 — Public Nuisance
6.14.001 Purposes.
        (a)    In order to further the stated goals of the City of Dana Point and to protect its citizens and their property from conditions which are offensive or annoying to the senses, detrimental to property values and community appearance, or hazardous or injurious to the health, safety or welfare of the general public, the City Council has determined that a Chapter is necessary to effectively abate or prevent the development of such conditions in the City of Dana Point.

        (b)    It is the intention of the City Council, in adopting the Chapter codified herein, to set forth guidelines for determining what conditions constitute a public nuisance; to establish a method for giving notice of the conditions and an opportunity to correct them; and finally in the event the public nuisance is not abated or corrected, to provide a procedure for a hearing and determination of the facts and manner in which the conditions shall be corrected or removed.

        (c)    It is the purpose of this Chapter to provide a just, equitable and practical method, in addition to any other remedy available at law, whereby lands or buildings which are dilapidated, unsafe, dangerous, unsanitary, cluttered with weeds, debris, abandoned vehicles, machinery or equipment, or are a menace, or hazard to life, limb, safety, health, morals, property values, aesthetic standards or the general welfare of the City of Dana Point, may be required to be repaired, renovated, vacated, demolished, made safe, or cleaned up by removal of offensive conditions.

        (d)    It is the purpose of this Chapter to provide a program for removal of graffiti from walls and structures on both public and private property and to provide regulations designed to prevent and control the further spread of graffiti in the City.

        (e)    It is the purpose of this Chapter to provide a program for the removal and/or abatement as public nuisances of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof from private or public property.

        (f)    In addition to the abatement procedures provided herein, this Chapter declares certain conditions to be public nuisances and that maintenance of such conditions shall be a misdemeanor.

        (g)    This Chapter is not intended to enforce Conditions, Covenants and Restrictions (CC&R's) on property, nor to supersede them. This Chapter will be enforced uniformly within the City regardless of CC&R's. Therefore, this Chapter does not abrogate the right of any homeowners association or private citizen to take action, legal or as otherwise provided in the CC&R's, to force compliance with the CC&R's applicable to their tract or association even though the CC&R provisions may be the same, more restrictive or may not be covered by this Chapter.

 

6.14.002 Public Nuisances Designated.
        It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor subject to punishment in accordance with Section 1.01.200 of this Code, and it is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, from any person owning, leasing, occupying, or having charge of any residential, agricultural, commercial, industrial, business park, office, educational, religious, vacant, or other property within the City of Dana Point, to maintain such property in such a manner that any of the following conditions are found to exist thereon:

        (a)    Any violation of any Section of the Dana Point Municipal Code or any section of the City of Dana Point Ordinance No. 90-07 which adopted by reference portions of the Codified Ordinances of the County of Orange (“Orange County Code”) and other noncodified Orange County Ordinances including, but not limited to the following:

        (1)    Division 2 through 14 of Title 3 of the Orange County Code relating to Public Morals, Safety and Welfare; including property maintenance and recreational vehicles on private property;

        (2)    Division 1 through 7 and 9 of Title 4 of the Orange County Code relating to Health, Sanitation, and Animal Regulation; including animal control regulations and licensing, noise control;

        (3)    With the exception of Article 2 of Division 3 therein, of Title 6 of the Orange County Code relating to Highways, Bridges, Rights-of-Way, and Vehicles; including oversized vehicles on streets, signs on parked cars, and encroachments over and on streets;

 

        (b)    Land, the topography or configuration of which, in any man-made state, whether as a result of grading operations, excavations, fill, or other alteration, interferes with the established drainage pattern over the property or from adjoining or other properties which does or may result in erosion, subsidence or surface water drainage programs of such magnitude as to be injurious to public health, safety and welfare or to neighboring properties;

        (c)    Buildings or structures which are partially destroyed, abandoned or permitted to remain in a state of partial construction for more than six (6) months, or during any period of extension, after the issuance of a building permit;

        (d)    The failure to secure and maintain from public access all doorways, windows and other openings into vacant or abandoned (not occupied or in use for any purpose, no maintenance applied to the structure or grounds) buildings or structures;

        (e)    Painted buildings that require repainting, and walls, retaining walls, fences or structures, or building, walls, fences or structures upon which the condition of the paint has become so deteriorated as to permit decay, excessive checking, cracking, peeling, chalking, dry rot, warping or termite infestation;

        (f)    Any building or structure, wall, fence, pavement, or walkway upon which any graffiti, including paint, ink, chalk, dye or other similar marking substances, is allowed to remain for more than twenty-four (24) hours;

        (g)    Broken windows;

        (h)    Overgrown, dead, decayed or hazardous vegetation which:

        (1)    May harbor rats, vermin or other disease carriers,

        (2)    Is maintained so as to cause an obstruction to the vision of motorists or a hazardous condition to pedestrians or vehicle traffic,

        (3)    Constitutes an unsightly appearance,

        (4)    Creates a danger or attractive nuisance to the public;

        (i)     For purposes of subdivision (h), it shall be a presumption that any property upon which weeds exceeding six (6) inches in height create the conditions set forth in subsections (h)(1) through (4), although weeds of lesser height may also meet such criteria if so determined by the City’s Code Enforcement Officer;

        (j)     Building exterior, roofs, landscaping, grounds, walls, retaining and crib walls, fences, driveways, parking lots, sidewalks or walkways which are maintained in such condition so as to become defective, unsightly or no longer viable;

        (k)    The accumulation of dirt, litter, feces, or debris in doorways, adjoining sidewalks, parking lots, landscaped or other areas;

        (l)     Except where construction is occurring under a valid permit, lumber, junk, trash, garbage, salvage materials, rubbish, hazardous waste, refuse, rubble, broken asphalt or concrete, containers, broken or neglected machinery, furniture, appliances, sinks, fixtures or equipment, scrap metals, machinery parts, or other such material stored or deposited on property such that they are visible from a public street, alley or neighboring property;

        (m)   Deteriorated parking lots, including those containing pot holes, or cracks;

        (n)    Abandoned, broken or neglected equipment and machinery, pools, ponds, excavations, abandoned wells, shafts, basements or other holes, abandoned refrigerators or other appliances, abandoned motor vehicles, any unsound structure, skateboard ramps, or accumulated lumber, trash, garbage, debris or vegetation which may reasonably attract children to such abandoned or neglected conditions;

        (o)    (1) Construction equipment, buses, tow trucks, dump trucks, flatbed trucks, grading equipment, tractors, tractor trailers, truck trailers, or any other commercial vehicle over twenty-five (25) feet long or eight (8) feet in height or ninety (90) inches wide, supplies, materials, or machinery of any type or description, parked or stored upon any street or property within a residential zone.

        (2)    Commercial vehicle, for the purposes of this section, shall be defined as any motorized or non-motorized vehicle used or maintained to transport property or goods for profit, or persons for hire or compensation. Any commercial vehicle, when used as the primary source of transportation by the person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge of any such vehicle, shall be excluded from the provisions of this Subsection;

        (p)    Construction debris storage bins stored in excess of fifteen (15) days on a public street or any front or sideyard setback area without the express approval of the Director of Community Development and/or the City Engineer;

        (q)    Refuse or trash placed so as to be visible from neighboring properties or streets, except for those times scheduled for collection, in accordance with Section 6.10.016;

        (r)    Any property with accumulations of grease, oil or other hazardous material on paved or unpaved surfaces, driveways, buildings, walls, or fences, or from which any such material flows or seeps on to any public street or other public or private property;

        (s)    Any front yard, parkway, or landscaped setback area which lacks turf, other planted material, decorative rock, bark or planted ground cover or covering, so as to cause excessive dust or allow the accumulation of debris;

        (t)     Any condition of vegetation overgrowth which encroaches into, over or upon any public right-of-way including, but not limited to, streets, alleys, or sidewalks, so as to constitute either a danger to the public safety or property or any impediment to public travel;

        (u)    Use of parked or stored recreational vehicles, as defined in Section 6-4-603(c) of the Codified Ordinances of the County of Orange as adopted by the City of Dana Point by Ordinance No. 90-07, as temporary or permanent living space;

        (v)    Animals, livestock, poultry or bees kept, bred or maintained for any purpose and in violation of any provision of the City Municipal Code;

        (w)   Any habitation which is overcrowded, as defined by the Uniform Housing Code, as adopted by reference by the City of Dana Point Ordinance No. 89-29, or as defined in Section 6.16.018(a) of the Dana Point Municipal Code or which lacks adequate ventilation, sanitation or plumbing facilities, or which constitutes a fire hazard;

        (x)    (1) Except where construction is occurring under a valid permit, the dumping of any waste matter in or upon any public or private highway or road, including any portion of the right-of-way thereof, or in or upon any private property into or upon which the public is admitted by easement or license, or upon any private property without the consent of the owner, or in or upon any public park or any public property other than property designated or set aside for that purpose by the governing board or body having charge of that property.

        (2)    Except where construction is occurring under a valid permit, any placing, depositing or dumping, whether by natural or man-made causes, and whether intentionally or unintentionally, of any rocks, dirt or debris in or upon any private highway or road, including any portion of the right-of-way thereof, or any private property, without the consent of the owner, or in or upon any public work or other public property, without the consent of the state or local agency having jurisdiction over the highway, road, or property.

        (y)    Any other condition declared by any State, County, or City statute, code or regulation to be a public nuisance.

        (z)    Trailers, campers, boats or motor vehicles present on vacant property or in front yards of developed lots other than driveways.

        (aa)  Laundry, clothes or household linens viewable from the public right-of-way, unless such laundry, clothes or household linens are on a clothes line in the rear yard or side yard of a property or unless such clothes or household linens are being sold at a legally permitted garage sale.

        (bb)  Any violation of Title 8 or Title 9 of the City of Dana Point Municipal Code.

        (cc)  Any violation of Title 15, Chapter 15.10 of the City Municipal Code.

        (dd)  Operation of a facility without any required governmental permit, approval or license (including, without limitation, a license required by Health and Safety Code Section 11834.01 et seq., Health and Safety Code Section 1505, or 9 CCR Section 10508).

        (ee)  Failure to comply with any condition or term of any required governmental permit, approval or license. (Amended by Ord. 93-09, 5/11/93; Ord. 94-15, 9/27/94; Ord. 10-07, 7/26/10; Ord. 10-12, 11/8/10; Ord. 17-05, 10/3/17)

 

6.14.003 Commencement of Abatement Proceedings.
        Whenever the Director of Community Development, hereinafter “Director” or his/her duly authorized agent or representative reasonably believes a public nuisance exists, he/she shall commence abatement proceedings. The Director shall have responsibility for abating such nuisances on any private property and shall cause a written notice to be issued to abate such nuisance.

        (a)    The notice shall contain a description of the property in general terms reasonably sufficient to identify the location of the property. Such notice shall refer to this Section and to the violations of the Municipal Code at issue, and shall direct compliance by removal or correction of the condition which is in violation of the provisions of this Code within the minimum time frames set forth in this Section from the date of the notice. The notice shall further describe the consequences for failure to comply with this Section.

        (b)    As a general matter, the notice of violation shall require the removal or correction of the condition within a minimum of seven (7) calendar days and a maximum of thirty (30) calendar days from the date of the notice unless one of the following exists:

        (1)    The City Code Enforcement Officer determines that the maintenance of the condition of the property in its present state constitutes an imminent threat to public health or safety and the Director of Community Development concurs with such determination, the Code Enforcement Officer and Director may order compliance within a shorter period of time. Nothing herein shall limit the City’s use of criminal nuisance or other abatement proceedings to seek immediate redress for imminent threats to public health and safety.

        (2)    The City Code Enforcement Officer determines that the violation is easily and simply correctable, the Code Enforcement Officer may require compliance in less than seven (7) days providing that such period of time shall be reasonable. If this subsection is utilized, the notice shall also state that the length of the compliance period is subject to review by the Director whose decision shall be final. (Ord. 94-15, 9/27/94)

 

6.14.004 Voluntary Abatement of Public Nuisances.
        The owner, lease holder, tenant, or occupant having charge of any building, structure, or property alleged to be a public nuisance as set forth above, may abate said nuisance at any time within the abatement period by rehabilitation, repair, removal or demolition. The Director/designee shall be advised of the abatement and shall inspect the premises to ensure that the nuisance has in fact been abated.

 

6.14.005 Involuntary Abatement.
        Upon failure of the owner or his agent or the person in possession of the property to remove or correct the conditions described in the notice by the date specified, the Director shall cause a hearing to be held to determine whether said building, structure, or property is being maintained in such a manner so as to constitute a public nuisance. The Director shall give not less than seven (7) days’ written notice of the hearing to the owner(s) of the affected properties as shown on the latest equalized tax assessment roll by mailing the same to the addresses as indicated thereon, to any persons holding permits to the applicable property, building or structure, and further, within the same time period, by conspicuously posting on the affected property, building, or structure a copy of the notice. Notice may also be served on the holder of any mortgage or deed of trust or other lien or encumbrance of record; the owner or holder of any lease of record; and the holder of any other state of legal interest of record of the building or structure, or the land on which it is located.

        (a)    The notice shall indicate the nature of the alleged public nuisance, a description of the property involved, and the designation of the time and place of the hearing to determine whether the same constitutes a public nuisance, and the manner of the proposed abatement if the same is found to be a public nuisance.

        (b)    The notice and order of abatement shall be served on every party by registered or certified mail. Delivery by first class mail shall be used when delivery by registered or certified mail is refused.

        (c)    The failure of any person to receive this notice shall not affect the validity of any proceedings under this Chapter.

        (d)    Nothing hereby shall prevent any property owner or other interested person from abating the nuisance prior to the time of the hearing and notifying the City of the same. Upon confirmation by the City that the nuisance has been abated, the need for the hearing shall be deemed terminated.

 

6.14.006 Form of Notice.
        The notice given shall be provided in substantially the following format:

 

“NOTICE OF HEARING ON ABATEMENT OF PUBLIC NUISANCE

 

        A hearing will be held at City Hall, 33282 Golden Lantern, Suite 210, Dana Point, before the City of Dana Point Hearing Officer, to determine whether the premises at ________________________ constitutes a public nuisance.

 

 

        The conditions asserted to constitute a public nuisance include the following:

__________________________________________________________________________________

 

        A hearing may be avoided if the following corrections are made at least two (2) calendar days before the date set for the hearing:

__________________________________________________________________________________

 

        If it is determined that the conditions on the property constitute a public nuisance, the following abatement action may be taken by the City if the owner has not taken corrective action within five (5) days after the hearing officer's determination:

__________________________________________________________________________________

 

        If abatement action is taken by the City, all costs of the abatement will be assessed against the property and will attach as a lien until paid. All persons having an interest in this matter may attend the hearing and give testimony and evidence, which will be given due consideration by the hearing officer. Call (714) 248-3560 for questions regarding this notice.”

 

6.14.007 Hearing.
        (a)    The hearing to determine whether a public nuisance exists shall be conducted by the hearing officer. The hearing officer shall be determined by Resolution by the City Council. The hearing officer is authorized to take testimony and in the course of so doing, is authorized to administer oaths or affirmations pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 2093(a).

        (b)    At the hearing, the hearing officer shall consider all relevant evidence, including but not limited to applicable Staff Reports. He shall give any interested person the reasonable opportunity to be heard in conjunction therewith. Based upon the evidence so presented, the hearing officer shall determine whether a public nuisance within the meaning of this Chapter exists, and determine the assessment of costs to date, if any, in accordance with Section 6.14.008 hereof. (Ord. 94-15, 9/27/94)

 

6.14.008 Order of Abatement.
        (a)    The decision of the hearing officer shall be final and conclusive in the absence of appeal as provided in this Chapter.

        (b)    The hearing officer shall, within five (5) working days, mail a copy of the written notice of decision by certified or registered mail to the owner, and by regular first-class mail to all other persons and entities who received notice of the original hearing, and to any other person requesting the same. The notice shall contain an order of abatement, if a public nuisance is determined to exist, and assessment of costs to date, if any, in accordance with subsection (d) hereof, and be directed to the owner of the affected property or the person in control and/or charge of the property, and shall set forth the nature of the nuisance, its location and the time and manner for its abatement.

        (c)    Where an appeal is filed as provided in this Chapter, the order of abatement shall be suspended pending the review of the determination in the manner set forth in this Chapter.

        (d)    If the hearing officer determines that a nuisance exists, then the hearing officer shall, as part of his/her order, direct that the property owner or person in control and/or charge of the property, pay the City's costs of the nuisance proceedings to date. Such costs shall include any and all City staff time and costs from the second notice/letter of violation and include all noticing, city attorney, city staff time, and hearing officer costs. If the hearing officer determines that no violation exists, no costs shall be awarded or ordered.

        Any costs awarded shall be deemed a debt owed to the City and shall be paid within thirty (30) days of invoice from the City. Any debt remaining unpaid shall, at the City's option, be:

        (1)    Collected through the use of civil process—including utilization of a collection agency; or

        (2)    Placement of such debt at a lien upon the property to be collected in accordance with Sections 6.14.011 and 6.14.012 of this Code. (Ord. 94-15, 9/27/94)

 

6.14.009 Appeal.
        Any person entitled to notice of hearing, who has participated in that hearing and who is dissatisfied by the order of the hearing officer, may appeal that order by filing an appeal with the City Clerk within five (5) days of the date of the order and by paying the appeal fee set by Resolution. The notice of appeal shall specify:

        (a)    A description of the property;

        (b)    The abatement proceedings appealed;

        (c)    The owner, or appealing party's, legal or equitable interest in the property;

        (d)    A statement of disputed and undisputed facts;

        (e)    A statement specifying which portion of the proceedings that are being appealed, together with any evidentiary or supporting materials that would support the appeal; and

        (f)    A verification of the truth of all matters asserted.

        Upon the timely filing of a notice of appeal in the proper form, the City Clerk shall place said appeal upon the next regular meeting to the City Council scheduled to be held not less than five (5) business days after said appeal is received.

        The City Clerk shall provide written notice of the appeal, including the time, place, and date of the hearing on the appeal, to the appellant and any other person to whom notice of the hearing officer's order was sent. Said notice shall be sent in the same manner as notice of the hearing officer's order.

        The City Council may limit the issues on appeal to those in substantially the same form as that sent by the hearing officer and shall be sent to all persons to whom notice of the hearing officer's order was sent as well as to all persons requesting such notice, in writing, at the time the appeal is heard.

 

6.14.010 Abatement of Nuisance by City.
        If the nuisance is not completely abated by the date specified in the hearing officer's order, or in the City Council's determination, as appropriate, the City Manager may immediately cause the same to be abated by City personnel or under private contract. The hearing officer and/or City Council are authorized to grant reasonable extensions on the time period for abatement based on a proper showing by the property owner of extenuating circumstances, made before the date of City abatement. The owner of the premises shall be liable to the City for all costs of such abatement.

 

6.14.011 Cost Accounting; Notification.
        City personnel, or any private contractor authorized to abate the nuisance, shall keep an account of the cost, including incidental expenses, of all abatement work performed on each separate lot or parcel of land where work is done and shall render an itemized report in writing to the City Council showing the total cost of abatement by rehabilitation, demolition, or repair of the property, buildings, or structure, including any salvage value relating thereto. A copy of the report shall be posted at City Hall or other official location for posting City notices for at least five (5) days before it is considered by the City Council. Proof of posting shall be made by affidavit of the City Clerk or Deputy City Clerk. The term “incidental expenses” includes but is not limited to the actual expenses and costs of the City in preparation of notices, specifications and contracts, inspection of the work, and the cost of printing and mailings required under this Chapter, and any attorney fees expended in the abatement of the nuisance, through civil action or otherwise. The City Attorney shall be responsible for keeping an accounting of attorney fees and costs and transmitting the same to the Director.

 

6.14.012 Assessment Lien.
        The total cost for abatement of the nuisance, as confirmed by the City Council, shall constitute a special assessment against the lot or parcel of land to which it relates and, upon recordation in the office of the County Recorder of a Notice of Lien, shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment.

        After confirmation and recordation, a copy of the Notice of Lien may be turned over to the Tax Collector to add the amounts of the assessments to the next regular tax bill levied against the respective lots and parcels of land. Thereafter the assessment amounts shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary property taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure for foreclosure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary property taxes. After recordation, the lien may be foreclosed by judicial or other sale in the manner and means provided by law. The Notice of Lien for recordation shall be in a form substantially as follows:

 

“NOTICE OF LIEN

 

Claim of the City of Dana Point

 

        Pursuant to the authority vested by Chapter 6.14 of the Dana Point Municipal Code, the City of Dana Point hearing officer [City Council] did on or about the _________ day of _________________, 20_____, cause the property hereinafter described to be declared a public nuisance and order the same abated. The City Council of the City of Dana Point, did on the _________ day of ______________, 20_____, assess the cost of such abatement upon the property and the same has not been paid nor any part thereof. The City of Dana Point does hereby claim a lien for such abatement in the amount of the assessment, to wit: the sum of $ ______________, and the same shall be a lien upon the real property until paid in full and discharged of record.

 

        The real property hereinabove mentioned, and upon which a lien is claimed, is that certain parcel of land lying and being entirely with the City of Dana Point, County of Orange, State of California, particularly described as follows:

 

(legal description)

 

        Dated: This___________day of___________________, 20____.

 

________________________________________________________

City Manager, City of Dana Point”

 

6.14.013 Owner Responsibility.
        The owner of any premises within the City has responsibility for keeping said premises free of public nuisances. Tenants and occupants of the premises, for the purposes of this Chapter, shall be deemed to be the agents of the owner. (Amended by Ord. 93-09, 5/11/93)

 

6.14.014 Alternate Actions—Judicial Remedies.
        Nothing in this Chapter shall be deemed to prevent the City Council from:

        (a)    Ordering and directing the City Attorney to commence a civil action in the Superior Court to enforce the provisions of a final order of abatement; and/or

        (b)    Ordering and directing the City Attorney to commence a civil action to abate a public nuisance as an alternative to an administrative proceeding pursuant to this Chapter.

        Where such a civil action is filed, if the Court issues an order or a judgment directing and ordering the abatement of a public nuisance, the Court shall also award the City its costs of abatement, determined pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, and, reasonable attorneys fees incurred by the City in such civil proceeding. (Amended by Ord. 93-09, 5/11/93)

 

6.14.015 Alternate Actions—Emergency Abatement.
        Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, whenever the City Manager determines that a public nuisance exists within the City, or that the condition of a building or structure constitutes a public nuisance, all as defined in this Chapter or pursuant to other applicable law, and that nuisance constitutes an immediate hazard or danger, the City Manager, without observing the provisions of this Chapter with regard to abatement procedures, shall immediately and forthwith order the abatement of such existing public nuisance, and forthwith report such circumstances to the City Council.  Where such abatement is ordered by the City Manager, the Director of Community Development shall, after completing the abatement, comply with the provisions of Section 6.14.005 et seq. hereof. (Added by Ord. 93-09, 5/11/93)

 

6.14.016—6.14.100 Reserved.
 

Article 2 — Graffiti
6.14.101 Graffiti Defined.
        For the purposes of this Chapter, “graffiti” means the unauthorized spraying of paint or marking of ink, chalk, dye or other similar substances on public or private buildings, structures, or places.

 

6.14.102 Prohibition.
        It is unlawful for any person to paint, chalk, or otherwise apply graffiti on public or privately owned structures located on public or privately owned property within the City.

 

6.14.103 Sale and Possession of Pressurized Paint Cans.
        The following regulation shall apply to the sale and possession of pressurized paint cans in the City:

        (a)    No person shall sell any pressurized can containing any substance commonly known as paint or dye to anyone under the age of 18 years and no person under the age of 18 years shall purchase any pressurized can containing paint or dye; and

        (b)    No person shall have in his or her possession any pressurized can containing any substance commonly known as paint or dye while in any public park, playground, swimming pool, or recreational facility in the City. This Section shall not apply to authorized employees of the City of Dana Point, the Capistrano Bay Parks and Recreation District, or any individual or authorized employee of any individual, agency, public utility, or company under contract with the City.

 

6.14.104 Removal of Graffiti.
        Graffiti may be removed by any of the following methods:

        (a)    Any person who applies graffiti within the City shall have the duty to remove the same within twenty-four (24) hours after notice by the City or the public or private owner of the property involved. The failure of any person to so remove said graffiti shall constitute an additional violation of this Chapter. Where graffiti is applied by anyone under the age of 18 years, the parent, parents or legal guardian shall be responsible for such removal or for the payment therefor;

        (b)    Whenever the Director determines that graffiti is located on public or privately owned structures on public or privately owned real property within the City, so as to be capable of being viewed by a person utilizing any public right-of-way in the City, the Director/Designee is authorized to provide for the removal of said graffiti at the City's sole expense, without reimbursement from the property owner upon whose property the graffiti has been applied, upon the following conditions:

        (1)    In removing the graffiti, the painting or repair of a more extensive area than necessary to remove said graffiti shall not be authorized;

        (2)    When a structure is owned by a public entity other than the City, the removal of the graffiti may be authorized only after securing the consent of the public entity which owns the structure;

        (3)    Where a structure is privately owned, the removal of the graffiti by City or by a private contractor under the direction of the City, may be authorized only after securing the consent of the owner.

        (c)    Graffiti located on privately or publicly owned structures on privately or publicly owned real property within the City, so as to be capable of being viewed by a person utilizing any public right-of-way in the City, may be removed by the City as a public nuisance, at the owner's expense, pursuant to the following provisions:

        (1)    Whenever the Director is apprised of the presence of graffiti located on privately owned structures on privately owned real property within the City, or when the Director is apprised of the presence of graffiti located on publicly owned structures on publicly owned real property located within the City to the extent the City has exclusive or concurrent jurisdiction over the same, the Director may cause a written notice to be served upon the owner of the affected premises as such owner's name and address appear on the last equalized assessment roll, by depositing a copy of said notice with the U.S. Postal Service enclosed in a sealed envelope and with the postage thereon fully prepaid. The notice shall be registered or certified and addressed to the owner at the last known address of the owner, and if there is no known address, then in care of the property address. The service is complete at the time of such deposit. “Owner,” as used in this Chapter, means any person in possession as well as any person having or claiming to have any legal or equitable interest in the premises as described by a preliminary title search from any accredited title company. The failure of any person to receive such notice shall not affect the validity of any proceeding hereunder. The property owner shall have five (5) days after the date appearing on the notice to remove the graffiti or be subject to City removal of the graffiti and assessment of the costs of such removal as a lien on the subject property:

        (2)    The notice shall be substantially in the following form:

 

“NOTICE OF INTENT TO REMOVE GRAFFITI

 

Date:

 

        NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that you are required at your expense to remove or paint over the graffiti located on the property commonly known as _____________________, Dana Point, California, within five (5) days after the date appearing on this notice. Said graffiti is visible to public view and therefore constitutes a public nuisance. If you fail to comply with this order, City employees or private City contractors will enter upon your property and abate the public nuisance by removal or painting over of the graffiti. The cost of the abatement by the City or its private contractors will be assessed against your property and such costs will constitute a lien upon the land until paid.

 

        All persons having any objections to, or interest in said matters are hereby notified to submit any objections or comments to the Director of Community Development for the City of Dana Point or his/her designated representative within five (5) days from the date appearing on this notice. At the conclusion of this five (5) day period the City may proceed with the abatement of the graffiti inscribed on your property at your expense without further notice.”

 

        The service of this notice shall be made on the day the notice is dated and by affidavit filed with the City Clerk.

        (3)    If any objections are submitted to the Director within five (5) days after the date appearing on the Notice of Intent to Remove Graffiti, the Director shall schedule a hearing on the matter, which shall follow the procedures set forth in Sections 6.14.007, 6.14.008 and 6.14.009 of Article 1;

        (4)    The cost of abatement by the City shall be recovered pursuant to Section 6.14.012 of Article 1 of this Chapter.

 

6.14.105 Rewards.
        The City Council may, by Resolution, establish a reward for information leading to the identification, apprehension and conviction of any person who places graffiti upon any public or private property in the City. Said Resolution may require that the convicted offender reimburse the City for any reward paid, and place responsibility for reimbursement upon the parent(s) or legal guardian(s) of any minor so convicted.

 

6.14.106 Alternate Actions.
        Nothing in this Article shall be deemed to prevent the City from commencing a civil or criminal proceeding to abate a public nuisance or from pursuing any other means available to it under provisions of applicable Ordinances or State Law or correct hazards or deficiencies in real property in addition to or as alternatives to the proceedings herein set forth.

 

6.14.107—6.14.200 Reserved.
 

 

Article 3 — Abandoned Vehicles
6.14.201 Purpose.
        In addition to and in accordance with the authority granted to the City by the State under Section 22660 of the Vehicle Code to remove abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof as public nuisances, the City Council makes the following findings and declarations:

 

        The accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof on private or public property is found to create a condition tending to reduce the value of private property, to promote blight and deterioration, to invite plundering, to create fire hazards, to constitute a nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, to create a harborage for rodents and insects and to be injurious to the health, safety and general welfare. Therefore, the presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or part thereof, on private or public property except as expressly permitted in this Article, is declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this Article.

 

6.14.202 Exceptions.
        (a)    This Article shall not apply to:

        (1)    A vehicle or part thereof which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property; or

        (2)    A vehicle or part thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, junk dealer, or when such storage or parking is necessary to the operation of a lawfully conducted business or commercial enterprise;

        (b)    Nothing in this Section shall authorize the maintenance of a public or private nuisance as defined under provisions of law other than Chapter 10 (commencing with Section 22650) of Division 11 of the Vehicle Code and this Chapter.

 

6.14.203 Enforcement.
        Except as otherwise provided in this Article, the provisions of this Article shall be administered and enforced by the Director of Community Development. The Director of Community Development may enter upon private or public property to examine a vehicle or parts thereof, or obtain information as to the identity of the vehicle and to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or part thereof declared to be a public nuisance pursuant to this Article.

 

6.14.204 Notice of Intent to Abate and Remove.
        (a)    A ten (10) day notice of intention to abate and remove a vehicle or part thereof as a public nuisance shall be issued, unless the property owner and the owner of the vehicle have signed releases authorizing removal and waiving further interest in the vehicle or part thereof;

        (b)    For inoperable vehicles or parts thereof located on property which is (1) zoned for agricultural use or (2) not improved with a residential structure containing one or more dwelling units, the notice of intention shall not be required for removal of a vehicle or part thereof which is inoperable due to the absence of a motor, transmission, or wheels and incapable of being towed, is valued at less than two hundred dollars ($200) by any person designated pursuant to the Vehicle Code to make such appraisals, and is determined by the Director to be a public nuisance presenting an immediate threat to public health or safety; provided that the property owner has signed a release authorizing removal and waiving further interest in the vehicle or part thereof. Prior to final disposition of such a low-valued vehicle or part thereof for which evidence of a registration was recovered pursuant to Section 6.14.203, the Director shall provide notice to the registered and legal owners of intent to dispose of the vehicle or part, and if the vehicle or part is not claimed and removed within twelve (12) days after notice is mailed, from a location specified in Vehicle Code Section 22662, final disposition may proceed;

        (c)    The notice of intention to abate shall contain a statement of the hearing rights of the owner of the property on which the vehicle is located and of the owner of the vehicle. The statement shall include notice to the property owner that the owner may appear in person at a hearing or may submit a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, and the owner's reasons for such denial, in lieu of appearing. The notice shall be mailed, by registered or certified mail, to the owner of the land as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the last registered and legal owner of record of the vehicle unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. The service is complete at the time of such deposit.

        (d)    The notice shall be substantially in the following form:

 

“NOTICE OF INTENT TO ABATE AND REMOVE

 

Date:

 

        Notice Is Hereby Given that you are required at your expense to remove the vehicle identified as _____________________________________________________ and located on property commonly known as _____________________________________________________, Dana Point, California, within ten (10) days after the date appearing on the notice. Said vehicle is in such a condition to constitute a public nuisance. If you fail to comply with this order, City employees or private City contractors will enter upon your property and abate the public nuisance by removal of the vehicle or part thereof. The cost of the abatement incurred by the City or its private contractor will be assessed against your property and such costs will constitute a lien upon the land until paid.

 

        All persons having an interest in the property on which the vehicle or part thereof is located and/or of the vehicle or part thereof are hereby notified that such interested parties may request a hearing within ten (10) days of the date of this notice to be held at City Hall, 33282 Golden Lantern, Suite 210, Dana Point, before a hearing officer to determine whether the vehicle or part thereof is in such a condition to constitute a public nuisance. You may appear in person at the hearing or you may submit a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle or part thereof on the land, and the reasons for such denial, in lieu of appearing. If such a request is not received within such period, the City shall remove the vehicle or part thereof. Call (714) 248-3560 for questions regarding this notice.”

 

6.14.205 Request for Hearing.
        (a)    A hearing shall be held before the hearing officer upon request for such hearing by the owner of the vehicle or the owner of the land upon which the vehicle is located. This request shall be made in writing to the Director within ten (10) days after the mailing of notice intention to abate and remove the vehicle, or at the time of signing a release pursuant to Subsection (a) or (b) of Section 6.14.204.

        (b)    If the owner of the land on which the vehicle is located submits a sworn statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his/her land within such time period, this statement shall be construed as a request for hearing which does not require the presence of the owner submitting such request. If such a request is not received within such period, the City shall have the authority to remove the vehicle.

 

6.14.206 Hearings.
        (a)    All hearings under this Article shall be held before the hearing officer, which hearing officer shall hear all facts and testimony deemed pertinent. The facts and testimony may include testimony on the condition of the vehicle or part thereof and the circumstances concerning its location on the private or public property. The technical rules of evidence shall not apply. The owner of the land on which the vehicle is located may appear in person at the hearing or present a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with the owner's reasons for such denial;

        (b)    At the conclusion of the hearing the hearing officer may find that a vehicle or part thereof has been abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or is inoperative on private or public property and order the same removed from the property as a public nuisance and disposed of as provided in this Article;

        (c)    If it is determined by the hearing officer that the vehicle was placed on the land without the consent of the landowner and that the owner has not subsequently acquiesced to its presence, the hearing officer shall not assess costs of administration or removal of the vehicle against the property upon which the vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect such costs from such landowner;

        (d)    If an interested party makes a written presentation to the hearing officer, but does not appear, said party shall be notified in writing of the decision within five (5) days of such decision by the hearing officer by certified or registered mail.

 

6.14.207 Appeal.
        Any interested party may appeal the decision of the hearing officer by filing a written notice of appeal with the City Clerk within ten (10) days after the decision and by paying the appeal fee set by Resolution. Such appeal shall be heard by the City Council which may affirm, amend or reverse the order or take any other action deemed appropriate. The City Clerk shall give written notice of the time and place of the hearing to the appellant and those persons specified in Section 6.14.206. In conducting the hearing, the City Council shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. The decision of the City Council shall be final.

 

6.14.208 Decision to Remove Vehicle.
        (a)    An order for abatement and removal of a vehicle, made pursuant to this Article, shall include a description of the vehicle or part thereof and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle, if available.

        (b)    The hearing officer, or the City Council on appeal, may impose such conditions and take such actions as are deemed appropriate and justified under the circumstances to carry out removal of the vehicle or part thereof;

        (c)    Five (5) days after adoption of the order, five (5) days from the date of mailing of notice of the decision if such notice is required, or fifteen (15) days after such action of the City Council authorizing removal following appeal, the vehicle or parts thereof may be disposed of by removal to a scrapyard or automobile dismantler's yard;

        (d)    After a vehicle has been removed, it shall not thereafter be reconstructed or made operable, unless it is a vehicle which qualifies for either horseless carriage license plates or historical vehicle license plates, pursuant to Section 5004 of the Vehicle Code, in which case the vehicle may be reconstructed or made operable.

 

6.14.209 Costs.
        The hearing officer, or the City Council on appeal, shall determine the administrative costs and cost of removal to be charged. If the administrative costs and the cost of removal are charged against the owner or a parcel of land pursuant to this Article and are not paid within thirty (30) days of the date of the order, or the final disposition of an appeal therefrom, such costs shall be assessed against the parcel of land pursuant to Section 38773.5 of the Government Code and shall be transmitted to the tax collector for collection. The assessment shall have the same priority as other taxes.

 

6.14.210 Franchises.
        When the City Council has contracted with or granted a franchise to any person or persons, such person or persons shall be authorized to enter upon private property or public property to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or part thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this Article.

 

6.14.211 Notice to Department of Motor Vehicles.
        Within five (5) days after the date of removal of the vehicle or part thereof, notice shall be given to the Department of Motor Vehicles identifying the vehicle or part thereof removed. At the same time, there shall be transmitted to the Department of Motor Vehicles any evidence of registration available, including registration certificates, certificates of title and license plates.

 

6.14.212 Removal Required.
        No person shall fail or refuse to remove an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or part thereof or refuse to abate such nuisance when ordered to do so in accordance with the abatement provisions of this Article or State law where such State law is applicable.

 

6.14.213 No City Liability.
        Neither the City nor any contractor thereof shall be liable for damage caused to a vehicle or part thereof by removal pursuant to this Article.

 

6.14.214 Alternate Actions.
        This Article is not the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles within the City. It shall supplement and be in addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes, and ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by the City, the State, or any other legal entity or agency having appropriate jurisdiction.

 

6.14.215—6.14.300 Reserved.
 

Article 4 — Violations
6.14.301 Misdemeanors.
        The owner, or any other person having charge or control of any building or property, who maintains any public nuisance as defined in this Chapter or who violates any order of abatement made pursuant to this Chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor.

        Any unauthorized person who removes any notice or order posted as required in this Chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor.

        No person shall obstruct, impede or interfere with any representative of the City engaged in vacating, repairing, rehabilitating or demolishing and removing any property pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, or in performing any necessary act preliminary to or incidental to such work as authorized or directed pursuant hereto.

        Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished in accordance with Sections 1.01.200 to 1.01.240 of this Code. A criminal prosecution may be initiated without a nuisance hearing, as provided in this Chapter, or upon a violation of any order resulting from such a hearing. Each person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of the provisions of this Chapter is committed or permitted to continue.

 

6.14.302 Authority to Arrest.
        The following designated officers and employees shall have the power to arrest persons for misdemeanor violations of this Chapter whenever the officer or employee has reasonable cause to believe that the person has committed the offense in said officer's or employee's presence:

        1.     The Director of Community Development;

        2.     The Building Official;

        3.     The Senior Planner; and

        4.     Code Enforcement Officers.

 

6.14.303 Citation Procedure.
        All designated officers and employees exercising their authority to arrest under this Chapter shall comply with the procedures regarding the making of arrests set forth in Section 833 et seq. of the California Penal Code, and the procedures regarding misdemeanor citations set forth in Section 853.6 et seq. of the California Penal Code.

 

Article 5 — Loud or Unruly Parties
6.14.401 Authority and Purpose.
        This Article is enacted pursuant to the authority of Sections 38771 through 38773.5 of the Government Code and pursuant to the police powers of the City. The purpose of this Article is to identify activity which constitutes a public nuisance, to provide for the summary abatement of such nuisance at the expense of persons creating, causing, committing or maintaining it, and to promote the public peace, health, safety and welfare by minimizing the frequency of return calls to loud and disturbing parties. (Added by Ord. 93-03, 1/26/93)

 

6.14.402 Definition.
        For the purposes of this Article, “party” means a social gathering for the purpose of pleasure or entertainment, which occurs between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. (Added by Ord. 93-03, 1/26/93)

 

6.14.403 Nuisance Declared.
        It is hereby declared that loud or unruly parties which create a threat to the public peace, health, safety or welfare constitute a public nuisance. No person, firm, corporation, association or other legal entity owning, leasing or occupying real property in the City shall create, cause, commit, maintain or permit such a public nuisance to occur on said property. (Added by Ord. 93-03, 1/26/93)

 

6.14.404 Notification of Liability for Costs of Second Response.
        When the Police Department is called to the scene of a loud or unruly party and a police officer at the scene determines that there is a threat to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare due to the party, the police officer shall notify the owner of the premises, the tenants of the premises, the person in lawful custody of the premises, or the person responsible for committing, creating, causing, maintaining or permitting said party, that the party constitutes a public nuisance and that such persons, (or, if that person is a minor, the parents or guardians of that minor person) shall be held jointly and severally liable for the costs incurred for providing police personnel for a second or subsequent response to the same premises due to a continuation of the same conduct.

        Said notice shall be given to the occupant of the property and to the owner if present both verbally and in written form. The written notice shall be in substantially the following form:

 

“NOTICE FIRST RESPONSE — DISTURBANCE IN
RESIDENTIAL AREA DURING SLEEPING HOURS

 

        This NOTICE OF VIOLATION given to (Name)___________________(DOB)_________at (Location)________________________(Phone Number)___________on (Date)___________at (Time)___________is the result of a disturbance in a residential area between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in violation of Article 5 of Chapter 6.14 of the Dana Point Municipal Code.

 

        If it is necessary for the Dana Point Police Department to respond a second or subsequent time to stop a disturbance at this location prior to 7:00 a.m. on (Date) ___________________ (either the next first response), the owner of the property and the occupant of the property shall be charged for all personnel and equipment costs incurred in such second and subsequent responses, up to $1,000, and all violators of statutes or ordinances will be subject to arrest and/or citation.

 

______________________________________

(Signature of party to whom notice given)

 

_______________________________________

(Signature of Deputy)”

 

(Added by Ord. 93-03, 1/26/93)

 

6.14.405 Second and Subsequent Response.
        If, after giving the first notice, the Police Department receives any additional complaints about a disturbance at the same location either the same night or prior to 7:00 a.m. the following morning, then the Police Department shall respond again to the location of the disturbance. If the Police Department determines that the disturbance continues to constitute a public nuisance as described in this Article and an immediate threat to public health or safety, the Police Department shall take appropriate actions to immediately abate the nuisance, including arrest and/or citation of persons violating the law. (Added by Ord. 93-03, 1/26/93)

 

6.14.406 Nuisance Remedy Not Exclusive.
        Nothing herein shall affect the authority of the Dana Point Police Department to make lawful arrests at any time, including on the first response to a disturbance constituting a nuisance as defined in this Article. (Added by Ord. 93-03, 1/26/93)

 

6.14.407 Persons Responsible for Costs of Second Response.
        The costs incurred by the Police Department for a second or subsequent response to a party which is determined to be a threat to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare, and which conduct is continuing at the time of the second or subsequent response, shall be charged to and borne by the owner of the premises, the tenants of the premises, the person in lawful custody of the premises, or the person or persons who created, committed, caused, maintained or permitted said party (or, in the event that person is a minor, that person's parents or guardians). (Added by Ord. 93-03, 1/26/93)

 

6.14.408 Second Response Deemed to be Special Security Assignment.
        The first response and warning shall be deemed to be normal police service. Personnel utilized on a second or subsequent response shall be deemed to be on special security assignment. The costs incurred from such special assignment are declared to be beyond normal services provided by the Department of Public Safety. (Added by Ord. 93-03, 1/26/93)

 

6.14.409 One Thousand Dollar ($1,000.00) Limit.
        The costs of such special assignment include all personnel and equipment costs, any damage to City property and any injuries to City personnel. The Police Department will determine the reasonable cost of such special assignment, which shall not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for a single incident. The remedy provided by this Article shall be in addition to any other remedy provided by law. (Added by Ord. 93-03, 1/26/93)

 

6.14 410 Recovery of Costs.
        The costs of such a special assignment shall be a personal obligation of the persons who created, caused, committed or maintained the nuisance. In addition, the costs of such special assignment may be assessed as a lien against the property on which the nuisance was maintained and shall be a personal obligation against the property owner as herein set forth. (Added by Ord. 93-03, 1/26/93)

 

6.14.411 Billing.
        When the City has incurred response costs as set forth in this Article, the actual cost thereof, plus accrued interest at the rate of ten percent (10%) per annum from the date of billing, shall be charged to the person or persons responsible. The person or persons responsible under this Article shall be billed by mail through the City reimbursement process and the bill shall apprise the owner that failure to pay the bill may result in a lien against the property. (Added by Ord. 93-03, 1/26/93)

 

6.14.412 Assessing the Cost as Lien.
        When the full amount due to the City for second or subsequent response costs as set forth in this Article is not paid by the person or persons responsible therefor within thirty (30) days of the date of the billing for such costs, the Chief of Police shall file with the City Clerk a sworn or certified statement showing the response costs incurred, the date costs were incurred and the location of the property to which the response was made. This statement shall be used to prepare notice of recordation of a lien against the property. Thereafter, notice shall be prepared and served upon the property owner in accordance with Government Code Section 38773.1(b), and the lien shall be recorded in the county recorder's office in accordance with Section 38773.1(c). The remedy provided in this Section shall not constitute an election of remedies by the City. (Added by Ord. 93-03, 1/26/93)

 

6.14.413 Appeals.
        (a)    Any person who has been notified by the City by first class mail that he or she will be held liable for second or subsequent response costs in accordance with this Article may appeal to the City Council for a hearing. The appeal shall be in writing, shall be signed by the appellant, and shall set forth the facts and reasons upon which the appeal is based. The appeal shall be filed with the City Clerk within ten (10) days following the date of official written notice to the appellant that he or she will be held liable for such costs.

        (b)    Upon receipt of an appeal, the City Clerk shall cause the matter to be placed on the next available Council agenda for a hearing.

        (c)    The appellant shall be notified in writing at least five (5) days in advance of the hearing.

        (d)    The Council shall hear the appeal and determine whether to allow the relief being sought or to deny the appeal.

        (e)    If the appeal is denied, the appellant shall have ten (10) days to pay the applicable response costs, or the City may commence proceedings to collect such sums as are due as provided by law and to place a lien upon the affected property, if the property owner was notified by the City pursuant to Subsection (a) above. (Added by Ord. 93-03, 1/26/93)

Chapter 6.15 LANDSCAPE AND MAINTENANCE OF VACANT PROPERTY IN COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 18-07. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 6.15.001 Landscaping of Vacant Property.
        (a)    Definitions.       For purposes of this Chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this Chapter are defined as follows:

        (1)    “Director” shall be as defined in Section 6.15.003 of this Code and shall include any persons duly designated by the Director of Community Development.

        (2)    “Landscaping” shall be as defined in Section 9.75.120 of this Code.

        (3)    “Vacant Property” shall mean any lot, parcel, or other division of land in commercial districts that is not currently in use and has less than seventy-five percent (75%) of its surface area covered by any properly maintained landscaping, permanent structures, or other physical improvements such as walls, paving, fencing or benches, but not including plastic sheeting.  Furthermore, the surface area not covered by any landscaping, permanent structures, or other improvements shall have remained uncovered for a period of sixty (60) days prior to the determination that the property is vacant pursuant to this Chapter.

        (b)    Landscaping of Vacant Property Required—Inspection.

        (1)    Whenever any lot, parcel, or other legal division of land is considered a vacant property under this Chapter, any surface area that is not covered by landscaping, permanent structures, or other improvements shall be sufficiently covered with landscaping and adequately irrigated.  Said landscaping shall be maintained until the vacant property is placed into regular use in accordance with its zoning designation.

        (2)    The Director shall inspect any or all property within the City for compliance with this Chapter whenever conditions warrant, or any specific property upon receiving notice of or observing a vacant property without the landscaping required by this Chapter. (Added by Ord. 01-03, 3/13/01)

 

6.15.002 Landscaping Standards.
        Notwithstanding any other portion of this Code, in order to promote and protect the City's interests that this Chapter addresses, the following general standards shall apply to any landscaping required under this Chapter:

        (a)    Landscaping shall cover as much surface area of the vacant property as reasonably possible, and shall be of a design or type that control erosion, reduce glare, reduce water run-off, and will reasonably beautify and enhance a property.

        (b)    In light of the City's interests addressed by this Chapter, the use of water-saving plants are encouraged where reasonably practicable, and irrigation systems if installed.

        (c)    So long as the property remains a vacant property, landscaping required by this Chapter shall not be subject to the plan review and approval required in Chapter 9.55. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any landscaping required by this Chapter shall comply with the landscape design standards enumerated in Section 9.55.050, and the landscaping plan must be approved by the Planning Department prior to installation. (Added by Ord. 01-03, 3/13/01)

 

6.15.003 Notice of Hearing—Time Allowed to Complete Landscaping—Form of Notice.
        (a)    Upon inspection of the property, the Director shall determine if the property is a vacant property, and determine if the vacant property meets the landscaping requirement of this Chapter.  If in the opinion of the Director the property is a vacant property within the meaning of this Chapter, he shall schedule and conduct an administrative hearing upon the matter. The owner of the property shall be notified of the hearing by posting a single notice upon the property and by mailing a single notice to the owner as shown upon the last published assessment role of the Orange County tax assessor. Such mailing and posting shall be accomplished at least sixty (60) days prior to the administrative hearing.

        (b)    During the sixty (60) day period between notice of the administrative hearing and the occurrence of the administrative hearing, the property owner shall have the option to install and/or maintain the landscaping required by this Chapter. If prior to the administrative hearing, such installation and/or maintenance is carried out in accordance with this Chapter and to the reasonable satisfaction of the Director, the administrative hearing shall be cancelled, and the City shall not seek to recover any of its costs related to that particular hearing.

        (c)    The notice required under this section shall be provided in substantially the following format:

 

        “A hearing will be held at City Hall, 33282 Golden Lantern, Suite 210, Dana Point, before the City of Dana Point Hearing Officer, to determine whether the premises at ______________________ shall be landscaped while vacant, or the existing landscaping maintained while the premises is vacant in accordance with Dana Point Municipal Code Chapter 6.15.

 

        “A hearing may be avoided if the following corrections are made before the day set for the hearing:

__________________________________________________________________________________

 

        “If it is determined that the property should be landscaped, or the landscaping maintained, in accordance with Chapter 9.50, the following action may be taken by the City if the owner has not taken corrective action within sixty (60) days after the hearing officer's determination:

__________________________________________________________________________________

 

        “If the City takes action, all costs of the action taken will be assessed against the property and will attach as a lien until paid.  All persons having an interest in this matter may attend the hearing and give testimony and evidence, which will be given due consideration by the hearing officer. Call ______________________ for questions regarding this notice.”

 

        (d)    Notice shall be sent First Class and Certified Mail, postage prepaid. (Added by Ord. 01-03, 3/13/01)

 

*       Section 6.15.003 remains in effect until April 1, 2002. On April 1, 2002, Section 6.15.003.1 becomes effective.

 

6.15.003.1 Notice of Hearing; Time Allowed to Complete Landscaping; Form of Notice.
        (a)    Upon inspection of the property, the Director shall determine if the property is a vacant property, and determine if the vacant property meets the landscaping requirement of this Chapter.  If in the opinion of the Director the property is a vacant property within the meaning of this Chapter, he shall schedule and conduct an administrative hearing upon the matter.  The owner of the property shall be notified of the hearing by posting a single notice upon the property and by mailing a single notice to the owner as shown upon the last published assessment role of the Orange County tax assessor.  Such mailing and posting shall be accomplished at least thirty (30) days prior to the administrative hearing.

        (b)    During the thirty (30) day period between notice of the administrative hearing and the occurrence of the administrative hearing, the property owner shall have the option to install and/or maintain the landscaping required by this Chapter.  If prior to the administrative hearing, such installation and/or maintenance is carried out in accordance with this Chapter and to the reasonable satisfaction of the Director, the administrative hearing shall be cancelled, and the City shall not seek to recover any of its costs related to that particular hearing.

        (c)    The notice required under this Section shall be provided in substantially the following format:

 

        “A hearing will be held at City Hall, 33282 Golden Lantern, Suite 210, Dana Point, before the City of Dana Point Hearing Officer, to determine whether the premises at _______________________ shall be landscaped while vacant, or the existing landscaping maintained while the premises is vacant in accordance with Dana Point Municipal Code Chapter 6.15.

 

        “A hearing may be avoided if the following corrections are made before the day set for the hearing:

__________________________________________________________________________________

 

        “If it is determined that the property should be landscaped, or the landscaping maintained, in accordance with Chapter 9.50, the following action may be taken by the City if the owner has not taken corrective action within thirty (30) days after the hearing officer's determination:

__________________________________________________________________________________

 

        “If the City takes action, all costs of the action taken will be assessed against the property and will attach as a lien until paid.  All persons having an interest in this matter may attend the hearing and give testimony and evidence, which will be given due consideration by the hearing officer. Call _____________________ for questions regarding this notice.”

 

        (d)    Notice shall be sent First Class and Certified Mail, postage prepaid. (Added by Ord. 01-03, 3/13/01)

 

*       Section 6.15.003.1 becomes effective April 1, 2002.

 

6.15.004 Hearing—Determination of Hearing Officer—Properties Combined into One Action.
        (a)    At the administrative hearing any party having an interest in the matter may present testimony and evidence.  The City Manager shall designate a hearing officer for the hearing.  The hearing officer shall not be a Dana Point City employee.  The employment, performance evaluation, compensation and benefits of the hearing officer, if any, shall not be directly or indirectly conditioned upon the findings and/or decision of the hearing officer.  After hearing testimony and receiving evidence, the hearing officer shall determine if the subject property is a vacant property and whether additional landscaping or maintenance is required under this Chapter.  Such determination by the hearing officer may be appealed to the City Council by following substantially the same form as Section 2.04.100 of the Dana Point Municipal Code.  Enforcement of this Chapter shall be suspended with regard to the subject property while the appeal is pending.

        (b)    If the hearing officer determines that the subject property is a vacant property, and the appropriate landscaping has not been installed or maintained, the hearing officer shall order the owner to comply with the landscaping and/or maintenance requirements of this Chapter within twenty (20) days.

        (c)    Whenever the Director deems it necessary, any or all Vacant Properties with identical ownership may be combined into one action when conducting hearings under this Chapter. (Added by Ord. 01-03, 3/13/01)

 

6.15.005 Installation and Maintenance by City—Record of Costs—Notice to Property Owner.
        If the owner fails to install or maintain the required landscaping on the vacant property within the time allowed by Section 6.15.003, reasonable installation and/or maintenance of the landscaping on the vacant property may be accomplished by the City.  The City may accomplish said landscaping by use of City forces, by hiring equipment and labor, or by contract.  The Director shall keep records of all costs incurred for installation and/or maintenance of the landscaping on each vacant property.  Upon completion of the installation, and at the end of each quarter for maintenance costs, the Director shall present to the City Council a compilation of the costs incurred under this Section for that parcel.  The owner as determined by the last assessment roll shall be notified of the cost of the abatement and the date that such costs shall be presented to the City Council. (Added by Ord. 01-03, 3/13/01)

 

6.15.006 Review of Costs—Assessment on Property.
        On the scheduled date, the City Council shall review the costs incurred for the installation or maintenance.  The City Council shall confirm, deny, or adjust such costs if there is clearly an error.  Any costs for landscaping installation or maintenance as determined by the City Council shall be assessed upon the property and shall constitute a debt owed to the City and a lien upon the property until paid.  The City Council shall order the Director to collect any assessment so determined. (Added by Ord. 01-03, 3/13/01)

 

6.15.007 Payment of Costs—Invoice Becomes Lien on Property.
        Upon such determination of assessment by the City Council, the Director shall present to the owner by mail an invoice for such costs to be paid within thirty (30) days.  At the expiration of thirty (30) days the Director shall file a lien upon the property for all or any moneys yet due.  Such lien shall be invoiced and collected by the tax collector with the next installment of taxes. (Added by Ord. 01-03, 3/13/01)

 

6.15.008 Public Nuisance Designated—Penalty Provisions.
        (a)    Unless otherwise exempted from the provisions of this Chapter, no person shall maintain a vacant property without landscaping as required by this Chapter.  Any vacant property without appropriate landscaping required by this Chapter is deemed a public nuisance.

        (b)    Any violation of this Chapter is illegal and may be punished as a misdemeanor. (Added by Ord. 01-03, 3/13/01)

Chapter 6.16 RESIDENTIAL HOUSING OCCUPANCY STANDARDS — OVERCROWDING
6.16.010 Findings.
        The City Council of the City of Dana Point finds and determines that:

        (a)    Decent, safe and sanitary housing is a necessity of life.

        (b)    Overcrowding any building used for residential purposes endangers life, limb, health, property, safety, and welfare of the public and the occupants thereof.

        (c)    Overcrowding dwelling accommodations accelerates deterioration caused by overuse of facilities in residential units and contributes to parking and traffic congestion and air and noise pollution.

        (d)    Overcrowding residential dwellings beyond the anticipated occupancy as approved by the building permit process unduly taxes and overburdens public facilities, public services, and the supporting infrastructure, both public and private, including without limitation schools, libraries, police services, fire protection services, sewer and waste facilities, water services, parks, health care facilities, streets and highways, and parking facilities.

        (e)    Overcrowding buildings used for residential purposes leads to the dilapidation of the City's housing stock, and the general deterioration of the neighborhood in which such overcrowding exists. (Added by Ord. No. 92-01, 1/28/92)

 

6.16.012 Finding—Impact on Infrastructure.
        The City Council finds and determines that its planning and budgeting processes for capital improvements and maintenance of existing infrastructure are thwarted by overcrowding of residential dwellings. (Added by Ord. No. 92-01, 1/28/92)

 

6.16.014 Purpose and Intent.
        It is the purpose and intent of this Chapter to protect the public health, safety, and welfare; to maintain the integrity of the City's residential areas; to improve the quality of life for its residents; to prevent the deterioration of neighborhoods; to promote the stability of property values; and to impose restrictions upon those activities that would detract from the neighborhood and adversely affect the quality of life of all residents of the City. (Added by Ord. No. 92-01, 1/28/92)

 

6.16.016 Definitions.
        Unless the provision or context otherwise requires, the definitions in this Article govern the construction of this Chapter.

 

6.16.016.1 Definitions “A.”
 

6.16.016.2 Definitions “B.”
        “Bedroom” means an enclosed space within a dwelling unit designed or intended for the purpose of sleeping and which contains at least one closet for the storage of clothes and other personal effects. A room or other enclosed area is not a bedroom, or habitable for sleeping purposes, unless it has a permanent door permitting complete closure and separation by the door from any and all kitchen and bathroom areas.

        A room or other enclosed area is not a bedroom, or habitable for sleeping purposes, unless it was identified as being intended for the purpose of sleeping on the building plans for which a building permit was issued.

        No dwelling unit containing two (2) or more bedrooms shall have such room arrangements that access to a bathroom intended for use by occupants of more than one (1) bedroom can be had only by going through another bedroom, nor shall room arrangements be such that access to a bedroom can be had only by going through another bedroom. (Added by Ord. No. 92-01, 1/28/92)

 

6.16.016.3 Definitions “C.”
 

6.16.016.4 Definitions “D.”
        “Dwelling Unit” means a building or portion thereof which is actually used, or which is designed or intended to be used, for residential purposes. (Added by Ord. No. 92-01, 1/28/92)

 

6.16.016.5 Definitions “E.”
 

6.16.016.6 Definitions “F.”
 

6.16.016.7 Definitions “G.”
        “Guest” means an individual who occupies a dwelling unit for not more than fourteen (14) consecutive days, nor more than thirty (30) days in any calendar year. In no event shall the total combined days that all guests occupy the unit exceed sixty (60) days per calendar year. (Added by Ord. No. 92-01, 1/28/92)

 

6.16.016.8 Definitions “H.”
        “Habitable Net Floor Space” means the total number of square feet of floor space in a dwelling unit based upon the actual interior dimensions excluding all stairwells, halls, closets, bathrooms, kitchens, laundry rooms, furnace rooms, pantries, utility rooms, foyers, corridors, storage spaces, and similar enclosed floor space not designed or intended to be used for living, sleeping, or dining purposes.

        The ceiling height of any habitable room shall be at least seven (7) feet, except that in any habitable room under a sloping ceiling, at least one-half (1/2) of the floor area shall have a ceiling height of at least seven (7) feet, and the floor area of that part of such a room where the ceiling height is less than five (5) feet shall not be considered as part of the floor area in computing the total floor area of the room for the purpose of determining the maximum permissible occupancy. (Added by Ord. No. 92-01, 1/28/92)

 

6.16.016.9 Definitions “I.”
 

6.16.016.10 Definitions “J.”
 

6.16.016.11 Definitions “K.”
        “Kitchen” means any room or other enclosed area intended to be used for the storage or preparation of foods as approved by the building permit process, and containing any of the following equipment: sink or other device for dishwashing, stove or other device for cooking, refrigerator or other device for cool storage of food, cabinets or shelves for storage of equipment and utensils, and counter or table for food preparation. (Added by Ord. No. 92-01, 1/28/92)

 

6.16.016.12 Definitions “L.”
 

6.16.016.13 Definitions “M.”
 

6.16.016.14 Definitions “N.”
 

6.16.016.15 Definitions “O.”
        “Occupant” means a natural person residing or using a dwelling unit as his or her place of abode, but does not include a guest.

        “Overcrowd,” “Overcrowding,” or “Overcrowded” means any occupancy of a dwelling unit that exceeds either the maximum residential housing occupancy standards set by this Chapter or any lesser residential housing occupancy standards set by the owner of a building containing a dwelling unit.

        “Owner” means a natural or unnatural person, including a lessor or sublessor, having any ownership right, title, or interest in or to the building containing a dwelling unit. (Added by Ord. No. 92-01, 1/28/92)

 

6.16.018 Prohibition on Overcrowded Units.
        (a)    A dwelling unit may not be overcrowded. A dwelling unit in which there exist any of the following is deemed to be overcrowded:

        (i)     There is less than one hundred twenty (120) square feet of habitable net floor space for each occupant in the dwelling unit, or there are fewer bedrooms than are required to accommodate the occupants in the dwelling unit at a ratio of two (2) persons per bedroom plus one (1) additional person per dwelling unit, whichever permits the greater number of occupants.

        (ii)    The number of occupants in the dwelling unit exceeds six (6) per bathroom.

        (iii)   The number of occupants in the dwelling unit exceeds the structural occupancy standards specified in the Uniform Housing Code.

        (b)    Occupancy of an efficiency dwelling unit by not more than two (2) persons shall not constitute a violation of Paragraphs (1), (2), or (4) of Subdivision (a) of this Section if the efficiency dwelling unit has all of the following:

        (i)     At least two hundred twenty (220) square feet of habitable net floor space.

        (ii)    A separate closet.

        (iii)   A sink or other device for dishwashing, a stove or other device for cooking, and a refrigerator or other device for cool storage of food.

        (iv)   A separate bathroom containing a water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower.

        (c)    Occupancy by a child less than six (6) months of age, provided such child was born to a legal occupant of the dwelling unit during such occupancy, shall not constitute a violation of Paragraphs (1), (2), or (4) of Subdivision (a) of this Section. (Added by Ord. No. 92-01, 1/28/92)

 

6.16.020 Unlawful to Overcrowd a Unit.
        (a)    It is unlawful to overcrowd a dwelling unit. A person is deemed to have overcrowded a dwelling unit if there exist any of the following:

        (i)     There is less than one hundred twenty (120) square feet of habitable net floor space for each occupant in the dwelling unit, or there are fewer bedrooms than are required to accommodate the occupants in the dwelling unit at a ratio of two (2) persons per bedroom plus one (1) additional person per dwelling unit, whichever permits the greater number of occupants.

        (ii)    The number of occupants in the dwelling unit exceeds six (6) per bathroom.

        (iii)   The number of occupants in the dwelling unit exceeds the structural occupancy standards specified in the Uniform Housing Code.

        (b)    Occupancy of an efficiency dwelling unit by not more than two (2) persons shall not constitute a violation of Paragraphs (1), (2), or (4) of Subdivision (a) of this Section if the efficiency dwelling unit has all of the following:

        (i)     At least two hundred twenty (220) square feet of habitable net floor space.

        (ii)    A separate closet.

        (iii)   A sink or other device for dishwashing, a stove or other device for cooking, and a refrigerator or other device for cool storage of food.

        (iv)   A separate bathroom containing a water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower.

        (c)    Occupancy by a child less than six (6) months of age, provided such child was born to a legal occupant of the dwelling unit during such occupancy, shall not constitute a violation of Paragraphs (1), (2), or (4) of Subdivision (a) of this Section. (Added by Ord. No. 92-01, 1/28/92)

 

6.16.022 Unlawful to Permit Overcrowding.
        (a)    It is unlawful to permit overcrowding of a dwelling unit. A person is deemed to have permitted overcrowding of a dwelling unit if there exist any of the following:

        (i)     There is less than one hundred twenty (120) square feet of habitable net floor space for each occupant in the dwelling unit, or there are fewer bedrooms than are required to accommodate the occupants in the dwelling unit at a ratio of two (2) persons per bedroom plus one (1) additional person per dwelling unit, whichever permits the greater number of occupants.

        (ii)    The number of otherwise lawful occupants in the dwelling unit exceeds six (6) per bathroom.

        (iii)   The number of otherwise lawful occupants in the dwelling unit exceeds the structural occupancy standards specified in the Uniform Housing Code.

        (b)    Occupancy of an efficiency dwelling unit by not more than two (2) persons shall not constitute a violation of Paragraphs (1), (2), or (4) of Subdivision (a) of this Section if the efficiency dwelling unit has all of the following:

        (i)     At least two hundred twenty (220) square feet of habitable net floor space.

        (ii)    A separate closet.

        (iii)   A sink or other device for dishwashing, a stove or other device for cooking, and a refrigerator or other device for cool storage of food.

        (iv)   A separate bathroom containing a water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower.

        (c)    Occupancy by a child less than six (6) months of age, provided such child was born to a legal occupant of the dwelling unit during such occupancy, shall not constitute a violation of Paragraphs (1), (2), or (4) of Subdivision (a) of this Section. (Added by Ord. No. 92-01, 1/28/92)

 

6.16.023 Owner Limits.
        Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to limit, restrict or otherwise affect in any manner the right of an owner to set specific limits on the number of occupants in a dwelling unit so long as those limits are less than or do not exceed the maximum occupancy limits specified in this Chapter. (Added by Ord. No. 92-01, 1/28/92)

 

6.16.024 Notice of Violation.
        (a)    Any notice concerning a violation of this Chapter shall be served by the enforcement agency on the owner of the building containing the offending dwelling unit and, if the owner is not an inhabitant of the offending dwelling unit, upon the occupants of the dwelling unit which is in violation of this Chapter. If the owner is not an inhabitant of the offending dwelling unit, the notice shall also require the owner and the occupants of the offending dwelling unit to furnish to the enforcement agency within fourteen (14) days of service of the notice copies of any written agreement or other document relating to the occupancy of that dwelling unit. Responsibility for the violation shall be determined as follows:

        (i)     If the owner of a building containing a dwelling unit which is in violation of this Ordinance is an inhabitant of that dwelling unit, the owner is presumed to be responsible for the violation.

        (ii)    If the owner of a building containing a dwelling unit which is in violation of this Ordinance is not an inhabitant of that dwelling unit, the owner is presumed to be responsible for the violation if he or she has received any compensation of any kind from any occupant in excess of the number of occupants authorized by this Ordinance. Acceptance of rent or lease payments by an owner not in excess of that stated in a written agreement shall not constitute any authorization expressed or implied to exceed the number of permitted occupants as stated in the written agreement or this Chapter.

        (iii)   If the owner of a building containing a dwelling unit which is in violation of this Chapter is not an inhabitant of that dwelling unit, the owner is presumed to be responsible for the violation in the absence of a written agreement, or if the written agreement and other documents do not provide for the number of occupants, or if the written agreement or other documents approve or authorize, directly or indirectly, a number of occupants in violation of this Chapter.

        (iv)   If the owner of a building containing a dwelling unit which is in violation of this Chapter is not an inhabitant of that dwelling unit, and if the written agreement or other documents specifically provide for the number of occupants and that number of occupants is not in violation of this Chapter, it is presumed that the occupants are responsible for the violation. The owner of the property shall be provided a copy of any citation or notice to the occupants, and shall be kept informed by the enforcement agency of any enforcement actions against the occupants. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the owner of the property may be found by the enforcement agency to be responsible for a particular violation where the circumstances, including but not limited to repetitive violations at the same property, demonstrate a pattern of conduct on the part of the owner to violate the provisions of this Ordinance.

        (b)    The presumptions established by this Section are presumptions affecting the burden of producing evidence. Acceptance of rent or lease payments by an owner not in excess of that stated in a written agreement shall not constitute any authorization expressed or implied to exceed the number of permitted occupants as stated in the written rental agreement or this Chapter. (Added by Ord. No. 92-01, 1/28/92)

 

6.16.026 Opportunity to Abate Violation.
        If the owner of a building containing a dwelling unit which is in violation of this Chapter has commenced, or does commence within fifteen (15) days following receipt of a notice concerning any violations, any action to reduce the number of occupants in the offending dwelling unit to a legally prescribed number, any independent enforcement by the enforcement agency shall be held in abeyance pending the result of such action. If the owner is successful in the action, the enforcement agency shall not pursue the matter any further. If the owner fails to pursue the action with reasonable diligence, the enforcement agency may pursue enforcement of the matter with such remedy as may be available to it. (Added by Ord. No. 92-01, 1/28/92)

 

6.16.028 Violations as a Public Nuisance.
        A dwelling unit which is in violation of this Chapter is a nuisance. (Added by Ord. No. 92-01, 1/28/92)

 

6.16.030 Violations Deemed Substandard Building.
        Any building containing a dwelling unit which is in violation of this Chapter may be deemed by the enforcement agency to be a substandard building within the meaning of Section 17920.3 of the Health and Safety Code if the overcrowded condition exists to such an extent that it severely endangers the life, limb, health, property, safety, or welfare of the public or the occupants of the building. (Added by Ord. No. 92-01, 1/28/92)

 

6.16.032 Penalty.
        Violation of this Chapter is an infraction, subject to punishment in accordance with Section 1.01.220(b) of this Code. (Added by Ord. No. 92-01, 1/28/92)

Chapter 6.20 REGULATION OF LEAF BLOWERS
6.20.010 Definitions.
        As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have meanings as set forth below:

        (a)    “Leaf Blower” means any portable power equipment designed or operated to produce a current of air by fuel, electricity, or other means to push, propel, or blow dust, leaves, grass clippings, cuttings, and trimmings from trees and shrubs or other debris.

        (b)    “Parcel” means an area of real property with a separate or distinct number or other designation shown on a plat recorded in the Office of the County Recorder. Contiguous parcels owned by the same individual or entity shall be considered one (1) parcel for purposes of this Chapter.

        (c)    “Residential Area” means any property zoned for residential use as provided for in Section 7-9-1 et seq. of the Codified Ordinances of the County of Orange as the same were incorporated by reference into the Dana Point Municipal Code by Ordinance No. 90-07. Sidewalks and streets adjacent to residential property shall be considered a residential area for purposes of this Chapter.

 

6.20.012 Regulations on Leaf Blower Operation.
        (a)    In residential areas, the use and operation of leaf blowers is prohibited except during the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday. The use and operation of leaf blowers is further prohibited on any day which is a legal holiday identified in this Code. For commercial, industrial, and recreational areas within two hundred (200N) feet of a residential area, the restricted hours of operation noted above shall apply.

        (b)    It shall be unlawful for any person operating a leaf blower to create any noise exceeding the following decibel levels when measured at a distance of fifty (50N) feet from such leaf blower:

        (1)    New leaf blowers purchased, leased, or rented on or after a date three (3) months from the effective date of this Chapter shall not exceed a noise level of 70 dba.

        (2)    New leaf blowers purchased, leased, or rented on or after forty-eight (48) months from the effective date of this Chapter shall not exceed a noise level of 65 dba.

        (3)    All leaf blowers other than those specified at Subparagraphs (1) and (2) hereinabove shall not exceed a noise level of 70 dba on or after one year from the effective date of this Chapter.

        (c)    Any person using or operating a leaf blower shall not cause dirt, dust, debris, leaves, grass clippings, cuttings, or trimmings from trees or shrubs to be blown or deposited on any adjacent or other parcel, land, lot, street, alley, or gutter from which the leaf blower is being used or operated. Deposits of dirt, dust, leaves, grass clippings, debris, cuttings, or trimmings from trees or shrubs shall be removed and disposed of in a sanitary manner, to prevent dispersement by wind, vandalism, or similar means.

        (d)    Each commercially operated leaf blower shall have affixed on it the business name, address, and telephone number in a clear, identifying manner.

 

6.20.014 Violations—Infractions.
        (a)    Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed guilty of an infraction, and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount not exceeding fifty ($50.00) dollars. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such.

        (b)    Any person convicted of a violation of this Chapter more than three (3) times in any calendar year shall be deemed guilty of an infraction as defined in Section 1.01.220(b) of this Code and subject to punishment in accordance with Section 1.01.220(b) of this Code.

 

6.20.016 Violations—Additional Remedies—Injunctions—Public Nuisance.
        (a)    As an additional remedy, the operation of any leaf blower in violation of any provision of this Chapter which operation causes discomfort or annoyance to reasonable persons of normal sensitiveness or which endangers the comfort, repose, health, or peace of residents in the area, shall be deemed and is declared to be a public nuisance and may be subject to abatement summarily by a restraining order or injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction.

        (b)    Any violation of this Chapter is declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated in accordance with law. The expense of such abatement may be by Resolution of the City Council, declared to be a lien against the property in which such nuisances are maintained, and such lien shall be made a personal obligation of the property owner.

 

6.20.018 Real Property Maintenance Exemption From Noise Ordinance Inapplicable to Operation of Gasoline Powered Leaf Blowers.
        Section 11-4-6-7, “Special Provisions,” of the Dana Point Municipal Code which adopts by reference Section 4-6-7 of the Codified Ordinances of the County of Orange provides certain exemptions from the operation of the noise ordinance. The exemptions provided in Section 4-6-7 of the Codified Ordinances of the County of Orange shall be wholly inapplicable to the operation of gasoline powered leaf blowers within the corporate limits of the City of Dana Point.

Chapter 6.30 FOOD-HANDLING BUSINESSES
6.30.010 Definitions.
        The following terms used in this Chapter shall have the meanings indicated below; provided, however, said definitions shall also include any amendments or changes made to referenced sections of the California Health and Safety Code after January 1, 1991:

        (a)    “Certified Farmers' Market” shall be as defined in Section 27512 of the California Health and Safety Code.

        (b)    “Commissary” shall be as defined in Section 27513 of the California Health Safety Code.

        (c)    “Food Establishment” shall be as defined in Section 27520 of the California Health and Safety Code.

        (d)    “Food Facility” shall be as defined in Section 27521 of the California Health and Safety Code.

        (e)    “Food Processing Establishment” shall be as defined in Section 28280.1 of the California Health and Safety Code.

        (f)    “Health Department” or “Department” shall mean the Orange County Health Care Agency.

        (g)    “Health Officer” shall mean the County Health officer or his or her deputy.

        (h)    “Inspector” shall mean an Environmental Health Specialist, as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 517, employed by the Health Department, or the Health Officer or any deputy health officer authorized to inspect premises or equipment for the enforcement of this Chapter.

        (i)     “Mobile food preparation unit” shall be as defined in Section 27526 of the California Health and Safety Code.

        (j)     “Open-Air Barbecue Facility” shall be as defined in Section 27528.5 of the California Health and Safety code.

        (k)    “Person” shall be as defined in Section 27530 of the California Health and Safety Code.

        (l)     “Premises” shall include land, buildings, vehicles and ships, and other vessels wherein food is handled, stored, distributed, prepared, processed, served or sold, and also equipment installed or used in food establishments or food facilities or on such premises.

        (m)   “Produce Stand” shall be as defined in Section 27533 of the California Health and Safety Code.

        (n)    “Restricted Food-Service Transient Occupancy Establishment” shall be as defined in Section 27535.5 of the California Health and Safety Code.

        (o)    “Satellite Food-Distribution Facility” shall be as defined in Section 27536.5 of the California Health and Safety Code.

        (p)    “Temporary Food Facility” shall be as defined in Section 27538 of the California Health and Safety Code.

        (q)    “Vehicle” shall be as defined in Section 27540 of the California Health and Safety Code.

        (r)    “Vending Machine” shall be as defined in Section 27541 of the California Health and Safety Code.

        (s)    “Vending Machine Business” shall mean the business of selling food or beverages by means of vending machines, regardless of the number of locations at which the vending machines are located. (Added by Ord. 92-10, 11/24/92)

 

6.30.012 Permit Required—Conditions and Terms.
        (a)    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any food facility, vending machine business, food processing establishment, or any other food-handling business governed by this Chapter, without first applying for and receiving a food vending permit issued by the Health Department under the provisions of this Chapter.

        (b)    Every applicant for a food vending permit shall file with the Health Department a written application which shall state the name and address of the applicant, the character and location of the activity for which a permit is required under this Chapter, and such other information as the Health Department may require. Applicants for a permit to operate a mobile food-preparation unit shall, in addition, provide a list of three (3) service stops which shall include the address of exact location and time of each stop.

        (c)    A permit may be issued when an investigation has determined that the proposed facility and its method of operation will conform to all applicable laws and regulations. A permit, once issued, is nontransferable. A permit shall be valid only for the person, location, type of food sales, or distribution activity approved and, unless suspended or revoked, for the time period indicated.

        (d)    Any permit may be suspended or revoked for a violation of any applicable provisions of law or regulation. Any food facility, vending machine business, food processing establishment, or any other food-handling business governed by this Chapter, for which the permit has been suspended or revoked, shall close and remain closed until the permit has been reinstated or until a new permit has been issued.

        (e)    Permits may be granted at any time during the year. A permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises or vehicle for which it is issued. (Added by Ord. 92-10, 11/24/92)

 

6.30.014 Construction, Conversion and Alteration.
        A person proposing to build or remodel a food facility, vending machine business, food processing establishment, or any other food-handling business governed by this Chapter, shall submit three (3) copies of the complete plans and specifications to the Department for review and approval pursuant to the applicable requirements of the California Health and Safety Code. The Health Officer may thereafter issue a certificate stating what modifications, if any, are required for compliance with applicable laws and ordinances. (Added by Ord. 92-10, 11/24/92)

6.30.016 Suspension of Permits.
        A permit issued under this Chapter or its predecessor may be suspended or revoked under the procedure set forth in this Chapter for any of the following reasons:

        (a)    Violation of State law;

        (b)    Violation of this Chapter;

        (c)    Violation of the rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this Chapter; or

        (d)    Upon recommendation by the Health Officer. (Added by Ord. 92-10, 11/24/92)

 

6.30.018 Notice of Violation.
        When any laws, this Chapter, or rules and regulations have been violated, an inspector may serve written notice thereof, entitled “Notice of Violation,” specifying:

        (a)    The acts or omissions with which the permittee is charged;

        (b)    The provision or provisions violated thereby;

        (c)    The corrective steps required;

        (d)    The date by which all such corrections must be completed, allowing a reasonable period therefor;

        (e)    That the permittee has a right to a hearing upon written request or that a mandatory hearing has been scheduled;

        (f)    That if no hearing is requested or the permittee fails to appear at the scheduled hearing and if the Health Department does not receive notice that all such corrections have been made before 9:00 a.m. of the date specified under subsection (d) above, the permit will be subject to suspension or revocation from that time until all violations have been corrected. (Added by Ord. 92-10, 11/24/92)

 

6.30.020 Hearing.
        (a)    The hearing shall be held by the Health Officer or his or her duly authorized representative who is a qualified Environmental Health Specialist as defined in Section 517 of the Health and Safety Code and registered as provided in Section 529 thereof, but shall not be the inspector who reported the violations or who inspected any corrective measure taken.

        (b)    The permit holder shall have the right to a hearing, if requested, on all violations listed in the notice. A written request for a hearing shall be made by the permittee within fifteen (15) calendar days after receipt of the notice. A failure to request a hearing within fifteen (15) calendar days after receipt of the notice shall be deemed a waiver of the right to a hearing. When circumstances warrant, the hearing officer may order a hearing at any reasonable time within this fifteen (15) day period to expedite the permit suspension or revocation process.

        (c)    The hearing shall be held within fifteen (15) calendar days of the receipt of a request for a hearing. Upon written request of the permittee, the hearing officer may postpone any hearing date, if circumstances warrant such action.

        (d)    At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a written notice of decision to the permittee within five (5) working days following the hearing. In the event of a suspension or revocation, the notice shall specify the acts or omissions with which the permittee is charged, and shall state the terms of the suspension, or that the permit has been revoked.

        (e)    The Health Officer may, after providing opportunity for a hearing, modify, suspend, or revoke a permit for serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements of the applicable laws, rules and regulations. (Added by Ord. 92-10, 11/24/92)

 

6.30.022 Mobile Food-Preparation Units Generally.
        In addition to all other applicable provisions of the Health and Safety Code and of this Chapter, mobile food-preparation units shall comply with the following safety requirements:

        (a)    Compressors, auxiliary engines, generators, batteries, battery chargers, gas-fueled water heaters, and similar equipment shall be installed so as to be accessible only from the outside of the unit.

        (b)    All equipment installed in any part of the unit shall be secured so as to prevent movement during transit and to prevent detachment in the event of a collision or overturn.

        (c)    All equipment installed within the interior of the unit, including the interiors of cabinets or compartments, shall be constructed so as to be free of sharp or jagged edges.

        (d)    All utensils shall be stored so as to prevent their being hurled about in the event of a sudden stop, collision or overturn. A safety knife holder shall be provided to avoid loose storage of knives in cabinets, boxes or slots along counter aisles. Knife holders shall be designed to be easily cleaned and be manufactured of materials approved by the Health Officer.

        (e)    Ceiling light fixtures shall be recessed or flush-mounted and sealed and shall be equipped with safety covers approved by the Health Officer. The minimum clearance from the floor to the light fixture shall be at least one hundred eighty-eight (188) centimeters (seventy-six (76) inches) or the fixture shall be installed out of the traffic aisle or work area.

        (f)    High-voltage (110—120 v) electrical wiring shall be properly installed in electrical conduit with all splices or connections being made within junction, outlet or switch as to prevent the use of extension cords exceeding one hundred eighty-three (183) centimeters (six (6) feet). Outside electrical connection receptacles shall be of weatherproof design with cover.

        (g)    Attached, firmly anchored seats with backrests, equipped with seat belts shall be provided for all occupants. If a jump seat in the aisleway is utilized, it shall fold in a manner that will clear the aisleway when not in use and be held with a self-latching mechanism. Seats and backrests shall be at least thirty-five and five-tenths (35.5) centimeters by thirty-five and five-tenths (35.5) centimeters (fourteen (14) inches by fourteen (14) inches) in size. All occupants shall be seated, shall wear seat belts ad shall not cook or prepare food while the unit is in motion. Signs setting forth the latter three (3) requirements shall be posted in both English and Spanish.

        (h)    A first-aid kit approved by the Health Officer shall be provided and located in a convenient area in an enclosed case.

        (i)     All pressure cylinders shall be securely fastened to a rigid structure of the unit. All liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) equipment shall be installed as follows:

        (1)    The LP gas tanks and relief valves shall be ASME-approved for intended use.

        (2)    Tanks shall be securely fastened and located where they will normally not be subject to damage. They may be in a body compartment or underneath the body. The tank or fittings must not protrude beyond the body.

        (3)    Tanks and regulators shall be separated from any open flame by a vapor-tight partition.

        (4)    When tanks are installed in a body compartment, the partitions shall be sealed off from the rest of the body with no openings to the interior except for the tubing. The following additional requirements shall be met:

        (A)   All tank valves and fittings shall be readily accessible from outside the unit.

        (B)   The tank safety relief valve shall be vented to the outside and directed downward.

        (C)   The filling shall be done through an outside door to the compartment.

        (D)   The compartment shall be vented to the exterior of the unit so as to prevent accumulation of gas.

        (5)    Tubing that passes through partitions shall be protected by grommets made of rubber or other approved materials.

        (6)    Tubing exposed to friction shall be protected against chafing.

        (7)    Expansion and contraction bends shall be made in the tubing between the tank and the appliance.

        (8)    ASME-approved LP gas tubing or standard weight pipe shall be used throughout.

        (9)    Protective “thread” caps shall be installed on fill-line check valves.

        (10)  Every appliance fueled by LP gas shall be equipped with a pilot light attachment and provided with an ASME-approved device which will automatically shut off all gas to the appliance if the pilot light should be extinguished.

        (j)     A minimum five (5) B.C.-rated portable fire extinguisher (UL or State Fire Marshal approved design) shall be installed in plain sight and within easy reach, immediately inside the front driver's door. The extinguisher shall be replaced or recharged after each use. (Added by Ord. 92-10, 11/24/92)

 

6.30.024 Additional Requirements for Mobile Food-Preparation Units Operating in Multi-Locations in Any Day.
        In addition to the requirements specified in Section 6.30.022 above, mobile food preparation units which operate at more than one (1) location in any calendar day, shall comply with the following additional requirements:

        (a)    Coffee urns shall be installed in a compartment that will prevent excessive spillage of coffee in the interior of the unit in the event of a sudden stop, collision or overturn, or, as an alternative to this requirement, coffee urns shall be equipped with positive closing lids as well as perforated metal protective sleeves on the glass liquid-level sight gauges.

        (b)    Deep fat fryers are prohibited, unless equipped with positive closing lids to contain the fat and to prevent splashing or excessive spillage in transit or in the event of a sudden stop, collision or overturn of the unit. Such lids shall be designed and constructed so as to prevent pressure buildup which could result in an explosion. All lids shall be kept positively closed while the unit is in motion. Signs setting forth the latter requirements shall be posted in both English and Spanish.

        (c)    Water bath or steam food insert tables shall be provided with baffles to prevent surging in transit. All such tables, as well as dry-heat units, their insert food containers and similar equipment that contains hot liquids or hot foods shall have positive closing lids to contain all such liquids or foods and to prevent splashing or spillage in transit or in the event of a sudden stop, collision or overturn of the unit. Such lids shall be designed and constructed so as to prevent pressure buildup which could result in an explosion. All lids shall be positively closed while the unit is in motion. Signs setting forth the latter requirement shall be posted in both English and Spanish.

        (d)    An alternate means of exit on the side opposite the main exit door, or the roof, or the rear of the unit, with unobstructed passage of sixty-one (61) centimeters by ninety-two (92) centimeters (twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36) inches) minimum to the outside shall be provided. The interior latching mechanism shall be operable by hand without special tools or key. The exit shall be labeled “Safety Exit” in contrasting colors with at least two and fifty-four one hundredths (2.54) centimeters (one (1) inch) high letters. (Added by Ord. 92-10, 11/24/92)

 

6.30.026 Suspension for Refusal of Entry.
        It is a violation of this Chapter for any person to deny or hinder entry by any inspector for the purpose of inspecting any of the premises described in Section 6.30.012, above, or any portion thereof; and in such event the inspector may forthwith suspend the food vending permit issued for the premises. (Added by Ord. 92-10, 11/24/92)

 

6.30.028 Summary Suspension.
        (a)    If any immediate danger to the public health or safety is found, unless the danger is immediately corrected, an inspector may temporarily suspend the permit and order the premises immediately closed. “Immediate danger to the public health and safety” means any condition, based upon inspection findings or other evidence, that can cause food infection, food intoxication, disease transmission, or hazardous conditions, including, but not limited to, unsafe food temperature, sewage contamination, nonpotable water supply, or any employee who is a carrier of a communicable disease.

        (b)    Whenever a permit is suspended as the result of an immediate danger to the public health or safety, the inspector shall issue to the permittee a notice setting forth the acts or omissions with which the permittee is charged, specifying the pertinent code section, and informing the permittee of the right to a hearing.

        (c)    At any time within fifteen (15) calendar days after service of a notice pursuant to subsection (b), the permittee may request in writing a hearing before a hearing officer to show cause why the permit suspension is not warranted. The hearing shall be held within fifteen (15) calendar days of the receipt of a request for a hearing. A failure to request a hearing within fifteen (15) calendar days shall be deemed a waiver of the right to such hearing. (Added by Ord. 92-10, 11/24/92)

 

 

6.30.030 Supervision of Closing Down Premises.
        When any permit is first suspended hereunder, or when any premises governed hereby shall have been closed for business and left in an unsanitary condition, the Health Department shall have the power to enter to ensure that the premises are closed down in a manner which will not endanger the public health. If the permittee or his employee in charge cannot be found, or is unwilling or unable to remedy the condition of the premises, the owner of the premises shall be notified of the unsanitary conditions and shall be required to take such remedial action as may be necessary to obviate such condition. (Added by Ord. 92-10, 11/24/92)

 

6.30.032 Rules and Regulations.
        The Health Officer may adopt and enforce rules and regulations necessary to administer this Chapter including, but not limited to, regulations pertaining to:

        (a)    Forms for applications, permits and notices;

        (b)    Forms and procedures for hearings upon the granting, denying, suspending, revoking or reinstating of permits;

        (c)    Inspection of premises and reporting thereon. (Added by Ord. 92-10, 11/24/92)

 

6.30.034 Penalty.
        Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Added by Ord. 92-10, 11/24/92)

 

6.30.036 Preemption.
        This Chapter shall not apply to any matter to which it concerns to the extent that the regulation of such matter is preempted by State law. (Added by Ord. 92-10, 11/24/92)

Chapter 6.34 HEALTH SERVICES FEES
6.34.010 Definitions.
        The following terms used in this Chapter shall have the meaning indicated below:

        (a)    “Health Department” or “Department” shall mean the Orange County Health Care Agency.

        (b)    “Health Officer” shall mean the County Health Officer or his or her duly authorized representative.

        (c)    “Person” shall mean an individual, partnership, corporation or other legal entity.

        (d)    “Receipt” shall mean a County public health services fee receipt. (Added by Ord. No. 92-10, 11/24/92)

 

6.34.012 Purpose and Authority.
        The purpose of this Chapter is to establish fees sufficient to meet the reasonable expenses of the Health Officer in enforcing State statutes, orders, quarantines and rules and regulations of State offices and departments relating to public health, which expenses are hereby found not to be met by the fees prescribed by the State. The authority for this Chapter is contained in Section 510 of the Health and Safety Code. (Added by Ord. No. 92-10, 11/24/92)

 

6.34.014 Area of Application.
        This Chapter shall be enforceable within the territory in which the Health Officer enforces any State statute, order, quarantine or rule or regulation of any State officer or department relating to public health, including incorporated as well as unincorporated territory. (Added by Ord. No. 92-10, 11/24/92)

 

6.34.016 Violation—Operating Without Receipt.
        It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct any activity enumerated in this Chapter without a valid receipt. (Added by Ord. No. 92-10, 11/24/92)

 

6.34.018 Separate Activities.
        If a person shall conduct more than one (1) of the activities for which a receipt is required, he or she must obtain a separate receipt for each activity, except as otherwise provided herein. (Added by Ord. No. 92-10, 11/24/92)

 

6.34.020 Applications.
        Applications for a receipt shall be filed with the Health Department on a form to be provided by that Department. The applications shall be accompanied by payment of the required fee. An applicant for or recipient of a receipt shall provide the Health Officer with any information requested by him or her. (Added by Ord. No. 92-10, 11/24/92)

 

6.34.022 Rules and Regulations.
        The Health Officer shall administer this Chapter and may issue regulations and prepare application and identification forms pertaining thereto. (Added by Ord. No. 92-10, 11/24/92)

 

6.34.024 Fees.
        The County shall, by annual Board resolution, adopt health service fees to be paid by the proprietor or operator of the food facility. Such fees are to be paid directly to the County Health Officer and retained by the County as reimbursement for said services related to this Chapter. (Added by Ord. No. 92-10, 11/24/92)

Chapter 6.40 SMOKING REGULATED OR PROHIBITED
6.40.010 Purpose.
        This Chapter recognizes the right of residents and visitors to the City to be free from unwelcome secondhand smoke, which is deemed to be a public nuisance. The purpose of this Chapter is to promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare by prohibiting smoking in public places, in hazardous fire areas, and in City facilities and on City property where persons will be exposed to unwelcome secondhand smoke and also the risks and dangers associated with fires. This Chapter is further intended to ensure a cleaner and more hygienic environment for the City, its residents and visitors, and its natural resources. (Added by Ord. 18-02, 1/16/18)

 

6.40.020 Definitions.
        The following words and phrases, whenever used in this Chapter, shall be construed as defined in this Section:

        (a)    “Electronic smoking device” means an electronic device that can be used to deliver an inhaled dose of nicotine, or other substances, including any component, part, or accessory of such device, whether or not sold separately. This definition includes any such device, whether manufactured, distributed, marketed, or sold as an electronic cigarette, an electronic cigar, an electronic cigarillo, an electronic pipe, an electronic hookah, or any other product name or descriptor, including any component, part or accessory of such device, whether or not sold separately.

        (b)    “Employer” means any person who employs the services of an individual person.

        (c)    “Employee” means any person who is employed by an employer for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit.

        (d)    “Enclosed” means closed in by a roof and four (4) walls with appropriate openings for ingress and egress.

        (e)    “Place of employment” means any area under the legal or de facto control of an employer that an employee or the general public may enter in the normal course of operations, but regardless of the hours of operation, including, for example, indoor and outdoor work areas, construction sites, taxis, employee lounges, conference and banquet rooms, bingo and gaming facilities, long-term health facilities, warehouses, and any private residences subject to State licensing requirements that are used as child-care or health-care facilities.

 

        (f)    “Public place” means any indoor or outdoor public place publicly or privately owned, including, but not limited to, any public buildings, restaurants, dining areas, bars, entryways, elevators, hospitals and health care facilities, public meeting rooms, theaters and auditoriums, public restrooms, service lines, streets, alleys, rights-of-way, sidewalks, plazas, beaches and beach access ways, public transportation and bus shelters, parking lots, parking structures, parks, picnic areas, playgrounds, sports fields, walking paths, hiking trails, bike paths, and hazardous fire areas. “Public place” includes any place being used for a public event, including, but not limited to, a farmers’ market, parade, craft fair, festival, or any other event open to the general public.

        (g)    “Smoke” means the gases, particles, or vapors released into the air as a result of combustion, electrical ignition or vaporization, when the apparent or usual purpose of the combustion, electrical ignition or vaporization is human inhalation of the byproducts, except when the combusting material contains no tobacco or nicotine and the purpose of inhalation is solely olfactory, such as, for example, smoke from incense. “Smoke” includes, but is not limited to, tobacco smoke, electronic cigarette vapors, and marijuana smoke.

        (h)    “Smoking” means the release of gases, particles, or vapors into the air as the result of combustion, electrical ignition, or vaporization and/or inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any lighted, heated or ignited cigar, cigarette, cigarillo, pipe, hookah, electronic smoking device, or any plant product, including, but not limited to, tobacco and marijuana, intended for human inhalation. (Added by Ord. 18-02, 1/16/18)

 

6.40.030 Smoking Prohibited in Public Places.
        (a)    In addition to all places where smoking is prohibited under State or Federal law, in which case those laws apply, no person shall smoke in, and smoking areas shall not be established or designated in, all of the following areas:

        (1)    Places of employment; and

        (2)    Public places.

        (b)    Smoking is permitted in the following locations within the City, unless otherwise provided by State or Federal law or this Code:

        (1)    Private residential properties, other than those used as a child-care or health-care facility subject to State licensing requirements; and

        (2)    Within a moving or stationary vehicle, including a vehicle on a public street or right-of-way or parked in a public place.

        (c)    No employer, owner, operator, manager, employee or other person having control of a place of employment or a public place shall knowingly permit smoking in an area in which smoking is prohibited by law. This Subsection does not require the physical ejection of any person from the business or the taking of steps to prevent smoking under circumstances that would involve a significant risk of physical harm.

        (d)    The owner, operator or manager of a hotel, motel or bed and breakfast establishment may establish rules permitting or prohibiting smoking on the portions of the property not open to the public, including guest rooms, pools, and similar facilities and areas, provided that such rules comply with applicable laws.

        (e)    No employer, owner, operator, manager, employee or other person having control of an outdoor dining area, restaurant, snack shop or alcohol beverage establishment shall place ashtrays on tables or otherwise make ashtrays or receptacles for smoking waste available to patrons.

        (f)    Nothing in this Chapter prohibits any person or employer with legal control over any property from prohibiting smoking on any part of such property, even if smoking is not otherwise prohibited in that area. (Added by Ord. 18-02, 1/16/18)

 

 

6.40.040 Smoking and Open Fires Prohibited in Hazardous Fire Areas.
        Smoking and open fires are prohibited in any hazardous fire area as identified by the Chief.

        (a)    The Fire Chief has identified the following locations as hazardous fire areas and has provided signage identifying such:

        (1)    All open space and wildland interface areas in and surrounding the City. (Added by Ord. 18-02, 1/16/18)

 

6.40.050 Smoking Prohibited in City Facilities and on City Property.
        Smoking is prohibited in all enclosed areas, including buildings and vehicles owned, leased, or operated by the City of Dana Point, as well as on all outdoor property owned, leased, or operated by the City of Dana Point. (Added by Ord. 18-02, 1/16/18)

 

6.40.060 Smoking Prohibited on Property of Other Governmental Bodies.
        Smoking is prohibited in all enclosed areas, including buildings, as well as on all outdoor property within the City owned, leased, or operated by other governmental bodies, including the State of California, the County of Orange, and special districts, when such other governmental body has consented in writing to the City enforcing the provisions of this Section on such property. (Added by Ord. 18-02, 1/16/18)

 

6.40.070 Posting of Sign Required.
        Except where other signs are required, whenever in this code smoking is prohibited, “No Smoking” or “Smoke Free” signs shall be conspicuously posted by the owner, operator, manager, or other persons having control of such room, building, or other place where smoking is prohibited. The City Manager shall post signs at or near the primary entrance(s) to a public place in which smoking is prohibited and which is owned or controlled by the City. Signage required by this Section shall not be subject to Chapter 9.37. Notwithstanding this provision, the presence or absence of signs shall not be a defense to the violation of any other provisions of this Chapter. (Added by Ord. 18-02, 1/16/18)

 

6.40.080 Enforcement.
        (a)    The provisions of this Chapter may be enforced by the Orange County Sheriff’s Department, any peace officer or fire or code enforcement officer, or other employees designated by the City Manager.

        (b)    While an establishment is undergoing otherwise mandatory inspections, fire and code enforcement officers may inspect the establishment for compliance with this Chapter.

        (c)    Notice of the provisions of this Chapter shall be provided to all applicants for a business license or renewal thereof; provided, however, any failure to provide such notice shall be no defense to a violation of this Chapter.

        (d)    Employers, owners, operators, managers or employees of same shall be required to orally inform persons violating this Chapter of the provisions hereof. The duty to inform such violator shall arise when such employer, owner, operator, manager or employee of the same becomes aware of such violation.

        (e)    Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, or concealing a violation of any provision of this Chapter shall also constitute a violation of this Chapter.

        (f)    Except as provided in Subsection (g), any person who is found to violate any provision of this Chapter shall be deemed guilty of an infraction and shall be punishable by:

        (1)    A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first violation;

        (2)    A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second violation within one (1) year; and

        (3)    A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a third violation within one (1) year.

        (g)    Any person who is found to violate the prohibition of smoking in a hazardous fire area pursuant to Section 6.40.040 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as provided by State law.

        (h)    Any aggrieved person may enforce the provisions of this Chapter by means of a civil action on his or her own behalf pursuant to California Civil Code Section 3501 et seq. (Added by Ord. 18-02, 1/16/18)

 

6.40.090 Other Applicable Laws.
        This Chapter shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted or prohibited by other applicable laws. (Added by Ord. 18-02, 1/16/18)

Chapter 6.44 TATTOO ESTABLISHMENTS
6.44.100 Citation.
        The Ordinance codified in this Chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Tattoo Establishments Ordinance. (Ord. 94-08, 5/24/94)

 

6.44.101 Enforcement and Administration.
        The County of Orange and all of its officers, employees, and agents are hereby authorized and empowered to enforce and administer the provisions of this Chapter within the City of Dana Point. (Ord. 94-08, 5/24/94)

 

6.44.102 Definitions.
        For purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

        “Health Officer” means that person or office designated by order of the City Council of the City of Dana Point or by contract approved by the said Council as the person or office having responsibility for the enforcement of the provisions of this Section.

        “Operator” means any person, whether the proprietor or another person, administering a tattoo to any customer of a tattooing establishment.

        “Proprietor” means the person having general control and management over the conduct of business at a tattooing establishment, whether or not such person is the legal owner of the premises or the business.

        “Tattoo” means an indelible mark, design or figure fixed upon a body by insertion of pigment under the skin or by the production of scars.

        “Tattooing establishment” means premises used for the business of marking or coloring the skin with tattoos, and all furnishings, equipment, instruments, dyes and inks, and other facilities maintained therein incidental to such use. (Ord. 94-08, 5/24/94)

 

6.44.103 Maintenance of Premises.
        (a)    All tattooing establishments shall be equipped with running hot and cold water, with adequate toilet facilities and with all such appliances, furnishings and materials as may be necessary to enable persons employed in and about such establishments to comply with the requirements of this Chapter.

        (b)    The floors, furnishings and equipment of tattooing establishments shall be kept clean at all times during business hours. For purposes of this paragraph, a floor shall not be considered clean if it has not been swept and mopped within the preceding twenty-four (24) hour period.

        (c)    All operating tables in tattooing establishments shall be constructed of metal with white enamel or porcelain finish, or stainless steel.

        (d) Each tattooing establishment shall have adequate lighting and ventilation. For purposes of this paragraph, lighting or ventilation shall be considered as inadequate if it fails to comply with any reasonable standard prescribed by the Health Officer.

        (e)    No tattooing establishment shall be used as a sleeping room or dormitory. (Ord. 94-08, 5/24/94)

 

6.44.104 Source of Dyes and Inks.
        (a)    Proprietors of tattooing establishments shall, on request of the Health Officer, submit in writing to the Health Officer the source of all dyes and inks retained for use in tattooing operations, and thereafter shall notify the Health Officer in writing of any dyes or inks obtained for uses in tattooing operations from any source other than those previously submitted.

        (b)    No dyes or inks from any sources which have been disapproved by the Health Officer shall be retained for use in tattooing operations. (Ord. 94-08, 5/24/94)

 

6.44.105 Maintenance of Pigments, Dyes and Equipment.
        No pigments, dyes, or equipment shall be retained for use in tattooing operations unless cleaned and sterilized as provided in this section. For purposes of this section, equipment shall include needles, needle tubes, towels, blade holders, wiping cloths, paper towels and napkins, charcoal, gauze bandages (unless purchased in individual sterile packages), and all similar items.

        (a)    All equipment shall be thoroughly cleaned before being sterilized. Instruments shall be cleaned with soap or detergent by use of a brush. The interior of needle barrels shall be brushed. After cleaning, all equipment shall be thoroughly rinsed under running fresh tap water.

        (b)    All equipment shall be sterilized by autoclaving. Each piece of equipment shall be individually wrapped with paper in an approved method for autoclaving. Metal foil may not be used. Tattooing needles shall be threaded through the metal tube that attaches to the tattooing vibrator and shall be placed in a glass (or autoclave plastic) test tube with a cotton plug for autoclaving. Wiping tissues shall be sterilized in a single pack to be used for one tattoo and then discarded. All packs shall be marked with temperature recording tape or labels.

        (c)    Dyes or inks shall be used from containers with a cap that completely covers the opening and is attached to the neck of the dye container, sterilized in an autoclave after first being filled with the dye. Dye shall be handled utilizing aseptic techniques and the dye containers filled with dye shall be autoclaved at least once a week or more often if necessary to keep the dye in sterile condition. The dyes may be placed in Teflon squeeze bottles that will withstand autoclaving.

        (d)    Steam sterilization of the above listed equipment shall be accomplished in an autoclave with at least fifteen (15) pounds of pressure per square inch, at a minimum of 251EF, for at least (15) minutes. Other means of sterilization may be approved by the Health Officer.

        (e)    All sterilized dyes, pigments, and equipment shall be stored in a manner which will insure sterility at the time of use.

        (f)    Proprietors shall maintain sufficient sterilized equipment available at the beginning of each workday to allow completion of such workday without requiring resterilization of such equipment. (Ord. 94-08, 5/24/94)

 

6.44.106 Maintenance of Stencils.
        No stencil, whether new or used, shall be retained in a manner available for use in any tattooing operation unless it has been precleaned and disinfected in the following manner:

        (a)    Each stencil must be precleaned by being scrubbed with soap and brush to the extent necessary to remove all accumulations of carbon and vaseline in the etched grooves of the stencil.

        (b)    Each stencil, after being precleaned and dried, must be disinfected by being soaked, design-cut side down, in a closed container of seventy percent (70%) alcohol for not less than thirty (30) minutes at room temperature.

        (c)    Each stencil, after being disinfected, shall be air dried for not less than thirty (30) minutes by being suspended in a manner exposing both sides to the air, and thereafter shall be stored for the next use in a clean envelope. (Ord. 94-08, 5/24/94)

 

6.44.107 Tattooing Operations.
        All tattooing operations shall be performed in accordance with the following operations procedures:

        (a)    Prohibited Operations. No tattooing operation shall be performed on skin surface areas containing any rash, pimples, boils, or infection or otherwise manifesting any evidence of unhealthy conditions.

        (b)    Potential Health Risks. The establishment owner shall provide written information as required by the Health Officer about blood-borne diseases and their transmission to all tattoo operators and maintain records to verify operator receipt of this information. The tattoo operator shall inform the customer of any potential health risks involved, whenever the skin is pierced, punctured or tattooed, as required by the Health Officer.

        (c)    Health Conditions of Operator. No tattooing operations shall be performed unless the operator is free of communicable diseases and pustular skin lesions.

        (d)    Smoking. No operator shall smoke while performing a tattooing operation.

        (e)    Cleanliness of Operator. No operator shall perform a tattooing operation with unclean hands. For the purpose of this paragraph, hands shall not be considered clean unless they have been thoroughly washed with soap from a single service dispenser and warm water vigorously rubbing all surfaces of lathered hands for at least ten (10) seconds, followed by thoroughly rinsing under a stream of water. Hands shall be dried using single service towels from a dispenser or hot air blower. If a liquid soap is used, the dispenser shall be cleaned and filled with fresh soap only when empty.

        Tattoo operators shall wear protective gloves while handling needles or blades, or doing any procedure that may cause bleeding. Gloves shall be discarded between each customer.

        (f)    Shaving. No tattooing operation involving shaving shall be performed unless the skin is washed with soap prior to the shaving and unless the blade used in shaving is previously unused and unless the blade holder has been autoclaved since its previous use.

        (g)    Skin Preparation. No tattooing operation shall be performed unless the skin is adequately prepared prior to the operation. For purposes of this paragraph, skin shall be considered properly prepared if it is thoroughly washed with soap following shaving and thereafter scrubbed gently three times with seventy percent (70%) isopropyl alcohol, using a separate sterile gauze pad each time. No alternative method of skin preparation shall be considered adequate unless approved in writing by the Health Officer.

        (h)    Use of Stencils. No tattooing operation involving the use of stencils shall be performed unless all of the following requirements have been complied with:

        (1)    Each stencil must be precleaned pursuant to Section 6.40.105.

        (2)    Each stencil, having been precleaned, must be wiped with sterile gauze soaked in seventy percent (70%) alcohol and air dried immediately prior to its use in the tattooing operation.

        (3)    Petroleum jelly used for stencils must be from a collapsible tube which has not previously been used in any tattooing operation and must be applied to the skin with a sterile gauze which has not previously been used.

        (i)     Use of Approved Dyes. No tattooing operation shall be performed using dyes or inks of a type that has been disapproved for use by the Health Officer pursuant to Section 6.40.104.

        (j)     Use of Sterile Dyes. No tattooing operation shall be performed unless the following requirements have been complied with:

        (1)    The dye or ink used for the tattoo must be obtained from presterilized dye or ink bottles and, prior to the tattooing operation, aseptically transferred from such bottles into sterile paper cups which have not previously been used in any tattooing operation. No refilling of the dye cup is permitted.

        (2)    No dye or ink shall be used in which needles used on another person have been dipped.

        (k)    Use of Sterile Equipment. No tattooing operation shall be performed using equipment that has not been cleaned and sterilized in the manner set forth in Section 6.40.105.

        (l)     Discarding of Certain Equipment. Operators shall discard the following items immediately after use in any tattooing operation:

        (1)    Blades used in shaving.

        (2)    Tubes and gauze used in application of petroleum jelly used for stencils.

        (3)    Paper cups used for dye or ink. (Ord. 94-08, 5/24/94)

 

6.44.108 Inspections of Tattooing Establishments.
        The County Health Officer shall periodically make inspections of tattooing establishments located in the City of Dana Point to determine if the proprietor or operator of such establishments is complying with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 94-08, 5/24/94)

 

6.44.109 Inspection Fees.
        An inspection fee, in accordance with a schedule of health services fees set by an annual Resolution of the County Board, shall be paid by the proprietor or operator of the tattoo establishment. Such fees shall be paid directly to the County Health Officer and retained by the County as reimbursement for said services related to this Chapter. (Ord. 94-08, 5/24/94)

 

6.44.110 Penalties.
        Each of the following acts or omissions shall constitute a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or imprisonment in the County jail for a period not to exceed six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment:

        (a)    Any performance of a tattooing operation by an operator in violation of any requirement or prohibition imposed by this Chapter.

        (b)    Any failure by a proprietor to maintain a tattooing establishment in conformity with the requirements of this Chapter. For purposes of this subparagraph (b), each day upon which such failure to conform shall constitute a separate violation. (Ord. 94-08, 5/24/94)

Chapter 6.45 ANTI-LITTERING
6.45.100 Littering Prohibited.
        It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, drop, cast or deposit on any street, alley, sidewalk or any other public premises, including, but not limited to, beaches, parks, fountains, ponds, bays, ocean, or other bodies of water or public areas, any waste material of any kind including, without limitation, cigarette butts, cans, paper, paper containers, bottles or any other form of waste matter, whether solid, hazardous or special. Nothing contained herein shall preclude the right of any person to place any waste material in public or private trash receptacles or in official City dumps as permitted by this Code or by applicable law. (Added by Ord. 06-10, 11/20/06)

 

6.45.110 Penalties.
        An offense under this Section shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first conviction, for a second conviction within a period of one year by a fine of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00), and for a third or any subsequent conviction within a period of one year by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Added by Ord. 06-10, 11/20/06)

Chapter 6.46 EXPANDED POLYSTYRENE FOOD SERVICE WARE
6.46.010 Definitions.
        For the purposes of this Chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:

        “City facilities” mean any buildings, structures, or vehicles owned or operated by the City of Dana Point, its agents, agencies, departments, and franchisees.

        “Customer” means any person obtaining prepared food from a restaurant or retail food vendor.

        “Disposable food service ware” means all containers, trays, cartons, cups, and other items that are designed for one (1) time use and on, or in, which any restaurant or retail food vendors directly places or packages prepared foods or which are used to consume foods. This includes, but is not limited to, service ware for takeout foods and/or leftovers from partially consumed meals prepared at restaurants or retail food vendors such as plates, cups, bowls, lids, trays, and hinged or lidded containers. This does not include single-use disposable straws or utensils.

        “Expanded polystyrene (EPS)” means polystyrene that has been expanded or “blown” using a gaseous blowing agent into a solid foam. EPS is sometimes called “Styrofoam,” a Dow Chemical Co. trademarked form of polystyrene foam insulation.

        “Food vendor” means any establishment located or operating within the City of Dana Point which provides prepared and ready-to-consume food or beverages for public consumption, including, but not limited to, any store, supermarket, delicatessen, restaurant, retail food vendor, sales outlet, shop, cafeteria, catering truck or vehicle, sidewalk or other outdoor vendor, or caterer.

        “Polystyrene” means and includes expanded polystyrene, which is a thermoplastic petrochemical material utilizing a styrene monomer and processed by any number of techniques, including, but not limited to, fusion of polymer spheres (expandable bead polystyrene), injection molding, foam molding, and extrusion-blow molding (extruded foam polystyrene).

        “Prepared food” means food or beverages which are served, packaged, cooked, chopped, sliced, mixed, brewed, frozen, squeezed, or otherwise prepared on the food vendor’s premises, including sidewalk vending receptacles as defined in Section 5.03.020(s) of this Code, with the intent of consumption on or off the premises as the balance of an unfinished meal or as “takeout food.” For the purposes of this Chapter, “prepared food” does not include raw, butchered, ground, chopped, or sliced meats, fish, and/or poultry sold from a butcher case or similar retail appliance for subsequent preparation.

        “Restaurant” means any establishment located within the City of Dana Point that sells prepared food for consumption on, near, or off its premises by customers. “Restaurant,” for the purposes of this Chapter, includes mobile food preparation units as defined in Section 6.30.010 of the Dana Point Municipal Code.

        “Retail food vendor” means any store, shop, sales outlet, or other establishment, including a grocery store or a delicatessen, other than a restaurant, located within the City of Dana Point that provides prepared food. (Added by Ord. 12-03, 2/21/12; amended by Ord. 19-03, 6/4/19)

 

 

6.46.020 Polystyrene (EPS) Food Service Ware Prohibited.
        (a)    Except as provided by Section 6.46.030 of this Chapter, food vendors are prohibited from providing prepared food in disposable food service ware made of EPS.

        (b)    Except as provided by Section 6.46.030 of this Chapter, all City facilities, City-managed concessions, City-sponsored events, City permitted events and all franchisees, contractors, and vendors doing business with the City are prohibited from using disposable food service ware made of EPS within the City of Dana Point. (Added by Ord. 12-03, 2/21/12)

 

6.46.030 Exemptions.
        (a)    EPS coolers and ice chests that are intended for reuse are exempt from the provisions of this Chapter.

        (b)    Upon receipt of a written application, the City Manager, or designee, may exempt a retail food vendor or restaurant from the requirements of this Chapter for a period of up to one (1) additional year after the operative date of the ordinance codified in this Chapter, upon sufficient showing by the applicant that the provisions of this Chapter would cause undue hardship.

        (1)    The phrase undue hardship includes:

        (A)   Situations where there are no reasonably feasible available alternatives to EPS food service ware for reasons which are unique to the retail food vendor or restaurant; or

        (B)   Situations where compliance with the requirements of this Chapter would deprive a person of a legally protected right.

        (2)    The written application shall include all information necessary for the making of a decision on the application, including, but not limited to, documentation showing the factual support for the claimed exemption. The applicant may be required to provide additional information to permit the determination of facts regarding the exemption application.

        (3)    An exemption application may be approved in whole or in part, with or without conditions.

        (4)    A retail food vendor or restaurant granted an exemption must reapply in writing prior to the end of the one (1) year exemption period and demonstrate continued undue hardship if it wishes to have the exemption extended.

        (c)    The City Manager and/or designee may also determine to exempt from the requirements of this Chapter the procurement of supplies or services in the event of a proclaimed emergency or when otherwise deemed necessary by the City Manager for the immediate preservation of the public health, safety, or general welfare. (Added by Ord. 12-03, 2/21/12; amended by Ord. 19-03, 6/4/19)

 

6.46.040 Enforcement.
        (a)    Whenever the City Manager or designee finds that any provision of this Chapter has been violated, the City Manager shall give notice of such violation by means of a written warning. In any such warning, the City Manager shall:

        (1)    Set forth the specific violation or violations found; and

        (2)    Establish a specific and reasonable period of time for the correction of the violation or violations; and

        (3)    State that failure to comply with any notice issued in accordance with the provisions of this Subsection shall be punishable by a fine in an amount consistent with Subsection (b) of this Section.

 

        (b)    Following the issuance of a written warning, an offense under this Chapter shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first conviction, and a fine of not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the second and any subsequent conviction.

        (c)    Each and every day that a violation occurs shall constitute a separate violation of this Chapter.

        (d)    The City Attorney may seek legal, injunctive, or other equitable relief to enforce this Chapter. (Added by Ord. 12-03, 2/21/12)

Chapter 6.47 PLASTIC CARRY-OUT BAGS
6.47.010 Definitions.
        For purposes of this Chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:

        “Affected retail establishment” means any retail establishment, vendor, or non-profit vendor located within or doing business within the geographical limits of the City of Dana Point, and which is subject to the provisions of this Chapter.

        “City-sponsored event” means any event organized or sponsored by the City of Dana Point or any department of the City of Dana Point.

        “Customer” means any person obtaining goods from an affected retail establishment.

        “Grocery store” means any dealer in staple foodstuffs, meats, produce and dairy products and usual household supplies.

        “Non-profit vendor” means a recognized tax exempt organization which provides goods as a part of its services.

        “Pharmacy” means a retail use where the profession of pharmacy by a pharmacist licensed by the State of California in accordance with the Business and Professions Code is practiced and where prescription medications are offered for sale.

        “Plastic carry-out bag” or “plastic bag” means any bag made from plastic (including compostable and biodegradable plastic), excluding reusable bags, provided by an affected retail establishment to a customer at the point of sale for the purpose of carrying away goods.

        “Recyclable” means material that can be sorted, cleansed, and reconstituted using Dana Point’s available recycling collection programs for the purpose of using the altered form in the manufacture of a new product. Recycling does not include burning, incinerating, converting, or otherwise thermally destroying solid waste.

        “Recyclable paper bag” means a paper bag that meets all of the following requirements: (1) contains no old growth fiber; (2) is one hundred (100) percent recyclable overall and contains a minimum of forty (40) percent post-consumer recycled content; and (3) displays the words “Reusable” and “Recyclable” in a highly visible manner on the outside of the bag.

        “Retail establishment” means any commercial business facility that sells goods directly to the ultimate consumer including, but not limited to, grocery stores, pharmacies, liquor stores, and “mini-marts.” The term “retail establishment” shall also include any retail store, vendor, and non-profit vendor selling clothing, food or personal items.

        “Reusable bag” means a bag with handles that is specifically designed and manufactured for multiple reuse and meets all of the following requirements: (1) has a minimum lifetime of one hundred twenty-five (125) uses, which for purposes of this definition, means the capability of carrying a minimum of twenty-two (22) pounds one hundred twenty-five (125) times over a distance of at least one hundred seventy-five (175) feet; (2) has a minimum volume of fifteen (15) liters; (3) is machine washable or is made from a material that can be cleaned or disinfected; (4) does not contain lead, cadmium, or any other heavy metal in toxic amounts; (5) has printed on the bag, or on a tag that is permanently affixed to the bag, the name of the manufacturer, the location (country) where the bag was manufactured, a statement that the bag does not contain lead, cadmium, or any other heavy metal in toxic amounts, and the percentage of postconsumer recycled material used, if any; and (6) if made of plastic, is a minimum of at least 2.25 mils thick.

        “Vendor” means any store, shop, sales outlet or other commercial establishment located within or doing business within the City of Dana Point, which provides perishable or nonperishable goods. (Added by Ord. 12-04, 3/6/12)

 

6.47.020 Single-Use Plastic Carry-Out Bags Prohibited.
        (a)    No affected retail establishment shall provide plastic carry-out bags to customers at the point of sale. Reusable bags and recyclable paper bags are allowed alternatives.

        (b)    Nothing in this Chapter shall be read to preclude affected retail establishments from making reusable bags and recyclable paper bags available to customers.

        (c)    Affected retail establishments are strongly encouraged to provide incentives for the use of reusable bags through education, credits, or rebates for customers that use reusable bags at the point of sale for the purpose of carrying away goods, and/or by charging customers for each paper bag distributed at the point of sale.

        (d)    No person shall distribute plastic carry-out bags at any City-sponsored event, or at any City facility or any event held on City property. (Added by Ord. 12-04, 3/6/12)

 

6.47.030 Operative Date.
        For affected retail establishments whose annual taxable sales exceed four million dollars ($4,000,000.00), the provisions of this Chapter shall become operative on April 1, 2013. For all other affected retail establishments, the provisions of this Chapter shall become operative on October 1, 2013. (Added by Ord. 12-04, 3/6/12)

       

6.47.040 Exemptions.
        (a)    This Chapter shall apply only to plastic carry-out bags provided at the point of sale for the purpose of carrying away goods. This Chapter shall not apply to single-use plastic produce bags distributed in a grocery store exclusively for the purpose of transporting produce, meats, fish, and/or poultry to the point of sale.

        (b)    Upon receipt of a written application, the City Manager, or designee, may exempt an affected retail establishment from the requirements of this Chapter for a period of up to one (1) additional year after the operative date of the ordinance codified in this Chapter, upon sufficient showing by the applicant that the provisions of this Section would cause undue hardship.

        (1)    The phrase undue hardship includes:

        (A)   Situations where there are no acceptable alternatives to plastic carry-out bags for reasons which are unique to the affected retail establishment;

        (B)   Situations where compliance with the requirements of this Chapter would deprive a person of a legally protected right.

        (2)    The written application shall include all information necessary for the making of a decision on the application, including, but not limited to, documentation showing the factual support for the claimed exemption. The applicant may be required to provide additional information to permit the determination of facts regarding the exemption application.

        (3)    An exemption application may be approved in whole or in part, with or without conditions.

        (4)    An affected retail establishment granted an exemption must reapply in writing prior to the end of the one (1) year exemption period and demonstrate continued undue hardship if it wishes to have the exemption extended.

        (c)    The City Manager and/or designee may also determine to exempt from the requirements of this Chapter the procurement of supplies or services in the event of a proclaimed emergency or when otherwise deemed necessary by the City Manager for the immediate preservation of the public health, safety, or general welfare. (Added by Ord. 12-04, 3/6/12)

 

6.47.050 Enforcement.
        (a)    Whenever the City Manager or designee finds that any provision of this Chapter has been violated, the City Manager shall give notice of such violation by means of a written warning. In any such warning, the City Manager shall:

        (1)    Set forth the specific violation or violations found;

        (2)    Establish a specific and reasonable period of time for the correction of the violation or violations; and

        (3)    State that failure to comply with any notice issued in accordance with the provisions of this Subsection shall be punishable by a fine in an amount consistent with Subsection (b) of this Section.

        (b)    Following the issuance of a written warning, an offense under this Chapter shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first conviction, and a fine of not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the second and any subsequent conviction.

        (c)    Each and every day that a violation occurs shall constitute a separate violation of this Chapter.

        (d)    The City Attorney may seek legal, injunctive, or other equitable relief to enforce this Chapter. (Added by Ord. 12-04, 3/6/12)

Chapter 6.48 VESSEL REGULATIONS
6.48.010 Definitions.
        For the purposes of this Chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:

        “Directing Authority.” The term “Directing Authority” shall mean the Director of Public Works or designee.

        “Enforcing Attorney.” The term “Enforcing Attorney” shall mean the City Attorney or the District Attorney acting to enforce any part of this Chapter, or either of their respective designees.

        “Harbor Patrol.” The term “Harbor Patrol” shall mean the Orange County Sheriff’s Department, located in the Dana Point Harbor, or its designee.

        “Pacific Ocean.” The term “Pacific Ocean” shall mean the waters off the City of Dana Point from the shoreline seaward three (3) nautical miles, excluding the Dana Point Harbor.

        “Person.” The term “person” shall mean an individual, proprietorship, firm, partnership, joint venture, syndicate, business trust, company, corporation, association, committee or any other legally recognized entity.

        “Vessel.” The term “vessel” means any boat, ship, barge, skiff or similar floating craft including any tanks or board facilities. (Added by Ord. 12-07, 12/4/12)

 

6.48.020 Vessel Anchoring Occupancy.
        It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing, or having charge or possession of any vessel to anchor such vessel in the Pacific Ocean while not continuously occupying the vessel during:

        (a)    Any nighttime hours (dusk to dawn);

        (b)    Any time period when a small craft advisory or greater has been issued by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration; and

        (c)    During daylight hours, except for one (1) shore excursion daily for no more than three (3) hours. (Added by Ord. 12-07, 12/4/12)

 

6.48.030 Disposition of Stray, Unattended or Abandoned Vessels.
        All stray, unattended or abandoned vessels, timber or any other personal property found in the water in the Pacific Ocean, or on the shore not in the lawful possession or control of some person, shall be immediately reported to the Harbor Patrol. The Harbor Patrol may immediately impound the vessel and associated costs of impoundment are recoverable from the vessel owner. Should the vessel go unclaimed for a period of thirty (30) days, the Directing Authority may sell the vessel and collect the proceeds of such sale, to offset the costs of storage and impoundment. For purposes of this Section, any vessel on the Pacific Ocean shall be deemed to stray, unattended or abandoned if the vessel is unoccupied by a person during: any nighttime hours (dusk to dawn); any time period when a small craft advisory or greater has been issued by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration; or daylight hours for more than three (3) hours, or is adrift. (Added by Ord. 12-07, 12/4/12)

 

6.48.040 Vessel Anchoring Period Within the Pacific Ocean Outside the Dana Point Harbor.
        It is unlawful and a public nuisance to anchor a vessel at any location on the Pacific Ocean within one thousand (1,000) yards of a beach swimming area or any area frequented by human powered craft as determined by the Harbor Patrol for a cumulative period of time that exceeds seventy-two (72) hours within any thirty (30) calendar day period. The seventy-two (72) hour period is not applied to vessels that are not anchored overnight. The Directing Authority may authorize an extension to the seventy-two (72) hour time limit if, under the particular circumstances, an extension of time is reasonable and warranted. (Added by Ord. 12-07, 12/4/12)

 

6.48.050 Anchoring Requirements Outside Dana Point Harbor.
        All vessels anchored on the Pacific Ocean shall be anchored in such a manner so that the vessel does not come in contact with another vessel or structure, or drifts. Vessels shall have properly-sized anchors and corresponding chain/line length in order to insure that vessels are securely anchored. (Added by Ord. 12-07, 12/4/12)

 

6.48.060 Discharge of Treated or Untreated Human or Animal Excreta and Bilges Prohibited.
        It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person to discharge any treated or untreated human or animal excreta from any head, toilet or similar facility on a vessel into the Pacific Ocean. Vessel waste discharge systems must be in proper functioning order, in compliance with all applicable Federal, State, County, and City standards and prevent discharge to the Pacific Ocean. As a condition of anchoring or mooring in the Pacific Ocean, the Directing Authority may require the vessel owner, operator, or occupier to demonstrate, under direct observation, that the vessel waste discharge system, bilges and/or holding tanks are functioning properly through use of dye tabs or other mechanism(s). (Added by Ord. 12-07, 12/4/12)

 

6.48.070 Other Vessel Discharges Prohibited.
        No person shall throw, discharge, deposit, or leave, or procure to be thrown, discharged, deposited or leave either from or out of any vessel, any anthropogenic refuse matter of any description into the Pacific Ocean. (Added by Ord. 12-07, 12/4/12)

 

6.48.080 Enforcement.
        (a)    Administrative Remedies. In addition to all other enforcement mechanisms provided for in this Chapter, any violation of this Chapter may be enforced through the Administrative Citation Program set forth in Chapter 1.10 of the City Municipal Code.

        (b)    Nuisance Abatement. Any condition in violation of the prohibitions of this Chapter shall constitute a threat to the public health, safety and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance pursuant to Government Code Section 38771. The Directing Authority is hereby authorized to take any and all enforcement action as provided for in accordance with Chapter 6.14 of the City Municipal Code to abate said nuisance.

        (c)    Criminal Sanctions.

        (1)    Misdemeanor. Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished in accordance with Sections 1.01.200 to 1.01.240 of this Code.

        (2)    Damages. Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of this Chapter may be ordered to pay all of the following damages:

        (A)   All costs incurred in the enforcement of this Chapter, including, but not limited to, costs relating to investigation, sampling, monitoring, inspection, impoundment, disposal, cleanup, administrative expenses, expert witness fees, attorneys’ fees and costs, and all other expenses as authorized by law;

        (B)   All costs incurred in cleaning up or mitigating harm to the environment or other public property, and/or the costs associated with reducing the threat to human health;

        (C)   Damages for harm to the environment or other public property; and

        (D)   Restitution and injunctive, declaratory and such other equitable relief as may be allowed by law.

        (d)    Consecutive Violations. Each day in which a violation occurs, and each failure to comply with any provision of this Chapter or any administrative citation shall constitute a separate violation of this Chapter.

        (e)    Nonexclusive Remedies. Each remedy available for the enforcement of this Chapter shall be nonexclusive. It is within the discretion of the Enforcing Attorney to seek cumulative remedies.

        (f)    Arrests and Citations. All arrests and/or citations issued pursuant to this Chapter shall comply with the procedures regarding the making of arrests set forth in Section 833 et seq., of the California Penal Code, and the procedures regarding misdemeanor citations set forth in Section 853.6 et seq., of the California Penal Code.

        (g)    Violations of Other Laws. Any person acting in violation of this Chapter also may be acting in violation of the Clean Water Act or the State Water Code and other laws and also may be subject to further sanctions, including civil liability. Accordingly, the Enforcing Attorney is authorized to file a civil suit pursuant to Section 505 of the Clean Water Act, 333 U.S.C. Section 1365, or other applicable code, seeking penalties, damages and orders compelling compliance and other appropriate relief. The Enforcing Attorney may notify any appropriate Federal, State or local agency of any alleged violation of this Chapter.

        (h)    Injunctions. Nothing in this Chapter shall be deemed to prevent the Directing Authority from ordering the Enforcing Attorney to file a civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction seeking an injunction against any threatened or continuing noncompliance with the provisions of this Chapter. Any temporary, preliminary or permanent injunction issued pursuant hereto may include an order for reimbursement to the Directing Authority of all fees and costs incurred in enforcing this Chapter, including, but not limited to, the costs of inspection, investigation and monitoring, the costs of abatement undertaken at the expense of the City, costs relating to restoration of the environment, all legal and consulting fees and costs and all other expenses as authorized by law.

        (i)     Other Civil Remedies. Nothing in this Chapter shall be deemed to prevent the Directing Authority from ordering the Enforcing Attorney to file a civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction seeking civil damages, including, but not limited to:

        (1)    All costs incurred in the enforcement of this Chapter, including, but not limited to, costs relating to investigation, sampling, monitoring, inspection, impoundment, disposal, cleanup, administrative expenses, expert witness fees, attorneys’ fees and costs, and all other expenses as authorized by law;

        (2)    All costs incurred in cleaning up or mitigating harm to the environment or other public property, and/or the costs associated with reducing the threat to human health;

        (3)    Damages for harm to the environment or other public property; and     

        (4)    Restitution and injunctive, declaratory and such other equitable relief as may be allowed by law.

        (j)     The Directing Authority is authorized to immediately issue a written order to remove the vessel from the Pacific Ocean, and barring the vessel and the person owning and/or in possession of the vessel from the Pacific Ocean for a period of: (1) one (1) year for a prohibited discharge; or (2) two (2) years for tampering or removal of dye tablets, the refusal to allow boarding, the refusal to or interference with the placing of dye tablets or the performance of testing. Where personal delivery cannot be made, a copy of the order shall be sent by first class mail, postage prepaid to the address of the person to whom the vessel is registered. The order may be appealed to the City Manager after the vessel is removed from the Pacific Ocean.

        (k)    The Directing Authority may also impound the vessel for failure to meet the requirements of this Chapter. (Added by Ord. 12-07, 12/4/12)

 

6.48.090 Interagency Cooperation.
        To the extent permitted by law, the Directing Authority may elect to contract for the services of any public entity or private person to carry out the patrolling, inspections, and enforcement authorized by this Chapter. (Added by Ord. 12-07, 12/4/12)

 

6.48.100 Compliance Disclaimer.
        Full compliance by any person with the provisions of this Chapter shall not preclude the need to comply with other local, State or Federal statutory or regulatory requirements which may be required for the control of the discharge of pollutants and/or the protection of water quality. (Added by Ord. 12-07, 12/4/12)

 

6.48.110 Judicial Review.
        The provisions of Sections 1094.5 and 1094.6 of the Code of Civil Procedure set forth the procedure for judicial review of any act taken pursuant to this Chapter. Parties seeking judicial review of any action taken pursuant to this Chapter shall file such action within ninety (90) days of the occurrence of the event for which review is sought. (Added by Ord. 12-07, 12/4/12)

Title 7 SUBDIVISIONS
Chapter 7.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 7.02 DEFINITIONS
Chapter 7.03 TYPES OF MAPS PERMITTED
Chapter 7.04 TENTATIVE MAPS—REQUIREMENT FOR FILING
Chapter 7.05 TENTATIVE MAPS—PROCEDURES
Chapter 7.08 STANDARDS OF DESIGN
Chapter 7.10 DEDICATION
Chapter 7.12 IMPROVEMENTS, MONUMENTATION AND SECURITY
Chapter 7.14 FEES IN LIEU OF DEDICATION OR IMPROVEMENT
Chapter 7.18 MAJOR THOROUGHFARE AND BRIDGE FEES
Chapter 7.20 TAXES AND ASSESSMENTS
Chapter 7.22 PARCEL MAPS—REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES
Chapter 7.24 FINAL MAPS—REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES
Chapter 7.26 WAIVERS AND EXCEPTIONS
Chapter 7.28 REVERSIONS TO ACREAGE
Chapter 7.30 CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE
Chapter 7.32 LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS
Chapter 7.33 MERGER OF PARCELS
Chapter 7.34 NOTICES OF VIOLATION
Chapter 7.36 DEDICATION OF LAND FOR PARK FACILITIES AND PAYMENT OF IN-LIEU FEES

Chapter 7.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
7.01.010 Title.
        This Subdivision Code may be cited as the “Dana Point Subdivision Code.” (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.01.015 Purposes.
        (a)    The purpose of this Subdivision Code is to provide regulations and controls for the design and improvement of subdivisions in the City of Dana Point, in accordance with the Subdivision Map Act.

        (b)    Other purposes of this Subdivision Code are:

        (1)    To implement the General Plan; and

        (2)    To provide regulations and controls, within the law, over the use of land in the City for the health, safety and welfare of present and future residents. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.01.020 Prohibitions.
        (a)    No person shall offer to sell or lease, contract to sell or lease, sell or lease, finance any parcel or parcels of real property, or commence construction of any building for sale, lease or financing thereon, except for model homes, or allow occupancy thereof, for which a final tract map is required by this Subdivision Code, until such map thereof, in full compliance with the provisions of this Subdivision Code and the Subdivision Map Act, has been filed for recording by the City Clerk.

        (b)    No person shall sell, lease or finance any parcel or parcels of real property or commence construction of any building for sale, lease or financing thereon, except for model homes, or allow occupancy thereof, for which a parcel map is required by this Subdivision Code, until such map thereof, in full compliance with the provisions of this Subdivision Code and the Subdivision Map Act, has been filed for recording by the City Clerk.

        (c)    No permit to develop any real property which has been divided or which has resulted from a division in violation of the Subdivision Map Act or this Subdivision Code shall be granted by any officer or employee of the City of Dana Point or by the Planning Commission or the City Council unless a certificate of compliance has been issued and recorded for the property to be developed in accordance with this Subdivision Code. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.01.025 Director of Community Development.
        Any reference to the “Director” in this Subdivision Code shall be to the City’s Director of Community Development or that person designated by the Director holding the appropriate licenses or credentials required by the Subdivision Map Act. The Director shall be responsible for enforcing the provisions of this Subdivision Code. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.01.030 Subdivision Manual.
        The Director shall formulate such rules, procedures, and interpretations as may be necessary or convenient to administer this Subdivision Code. Such rules, procedures and interpretations shall be referred to as the “Dana Point Subdivision Manual” or the “Subdivision Manual.” The Subdivision Manual and any amendments thereto shall not be effective until they are approved by action of the City Council. Copies of the Subdivision Manual shall be made available to the public at a cost sufficient to pay for printing. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.01.035 Planning Commission to Serve as Subdivision Committee.
        (a)    There is hereby established the Dana Point Subdivision Committee, hereinafter referred to as “Subdivision Committee.” For purposes of this Subdivision Code, the Planning Commission shall constitute the Subdivision Committee and serve as the same.

        (b)    The Dana Point Subdivision Committee is hereby designated as an advisory agency as that term is used in the Subdivision Map Act, and shall have the authority to review and approve, conditionally approve or disapprove tentative tract maps, tentative parcel maps and lot line adjustments.

        (c)    The Subdivision Committee shall review and make recommendations to the City Council on petitions for reversions to acreage.

        (d)    The Subdivision Committee shall perform such other duties as may be specified by the City Council. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.01.040 City Council as Appeal Body.
        The City Council is hereby designated as an appeal board as that term is used in the Subdivision Map Act and shall hear appeals from actions of the Subdivision Committee with respect to tentative tract maps, tentative parcel maps and lot line adjustments. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.01.045 Processing and Filing Fees.
        Fees to cover the costs incurred by the City in processing maps, plans and requests filed pursuant to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this Subdivision Code shall be paid to the City in compliance with the fee resolution adopted by the City Council. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

Chapter 7.02 DEFINITIONS
7.02.010 Map Act Prevails.
        The definitions in the Subdivision Map Act shall govern the meaning of words in this Subdivision Code, except as follows:

 

Terms Used in this Code

Equivalent Terms in Subdivision Map Act

Final tract map

Final map

Tract map

Final map

Final parcel map

Parcel map

Tentative tract map

Tentative map

Tentative parcel map

Tentative map

 

(Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.02.015 Zoning Code, Grading Code—Map Act Definitions Apply.
        Unless otherwise defined in this Subdivision Code, words and phrases used in this Subdivision Code shall be deemed to have the same meaning applied to them in the Dana Point Zoning Code, the Dana Point Grading and Excavation Code and the Subdivision Map Act. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.02.020 Subdivision Code Definitions.
        All references to this Section shall include Sections 7.02.025 through 7.02.140. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.02.025 Definitions (A).
        Advisory Agency. The Planning Commission shall constitute the Subdivision Committee, which is designated as the advisory agency, as that term is used in the Subdivision Map Act.

        Appeal Board. The City Council is hereby designated as the Appeal Board, as that term is used in the Subdivision Map Act. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.02.030 Definitions (B).
        “Building site” means a parcel or contiguous parcels of land which was established in compliance with the building site requirements in the Zoning Code. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.02.035 Definitions (C).
        “City Council” means the City Council of the City of Dana Point.

        “City Engineer” means the Director of Public Works and Engineering Services.

        “City standards” means the Dana Point standard specifications as adopted by the City Council.

        “Code” means the Municipal Code of the City of Dana Point.

        “Community apartment project” means a project in which an undivided interest in the land is coupled with the right of exclusive occupancy of any apartment located thereon.

        “Condominium” means an estate in real property consisting of an undivided interest in common in a portion of a parcel of real property together with a separate interest in space in a residential, industrial or commercial building on such real property, such as an apartment, office or store. A condominium may include in addition a separate interest in other portions of such real property.

        “Condominium project” means an entire parcel of real property divided or to be divided into condominiums, including all structures thereon.

        “County” means the County of Orange.

        “County Recorder” means the County Recorder of the County of Orange.

        “County Surveyor” means the County Surveyor of the County of Orange. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.02.040 Definitions (D).
        “Driveway” means a designated passageway providing vehicular access between a street and a garage or carport, a designated parking area, or other driveway or street. A driveway shall not be considered a street. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

 

7.02.045 Definitions (E).
        “Easement” means a recorded right or interest in the land of another, which entities the holder thereof to some use, privilege, or benefit out of or over said land.

        “Engineering geologist” means a person duly certified in the State of California to practice engineering geology. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.02.050 Definitions (F).
        “Fee” means the share of the cost of providing facilities attributable to a particular parcel of property and may include the provision of specified facilities or dedication of land for such facilities.

        “Fee area” means any area covered by a General Plan amendment, zone change, or other development approval which was granted subject to a condition that the developer pay a fee or fees.

        “Final parcel map” means a recorded parcel map that is in substantial conformance with an approved or conditionally approved tentative parcel map and complies with Section 7.03.040 of this Code.

        “Final tract map” means a recorded tract map that is in substantial conformance with all or a portion of an approved or conditionally approved tentative tract map and which is filed in compliance with the provisions of this Subdivision Code, the Subdivision Map Act and the Subdivision Manual.

        “Flood-control work” or “drainage work” means all means of conveying or storing stormwaters, including natural watercourses, improved drainage channels, retarding basins, closed conduits or pipes, and authorized or existing flood-control channels, and also the control of sedimentation.

        “Flood hazard” means the capability of flowing water or mixtures of soils and water to impair or to damage buildings and other structures, and their functions; to erode natural and modified land surfaces, including channels and watercourses; to inundate coastal land areas by either wave action or tidal forces; and to deposit eroded material on either public or private property in a damaging or impairing manner and amount.

        Flood Hazard, Possible. “Possible flood hazard” means possible extension of areas denoted as “subject to flood hazard,” including also the uncertainty of degree or extent of bank erosion.

        “Floodplain” means the land adjacent to a watercourse and other land areas susceptible to being inundated by water. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.02.055 Definitions (G).
        “Grading Code” means the Grading and Excavation Code of the City of Dana Point. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.02.060 Definitions (H).
        “Hillside” means a parcel of land or a definable portion thereof with an average slope of ten percent (10%) or more or an average rise or fall of one (1) foot or more vertically for each ten (10) feet horizontally. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.02.065 Definitions (I).
        “Improvement” means such street work and utilities to be installed or agreed to be installed on the land proposed to be subdivided by any person, firm, corporation, partnership or association to be used for public or private streets, highways, ways and easements as are necessary for the general use of the lot owners in the subdivision and local neighborhood traffic and drainage needs as a condition precedent to the approval and acceptance of the final tract or parcel map thereof. “Improvement” also refers to such other specific improvement or types of improvements, the installation of which, either by the subdivider, by public agencies, by private utilities, by any other entity approved by the City Council or a combination thereof, is necessary or convenient to ensure conformity to or implementation of the General Plan or any adopted specific plan.

 

        “Inundation” means ponded water or water in motion of sufficient depth to damage property due to the mere presence of water or to deposition of silt. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.02.070 Definitions (L).
        Reserved. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.02.075 Definitions (M).
        “Master plan of drainage” means an engineering report adopted by the City Council, pursuant to Government Code Section 66483 which outlines the local drainage facilities (but not including necessary on-site or regional facilities), needed for proper development of a specific area of the City. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.02.080 Definitions (N).
        Reserved. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.02.085 Definitions (O).
        Reserved. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.02.090 Definitions (P).
        “Person” means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, club, social club, fraternal organization, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, the County, this and any other City, city and county, municipality, district, or other political subdivision, or any other group or combination acting as a unit.

        “Planning Commission” means the City of Dana Point Planning Commission, which shall constitute the Subdivision Committee. The Subdivision Committee is designated as the advisory agency, as that term is used in the Subdivision Map Act. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.02.095 Definitions (Q).
        Quarter Section. A quarter section of land contains one hundred sixty acres. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.02.100 Definitions (R).
        “Remainder parcel” means that portion of a parcel of land which is not to be included within the boundaries of the final parcel or tract map.

        “Right-of-way” means a specifically defined area or strip of land, either public or private, on which an irrevocable right of passage or use has been recorded. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.02.105 Definitions (S).
        Section. A section of land is a division or parcel of land comprising one square mile or six hundred forty acres.

        Slope, Man-Made. “Man-made slope” means a manufactured slope consisting wholly or partly of either cut or filled material.

        “Soil engineer” means a civil engineer duly registered in the State of California whose field of expertise includes soil mechanics.

        “Stock cooperative” means as defined in the Subdivision Map Act and Civil Code Section

1351(m).

        “Street” means a public or private vehicular right-of-way, other than an alley or driveway, including both local streets and arterial highways.

        “Subdivider” means a person, firm, corporation, partnership or association who proposes to subdivide, divides, or causes to be divided real property into a subdivision for himself or for others except that employees and consultants of such persons or entities, acting in such capacity, are not subdividers.

        “Subdivision” means the division, by any subdivider, of any unit or units of improved or unimproved land, or any portion thereof, shown on the latest equalized County assessment roll as a unit or as contiguous units, for the purpose of sale, lease or financing, whether immediate or future except for leases of agricultural land for agricultural purposes. Property shall be considered as contiguous units even if it is separated by roads, streets, utility easement or railroad rights-of-way. “Subdivision” includes a condominium project, as defined in Section 1350 of the Civil Code, a community apartment project, as defined in Section 11004 of the Business and Professions Code, or the conversion of five (5) or more existing dwelling units to a stock cooperative, as defined in Section 11003.2 of the Business and Professions Code. As used in this section “agricultural purposes” means the cultivation of food or fiber or the grazing or pasturing of livestock.

        “Subdivision Code” means Title 7 of the Dana Point Municipal Code; the Dana Point Subdivision Code.

        Subdivision Committee. The Planning Commission shall constitute the Subdivision Committee, which is designated as the advisory agency, as that term is used in the Subdivision Map Act.

        “Subdivision manual” means a manual prepared by the City’s Director of Community Development or his or her designee providing additional guidelines and requirements for compliance with Title 7 of this Code.

        “Subdivision Map Act” means Title 7, Division 2, Section 66410 et seq. of the Government Code, State of California. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.02.110 Definitions (T).
        “Tentative parcel map” means a preliminary map that is used whenever a parcel or contiguous parcels of land is proposed to be subdivided for the purpose of creating less than five (5) lots, less than five (5) condominium units or a community apartment project containing less than five (5) apartment units or where:

        (a)    The land prior to subdivision contains less than five (5) acres, each parcel proposed to be created by the subdivision will abut on a maintained public street or highway and all dedications and improvements required by City standards will have been previously complied with;

        (b)    Each parcel proposed to be created by the subdivision will have a gross area of twenty (20) acres or more and a right of vehicular access for a continuous width of not less than twenty (20) feet to a maintained public street or highway;

        (c)    The parcel of land proposed to be subdivided is within a tract of land zoned for commercial or industrial uses and abuts streets or highways which have been approved by the City as to alignment and width and to which it has a right of vehicular access for a minimum continuous width of not less than twenty-eight (28) feet; or

        (d)    Each parcel of land proposed to be created by the subdivision will have a gross area of not less than forty (40) acres or not less than a quarter of a quarter section of land.

        “Tentative tract map” means a preliminary map that is used whenever a parcel or a number of contiguous parcels of land is proposed to be subdivided for the purpose of creating five or more lots, five (5) or more condominium units, the conversion of five (5) or more existing dwelling units to a stock cooperative or a community apartment project containing five (5) or more apartment units, except as otherwise specified by Section 7.03.020 or Section 7.03.050.

        “Territorial map” means a map outlining the jurisdiction of a local agency or special district. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.02.115 Definitions (U).
        Reserved. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.02.120 Definitions (V).
        “Vehicular access rights” means the right of persons to gain entry or exit with a vehicle to or from a street or driveway to or from abutting land.

        “Vesting tentative map” means a map which may be developed in accordance with the development standards, rules and regulations in effect at the time the application for the map is deemed complete and which confers a vested right to proceed with development for a specified time after recordation. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.02.125 Definitions (W).
        Reserved. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.02.130 Definitions (X).
        Reserved. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.02.135 Definitions (Y).
        Reserved. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.02.140 Definitions (Z).
        “Zoning Code” means the Dana Point Zoning Code. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

Chapter 7.03 TYPES OF MAPS PERMITTED
7.03.005 Types of Maps.
        Four (4) different types of maps and procedures are available for the purpose of creating subdivisions and lots. Certain subdivisions may be created without following a map procedure. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.03.010 Tentative Tract Maps.
        A tentative tract map, as defined in Section 7.02.110, is permitted pursuant to the provisions of this Code. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.03.020 Tentative Parcel Maps.
        A tentative parcel map, as defined in Section 7.02.110, is permitted pursuant to the provisions of this Code.

        A parcel map shall not be required for subdivisions of a portion of the operating rights-of-way of a railroad corporation, as defined by Public Utilities Code Section 230, which are created by short-term leases, i.e., terminable by either party on not more than thirty (30) days’ written notice. Furthermore, a parcel map shall not be required for land conveyed to or from a governmental agency, public entity, public utility, or for land conveyed to a subsidiary of a public utility for conveyance to that public utility for rights-of-way, unless a showing is made based upon substantial evidence in individual cases that public policy necessitates a parcel map. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.03.030 Final Tract Maps.
        A subdivision may be created by the recordation of a final tract map that is in substantial conformance with all or a portion of an approved or conditionally approved tentative tract map. Each final tract map shall include all or an approved portion of the approved or conditionally approved tentative tract map. It shall be filed in compliance with the provisions of this Subdivision Code, the Subdivision Map Act, and the Subdivision Manual. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.03.040 Final Parcel Maps.
        (a)    A subdivision may be created by the recordation of a final parcel map that is in substantial conformance with an approved or conditionally approved tentative parcel map or with a portion of an approved or conditionally approved tentative parcel map which complies with the provisions of Section 7.03.020(c). A final parcel map may also be recorded on portions of a tentative tract map when such portions comply with the specifications of Section 7.03.020(b), (c) or (d). It shall be filed in compliance with the provisions of this Subdivision Code, the Subdivision Map Act (in particular, Government Code Sections 66426 and 66463.1) and the Subdivision Manual.

        (b)    A parcel map shall be based upon a field survey except that a parcel map may be compiled from record data when the Director determines that the subdivision does not require a field survey provided the map complies with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.03.050 Exceptions.
        Certain types of land divisions and transactions may be completed without complying with the entire tentative and final tract or parcel map procedure, as specified.

        (a)    A request for determination as to the status of any parcel of land created as a result of a lease or conveyance specified by subdivisions (l) through (15) of this Subsection may be submitted in compliance with the certificate of compliance procedure as stated in Chapter 7.30 of this Subdivision Code. Neither a tentative or final tract or parcel map is necessary for the following:

        (1)    The financing or leasing of apartments, offices, stores or similar space within apartment buildings, industrial buildings, commercial buildings, mobile home parks or trailer parks;

        (2)    Mineral, oil or gas leases;

        (3)    Land dedicated for cemetery purposes under the Health and Safety Code of the State of California;

        (4)    Leases of agricultural land for agricultural purposes;

        (5)    Short-term leases (terminable by either party on not more than thirty (30) days’ notice in writing) of a portion of the operating right-of-way of a railroad corporation defined as such by Section 230 of the Public Utilities Code;

        (6)    Subdivisions in which every parcel has a gross area of sixty (60) acres or more;

        (7)    Lot line adjustments;

        (8)    Conveyances of land for rights-of-way to or from a governmental agency, public entity or public utility or to a subsidiary of a public utility for conveyance to such a public utility; however, in any of these instances a tentative and final tract or parcel map may be required if the Director determines that a map is necessary for purposes of public health and safety or for the general welfare;

        (9)    Boundary line or exchange agreements to which the State Lands Commission or a local agency holding a trust grant of tide and submerged lands is a party;

        (10)  Any separate assessment under Revenue and Taxation Code Section 2188.7;

        (11)  Unless a parcel or final map was approved by the Subdivision Committee, the conversion of a community apartment project, as defined in Business and Professions Code Section 11004, to a condominium, as defined in Civil Code Section 783, but only if all of the following requirements are met:

        (A)   At least seventy-five percent (75%) of the units in the project were occupied by record owners of the project on March 31, 1982,

        (B)   A final or parcel map of the project was properly recorded, if the property was subdivided, as defined in Government Code Section 66424, after January 1, 1964 with all of the condition of that map remaining in effect after the conversion,

        (C)   The Director certifies that the above requirements were satisfied;

        (12)  Unless a parcel or final map was approved by the Subdivision Committee, the conversion of a stock cooperative, as defined in Business and Professions Code Section 11003.2, to a condominium, as defined in Civil Code Section 783, but only if all of the following requirements are met:

        (A)   At least fifty-one percent (51%) of the units in the cooperative were occupied by stockholders of the cooperative on January 1, 1981, or individually owned by stockholders of the cooperative on January 1, 1981. As used in this subparagraph, a cooperative unit is individually owned if and only if the stockholder of that unit owns or partially owns an interest in no more than one unit in the cooperative,

        (B)   No more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the shares of the cooperative were owned by any one person, as defined in Government Code Section 17, including an incorporator or director of the cooperative, on January 1, 1981,

        (C)   A person renting a unit in a cooperative shall be entitled at the time of conversion to all tenant rights in State or local law, including, but not limited to, rights respecting first refusal, notice and displacement and relocation benefits,

        (D)   The Director certifies that the above requirements were satisfied;

        (13)  The leasing of, or the granting of an easement to, a parcel of land or any portion or portions thereof, in conjunction with the financing, erection and sale or lease of a wind-powered electrical generation device on the land, if the project is subject to discretionary action by the City;

        (14)  The leasing or licensing of a portion of a parcel, or the granting of an easement, conditional use permit or similar right on a portion of a parcel, to a telephone corporation as defined in Public Utilities Code Section 234, exclusively for the placement and operation of cellular radio transmission facilities, including but not limited to, antennae support structures, microwave dishes, structures to house cellular communications transmission equipment, power sources, and other equipment incidental to the transmission of cellular communications, if the project is subject to discretionary action by the City;

        (15)  The establishment of condominiums on property pursuant to the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act and this Title when the Subdivision Committee or City Council approved a parcel map or final map for the project, the separation of a three-dimensional portion or portions of the property from the remainder of the property or the division of that three-dimensional portion or portions into condominium shall not constitute a further subdivision as defined in Government Code Section 66424, provided each of the following conditions has been satisfied:

        (A)   The total number of condominiums established is not increased above the number authorized by the City in approving the parcel map or final map,

        (B)   A perpetual estate or an estate for years in the remainder of the property is held by the condominium owners in undivided interests in common, or by an association as defined in subdivision (a) of Civil Code Section 1351, and the duration of the estate in the remainder of the property is the same as the duration of the estate in the condominiums,

        (C)   The three-dimensional portion or portions of property are described on a condominium plan or plans, as defined in subdivision (e) of Civil Code Section 1351.

        (b)    A final parcel map is not required when waived pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 7.26 of this Subdivision Code.

        (c)    A request for certificate of compliance may or may not require a tentative map, as specified by the Director. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.03.060 Exclusions and Designated Remainder Parcels.
        Whenever a subdivider seeks to have a parcel otherwise covered by the provisions of this Subdivision Code omitted or determined to be a designated remainder parcel, the provisions of Government Code Section 66424.6 shall apply and be followed by the subdivider and the City. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.03.070 Vesting Tentative Maps.
        A vesting tentative map is a map which confers a vested right to proceed with development for a specified period of time after recordation.

        (a)    A vesting tentative map is at the option of the subdivider and shall not be a prerequisite to any proposed subdivision or application for development.

        (b)    A vesting tentative map shall be conspicuously identified on the submittal as a “Vesting Tentative Map.”

        (c)    A vesting tentative map is limited to development of the property pursuant to the applicable regulations in existence at the time of approval of the vesting tentative map.

        (d)    No land shall be subdivided and developed pursuant to a vesting tentative map for any purpose which is inconsistent with the General Plan and any applicable specific plan or not permitted by the Zoning Code, the Subdivision Code or other applicable provisions of this Code or any code adopted by reference by this Code.

        (e)    No vesting tentative map shall be deemed filed until:

        (1)    The zoning of the proposed subdivision is consistent with the General Plan; and

        (2)    If an environmental impact report is required, until the environmental impact report is certified.

        (f)    At the time the vesting tentative map is filed, the subdivider shall also supply all of the following information and documents:

        (1)    A detailed grading plan which specifies total cubic yards of cut and/or fill and includes estimated total import or export;

        (2)    Detailed plans, diagrams and other information showing existing street, sewer, water and drainage facilities available to serve the subdivision;

        (3)    Diagrams and information concerning proposed street, sewer, water and drainage facilities to serve the proposed subdivision, including engineering calculations to support their adequacy;

        (4)    A hydrology study, which shall also include a hydrologic analysis of the proposed drainage facilities to convey runoff from the proposed subdivision in a manner which will not adversely impact downstream properties;

        (5)    A detailed traffic analysis indicating existing traffic conditions, future traffic impact from the proposed subdivision and any proposed traffic control devices;

        (6)    An acoustical analysis if such an analysis would otherwise be required prior to the construction of dwelling units in the proposed subdivision;

        (7)    A soils engineering report appropriate to the site as determined by the Director of Public Works and Engineering Services.

        (g)    Concurrently with the filing of a vesting tentative map, the subdivider shall file any other application (conditional use permit, coastal development permit, site development permit, zone text amendment, zone change, variance, etc.) or plans which would otherwise be required prior to the issuance of building permits.

        (h)    No vesting map shall be approved or conditionally approved unless any and all required and concurrently filed applications are also approved or conditionally approved.

        (i)     No subdivision, with respect to which a vesting tentative map was approved or conditionally approved, shall be developed in a manner inconsistent with the approval of a concurrently filed and required application and/or plan, except by consent of the agency which approved the application or plan.

        (j)     A vesting tentative map shall be processed in the same manner as a tentative map. However, previously approved tentative maps which were not approved as vesting tentative maps may be so approved only if refiled and processed in compliance with all requirements herein.

        (k)    The provisions of Section 7.05.075 of this Chapter shall apply to an approved or conditionally approved vesting tentative map.

        (l)     The vested right for a recorded subdivision map shall be for a period of one (1) year beyond the recording date of the final map or parcel map, and shall confer on such maps all rights described in Government Code Sections 66498.1 through 66498.8. Where several final maps or parcel maps are recorded on various phases of a project covered by a single vesting tentative map, the one (1) year time period shall commence when the final map or parcel map for that phase is recorded. Prior to the expiration of the initial one (1) year period, the developer may apply for a one (1) year extension of the period of the vested right to the Planning Commission. If the extension is denied, the developer may appeal in accordance with Section 2.04.100 et seq. of this Code.

        (m)   The provisions of Section 7.05.070 of this Chapter shall apply to an approved or conditionally approved vesting tentative map.

        (n)    Fees for the filing and processing of vesting tentative maps shall be the same as the fees established for the filing and processing of tentative maps. However, the City Council may establish by resolution an additional fee to cover additional costs incurred by the processing of vesting tentative maps, including an extension of time.

        (o)    Fees for development permits (e.g., building and grading permits) filed pursuant to an approved vesting tentative map or a recorded vesting final/parcel map shall be paid at the prevailing rate in effect at the time of issuance of such permit. Impact fees adopted by the City at the time the vesting tentative tract map is deemed complete shall be paid at the prevailing rate in effect at the time the fee becomes due.

        (p)    Additional information requested is limited to that which relates to ordinances, resolutions, policies or standards for the design, development or improvement relating to the conferred vesting rights, except with regard to a specified determination under the California Environmental Quality Act or in compliance with federal or state requirements. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

Chapter 7.04 TENTATIVE MAPS—REQUIREMENT FOR FILING
7.04.010 Types of Maps Covered.
        This Chapter pertains to tentative parcel maps and tentative tract maps. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.04.015 Form and Contents.
        Tentative maps shall conform with such requirements as to form and content as may be specified by the Director in the Subdivision Manual. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.04.020 Who May File.
        Any property owner who proposes to subdivide property may file a tentative map. Any person who proposes to subdivide property that is legally owned by another person may file a tentative map for such property with the written consent of the legal owner of record. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.04.025 Certification of Ownership.
        Each tentative map shall be signed by the property owner or owners of record, and shall be accompanied by evidence of ownership of the real property proposed for subdivision. When any portion of a tentative map includes property that is owned by a public agency, the certification of ownership need not include the signatures for such ownerships, provided such portions are clearly identified on the map. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.04.030 Title Report.
        Tentative maps shall be accompanied by a preliminary title report which discloses all possessory interests and interests of record in the land being subdivided when determined to be necessary by the Director. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.04.035 Environmental Documents.
        Tentative maps shall be accompanied by appropriate environmental documents in accordance with the California Environmental Quality Act. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.04.040 Soils Report.
        (a)    Unless the requirement is waived by the City Engineer pursuant to subsection (b) or deferred pursuant to Subsection (c) of this Section, tentative maps shall be accompanied by a preliminary soils report based upon adequate test borings and prepared by a registered civil engineer. If the preliminary soils report indicates the presence of critically expansive soils or other soils problems which, if not corrected, would lead to structural defects, a soils report on each proposed lot in the subdivision containing any such soils problem shall accompany the tentative map. If the preliminary soils report indicates the presence of rocks or liquids containing deleterious chemicals which, if not corrected, could cause construction materials such as concrete, steel and ductile or case iron to corrode or deteriorate, a soils investigation of each potentially affected lot in the subdivision may be required by the City Engineer. Such reports shall include recommended corrective action which is likely to prevent structural damage.

        (b)    The City Engineer may waive the preliminary soils report required by Subsection (a) of this Section for tentative tract maps, where the City Engineer determines that it is unnecessary because the City already has sufficient information as to the qualities of the soils in the proposed subdivision and for tentative parcel maps.

        (c)    The City Engineer may defer the requirement for a preliminary soils report until the submission of a final tract or parcel map.

        (d)    The City may approve or conditionally approve the tentative map or portion thereof where these soils problems exist if it determines that the recommended action is likely to prevent structural damage to each structure to be constructed and, as a condition to the issuance of any building permit, may require that the approved recommended action be incorporated in the construction of each structure.

        (e)    The preliminary soils report shall be submitted to the City Engineer for review. The City Engineer may review the preliminary soils report and may require additional information or reject the report if it is found to be incomplete, inaccurate or unsatisfactory. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.04.045 Additional Information.
        (a)    Tentative maps shall be accompanied by such additional information as may be specified by the Director. The Director shall have the authority to include among such requirements geologic, seismic and hydrology reports; aerial photographs and transparent overlays; grading, site development and landscaping plans, including building setback lines; evidence from the proposed sewer agency and water supplier with respect to their capability of serving the proposed subdivision; of protection and fuel modification reports and any other information reasonably relevant to proposed subdivisions.

        (b)    The Director may require differing amounts of supplementary information, depending upon the type of map involved, the scope of the proposed subdivision and the anticipated environmental impacts of the subdivision.

        (c)    The Director may require the submission of additional information after the filing of tentative maps as necessary.

        (d)    The preliminary soils report shall also address future groundwater or seepage conditions that may occur as the result of developing each proposed lot in the subdivision. The analysis shall specifically address the individual and cumulative impact of irrigation and rainwater absorption from past, present and anticipated future development. If the preliminary soils report determines that percolating groundwater may cause future damage or subsidence on public or private property, a soils investigation report of each potentially affected lot, public or private, shall accompany the tentative map. Such reports shall include recommended corrective action which is likely to prevent damage to public or private property including the installation of a subdrainage system throughout the proposed development. If the preliminary soils report determines that percolating groundwater will not cause future damage to public or private property no additional reports will be required. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

Chapter 7.05 TENTATIVE MAPS—PROCEDURES
7.05.010 Types of Maps Covered.
        This Chapter pertains to tentative parcel maps and tentative tract maps. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.05.015 Filing.
        Tentative maps shall be filed with the Director who shall accept such maps only when the Director determines that the requirements for filing a tentative map established by this Subdivision Code and the Subdivision Map Act have been satisfied. The tentative map shall be deemed filed on the date it is accepted as complete by the Director. Each tract or parcel map shall be identified by a number prominently displayed on the face of the map issued by the City. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.05.020 Copies to Concerned Agencies.
        (a)    Where a local agency has filed a territorial map with the Director pursuant to the Subdivision Map Act, the Director shall forward a copy of any filed tentative map which is located wholly or partially within the territory outlined on the territorial map to said local agency within three (3) days of the date the tentative map is filed.

        (b)    When the State Department of Transportation has filed with the City Council a map of territory within one (1) mile on either or both sides of any state highway routing pursuant to the Government Code, the Director shall forward a copy of any filed tentative map which is located wholly or partially within the territory outlined on the territorial map to the district office of the Department of Transportation within three (3) days of the date the tentative map is filed.

 

        (c)    Within three (3) days of the date a tentative map is filed, the Director shall give notice of the filing to the governing boards of the school district or districts within which the proposed subdivision is located pursuant to the Government Code. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.05.025 Time for Action.
        The Subdivision Committee shall act upon a tentative map within the time specified in the Subdivision Map Act unless:

        (a)    An extension of time for action is mutually consented to by the subdivider and the Subdivision Committee, in which case the map shall be acted upon within the time agreed upon; or

        (b)    The subdivider withdraws the map. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.05.030 Reports and Recommendations.
        Reports and recommendations on tentative maps shall be in writing and shall be provided to the subdivider at least three (3) days prior to the date action on the map is scheduled, provided, that a subdivider:

        (a)    May waive this requirement; and

        (b)    May consent to the receipt by the Subdivision Committee of additional recommendations; and provided further, that a subdivider shall be deemed to have consented unless the subdivider specifically objects to the form and timeliness of such additional recommendations prior to the time the Subdivision Committee takes action on the tentative map. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.05.035 Review of Tentative Maps.
        Each tentative map shall be reviewed by the Subdivision Committee, which shall approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the tentative map. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.05.040 Substitution of Revised Maps.
        A revised tentative map may be submitted at any time prior to action on the map by the Subdivision Committee. The time for action on a tentative map specified in Section 7.05.025 shall recommence upon the acceptance by the Director of a revised tentative map. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.05.045 Meetings and Hearings.
        The Subdivision Committee shall act on tentative maps at regularly scheduled meetings or duly noticed special meetings when the matter has been duly placed upon the Committee’s agenda. Public hearings shall be required for the consideration of tentative maps. At a public hearing, the Subdivision Committee shall allow all interested persons an opportunity to address the Subdivision Committee on any matter pertaining to a proposed subdivision. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.05.050 Notice.
        Notice shall be given to all persons shown in the latest equalized assessment roll as owning property within five hundred (500) feet of the property proposed to be subdivided by all three (3) of the following methods:

        (1)    Direct mailing of a notice to the owners;

        (2)    Posting of a notice in accordance with the standard policy;

        (3)    Publication of a notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Dana Point. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.05.055 Zoning Conformance.
        (a)    The Subdivision Committee shall not approve or conditionally approve a tentative map which does not conform with applicable zoning except as provided in Subsection (b) of this Section.

        (b)    A tentative map may be approved when it conforms with zoning which has been recommended for adoption by the Planning Commission on the condition that the zoning must become effective prior to recordation of the final tract or final parcel map.

        (c)    A tentative map shall not be approved if it is apparent that any proposed parcel cannot be developed to its intended use without the modification of these development standards. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.05.060 Findings Required.
        A tentative parcel map or tentative tract map shall be approved or conditionally approved only if the Subdivision Committee makes the following findings:

        (a)    That the proposed map is consistent with the City’s General Plan;

        (b)    That the design and improvement of the proposed subdivision is consistent with the City’s General Plan;

        (c)    That the site is physically suitable for the proposed type of development;

        (d)    That the requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act have been satisfied;

        (e)    That the site is physically suitable for the proposed density of development;

        (f)    That the design of the subdivision and the proposed improvements are not likely to cause substantial environmental damage or substantial and avoidable injury to fish or wildlife or their habitat;

        (g)    That the design of the subdivision and the proposed improvements are not likely to cause serious public health problems;

        (h)    That the design of the subdivision and the proposed improvements will not conflict with easements of record or established by court judgment or acquired by the public at large for access through or use of property within the proposed subdivision; or, if such easements exist, that alternate easements for access or for use will be provided and these will be substantially equivalent to ones previously acquired by the public;

        (i)     That the design and improvement of the proposed subdivision are suitable for the uses proposed and the subdivision can be developed in compliance with the applicable zoning regulations pursuant to Section 7.05.055;

        (j)     That the subdivision is not located in a fee area or, if located in a fee area, the subdivider has met the requirements for payment of the applicable fees or the subdivision would not allow development of a project which would contribute to the need for the facility for which a fee is required;

        (k)    That the subdivision is located in an area which has access to adequate utilities and public services to support the development proposed within the subdivision or that the subdivision includes the provisions and improvements necessary to ensure availability of such utilities and services. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.05.065 Additional Findings Required.
        (a)    The Subdivision Committee shall determine whether the discharge of waste from the proposed subdivision into an existing community sewer system, where such a system exists, would result in or add to a violation of existing requirements prescribed by the Regional Water Quality Control Board. In the event it is determined that the proposed waste discharge would result in or add to such a violation, the Subdivision Committee shall disapprove the tentative map unless there are extenuating or overriding considerations, in which case these shall be stated.

        (b)    In the event a subdivision fronting upon the coastline or shoreline or upon a public waterway, river, or stream or upon a lake or reservoir owned in part or entirely by a public agency does not provide public access to such public resources through the subdivision itself in accordance with requirements of Sections 7.08.125 and 7.08.130, the Subdivision Committee shall find that reasonable public access to the resource in question is otherwise available within a reasonable distance from the subdivision. If this finding cannot be made, the map shall be disapproved.

        (c)    If the Subdivision Committee approves or conditionally approves a tentative map which deviates from any standard of design as allowed by Section 7.08.145, the Committee shall make a finding or findings that each such deviation has been individually considered and found to be justified based upon specific special circumstances which apply. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.05.070 Modification of Maps and Conditions of Approval.
        Upon the request of the subdivider, approved tentative maps may be modified and conditions of approval may be modified or deleted by the Subdivision Committee. In all cases, the Director shall attempt to notify any third parties who had previously indicated an interest in the proposed subdivision, of the Subdivision Committee’s scheduled consideration of the modification. Modifications shall be covered by the Subdivision Committee in the same manner and in accordance with the notice requirements, where applicable, as set forth in Section 7.05.050. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.05.075 Period of Validity—Extensions.
        (a)    In accordance with Government Code Section 66452.6, an approved or conditionally approved tentative map shall expire twenty-four (24) months after its approval or conditional approval, unless prior to the expiration date the subdivider requests an extension of time to extend said map or if the subdivider is required to expend one hundred twenty-five thousand dollars ($125,000.00) or more to finance public improvements outside the boundaries of the tentative map, excluding improvements of public rights-of way which abut the boundaries of the property to be subdivided and which are reasonably related to the development of the property as set forth in Government Code Section 66452.6. The one hundred twenty-five thousand dollar ($125,000.00) figure shall be adjusted annually pursuant to the provisions of Government Code Section 66452.6(a).

        (b)    In accordance with Government Code Section 66452.11, if an approved tentative map had not expired on September 13, 1993, the life of the tentative map shall be extended for twenty-four (24) months.

        (c)    The Subdivision Committee may grant an extension of time for any map for a period of up to one (1) year. The Subdivision Committee may grant more than one (1) extension but in no case may the total of the extensions granted exceed a total of three (3) years beyond the original date of expiration.

        (d)    An extension may be granted only where it will not result in conditions or circumstances contrary to the public health, safety or the general welfare.

        (e)    Denial of a request for extension may be appealed by the subdivider to the City Council pursuant to Section 2.04.100 et seq. of this Code. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.05.080 Appeal of Tentative Map to City Council.
        Except as provided in Section 7.05.075, any interested person may appeal to the City Council from any action of the Subdivision Committee with respect to a tentative map by filing an appeal in accordance with Section 2.04.100 et seq. of this Code. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

Chapter 7.08 STANDARDS OF DESIGN
7.08.010 Conformance with Standards of Design.
        Subdivisions shall be designed in conformance with the following standards of design. Deviations from these standards may be requested pursuant to Section 7.08.145. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.08.015 Consistency with General Plan.
        Subdivisions shall be designed and improved so as to be consistent with the General Plan and any applicable adopted specific plan and the objectives, policies and general land uses and programs specified therein. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

 

7.08.020 Compliance with Zoning.
        Subdivisions shall be designed so that all proposed lots comply with applicable zoning regulations in a manner that will permit the establishment of the proposed uses without further deviations or variances as stated in Section 7.05.055. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.08.025 Boundary Lines.
        (a)    Tentative map boundaries shall be drawn to include all of the area of all abutting parcels which are owned by the same property owner and proposed for boundary alteration. However, when any land is proposed to be divided in such a way that the subdivision will include a portion of such land, any portion with a contiguous gross area of five (5) acres or more which is not proposed to be included within the subdivision may be identified by reference on the tentative map.

        (b)    A portion of a tentative parcel map may be designated as a remainder for the purpose of an exception to the survey requirements, in compliance with the following provisions:

        (1)    Any remainder shall have a gross area of five (5) acres or more;

        (2)    Any remainder so designated shall not be considered to be a building site;

        (3)    Any remainder so designated shall not be improved with any building or structure that is subject to the requirements of the Uniform Building Code.

        (c)    Whenever a parcel of real property lies partially within the City and partially within an unincorporated area or within another city, any proposal to subdivide such real property shall be consistent with existing city boundaries. No lot or parcel, except proposed public or private street rights-of-way, shall be partially within a city and partially within the unincorporated area. Any portion of such real property lying within any other city or unincorporated county territory shall be included in the tentative map for the purpose of showing the remainder parcel, but any approving action on the tentative map by the City of Dana Point shall not be construed as approval of any design or improvements shown within any other city or unincorporated county territory.

        (d)    Regardless of its size, no portion of any property shown on the latest equalized County assessment roll as a unit or contiguous units shall be excluded from within the boundaries of a subdivision for the purpose of avoiding dedication or improvement of any street, drainage or flood-control facility. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.08.030 Lots/Parcels.
        (a)    Each lot or parcel being created by a subdivision shall be either numbered or lettered. If it is numbered, it must comply with the requirements of a building site as defined in the Zoning Code.

        (b)    Lettered lots or parcels may not be used as building sites and need not comply with the requirements for a building site.

        (c)    Lettered lots other than streets shall be labeled as to their intended use. Numbered lots may be labeled as to their intended use.

        (d)    A numbered lot which is platted so that it is in more than one zoning district shall comply with area and width requirements of the zoning district having the more restrictive requirements. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.08.035 Arterial Highways.
        If an existing or proposed arterial highway or transportation corridor as shown on the Master Plan of Arterial Highways is located so that any portion of such highway lies within or adjacent to a subdivision, the highway or corridor shall be shown on the map in a width and in an alignment corresponding to the Master Plan of Arterial Highways, and the highway or corridor shall be designed in accordance with the Standard Plans or applicable specific plan. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.08.040 Private Streets.
        Private streets shall be permitted, pursuant to conditions specified in the Subdivision Manual, when the City Council finds that the occupants of the subdivision will be better served and the welfare of the general public will not be impaired thereby. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.08.045 Restricted Access to Highways.
        Subdivisions shall be designed so as to limit vehicular access to highways shown on the Master Plan of Arterial Highways. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.08.050 Street Widths.
        Subdivisions shall be designed in conformance with the Standard Plans adopted by the City Council, except:

        (a)    Streets in residential districts requiring a building site area of fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet or more and where no sidewalks are to be installed shall have a right-of-way that will provide a parkway width of at least five (5) feet.

        (b)    Private streets serving four (4) or less parcels as access to a public street shall provide for a minimum pavement width of twenty-eight (28) feet within a minimum forty (40) foot wide right-of-way.

        (c)    Private streets serving five (5) parcels or more as access to a public street shall provide for a minimum pavement width of forty (40) feet within a minimum fifty-six (56) foot wide right-of-way.

        (d)    Streets in a subdivision which provides an approved alternate pedestrian circulation system shall have a right-of-way that will provide a minimum parkway width of at least eight (8) feet. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.08.055 Dead-End or Cul-de-Sac Streets.
        Dead-end streets shall be terminated by a turnaround having a diameter which will maintain a parkway width uniform with that of the street. No such dead-end street shall exceed a length of one thousand (1,000) feet measured along the centerline thereof from the center point of the turnaround to its centerline intersection with a through street. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.08.060 Local Street and Highway Grades.
        Local street and highway grades shall be no less than one percent (1%), reverse grade vertical curves excepted. Private street grades shall be no less than one percent (1%), reverse grade vertical curves excepted. Highway grades shall not exceed six percent (6%) and local street grades shall not exceed ten percent (10%), unless otherwise approved in writing by the Director of Public Works. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.08.065 Curved Local Street and Highway Radii.
        The centerline radii of curves on local streets or highways shall be not less than:

        (a)    One thousand five hundred fifty (1,550) feet on highways shown on the Master Plan of Arterial Highways as major arterial highways;

        (b)    One thousand eight hundred (1,800) feet on highways shown on the Master Plan of Arterial Highways as primary arterial highways or one thousand four hundred (1,400) feet on highways shown on the Master Plan of Arterial Highways as secondary arterial highways;

        (c)    Five hundred fifty (550) feet on collector streets;

        (d)    Two hundred fifty (250) feet on local streets. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.08.070 Local Street Lengths.
        Local streets shall not exceed one thousand (1,000) feet in length without a significant change in alignment. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.08.075 Local Street and Highway Corner Cutoffs and Corner Radii.
        All local street and highway corner cutoffs and corner radii shall be designed in conformance with the Standard Plans as adopted by the City Council. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.08.080 Sidewalks and Pedestrianways.
        (a)    Sidewalks shall be designed in accordance with the Standard Plans adopted by the City Council and located as follows:

        (1)    Along both sides of arterial highways;

        (2)    Along all commercial and industrial frontage;

        (3)    Along both sides of collector streets;

        (4)    Along residential frontage where the required minimum building site area is less than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet and the lots have access to the street, except in those instances where an alternate pedestrian circulation system is proposed;

        (5)    Along all streets leading directly to a school, a designated school bus stop or a park;

        (6)    Where the sidewalk will provide a continuation or link between other sidewalks.

        (b)    Additional pedestrianways not abutting a street shall be provided when necessary for access to schools, recreation and other public areas. These pedestrianways shall not be less than six (6) feet in width. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.08.085 Bicycle and Equestrian Trails.
        Where the General Plan or any officially adopted specific or precise plan designates a bikeway or equestrian trail as lying wholly or partially within any proposed subdivision, the necessary right-of-way for the bikeway or equestrian trail shall be shown on the map in compliance with such adopted plans, and bikeways shall be designed in accordance with the design criteria and guidelines for City bikeways. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.08.090 Street Lighting.
        Street lighting shall be provided along and at the intersections of all arterial highways and local streets in accordance with the illumination levels specified in the Standard Plans except as otherwise approved by the City Engineer. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.08.095 Underground Utility Lines.
        (a)    Utility lines, including but not limited to, electric, communications, street lighting, and cable television, shall be required to be placed underground within any new, revised or reactivated residential subdivision. The subdivider is responsible for making the necessary arrangements with the utility companies for the installation of such facilities. For the purposes of this Subsection, appurtenances and associated equipment such as, but not limited to, surface-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes, meter cabinets and concealed ducts in an underground system may be placed above ground within the street right-of-way where sufficient right-of-way width exists so as not to pose a serious hazard to pedestrian traffic. If approved by the Director, utility lines, the main purpose of which is to provide service to customers outside of the original boundaries of the subdivision, and those utility lines which were in service in the area covered by the tentative tract or tentative parcel map prior to the filing of the tentative map may be placed aboveground.

        (b)    Required underground utility lines may be located in street or alley rights-of-way or along any lot line.

        (c)    Overhead utility lines shall be located at the rear of lots or parcels where practical, the poles supporting such overhead lines shall not be installed within any street, alleyway, drainage easement or flood-control channel.

        (d)    Aboveground installation of utilities shall be permitted on a temporary basis when such utilities are required during construction; provided, however, that such utilities shall be removed or placed underground prior to the final exoneration of street improvement bonds. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.08.100 Sewers.
        All lots intended for development shall be connected to a sanitary sewer system unless the County Health Officer has determined that each lot is adequate to accept a private septic system. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.08.105 Drainage and Erosion Control.
        (a)    Tentative maps shall illustrate the existing and proposed manner in which water drains onto, across and off of the land being subdivided, including the facilities and easements necessary to accommodate the drainage.

        (b)    In the event a subdivider unnaturally concentrates or diverts surface water running onto adjacent land, the map shall illustrate the manner in which such water will be accepted and disposed.

        (c)    If an existing or proposed flood-control channel, as shown on an officially adopted flood-control plan, is located so that any portion of it lies within or adjacent to a subdivision, the channel shall be illustrated on the map as a lettered lot in a width and in an alignment corresponding to the flood-control plan.

        (d)    Where any lot is designed in such a manner that it will not drain with a minimum one percent (1%) grade directly to a street or common drainage facility, it shall be designed in a manner that will conform to the following criteria:

        (1)    Lots shall be designed in such a manner that man-made slopes are not subject to sheet flow or concentrated runoff from either the same or an adjacent lot.

        (2)    All water flowing down man-made slopes, except that falling on each slope, shall be constrained within an approved drainage device.

        (3)    All water flowing from one lot to or across another lot shall be within an approved drainage device located within a properly executed easement, where appropriate.

        (e)    All drainage improvements intended or required to convey stormwater runoff shall be designed and installed or constructed in accordance with the applicable design requirements provisions of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES). (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.08.110 Man-Made Slopes.
        (a)    Man-made slopes shall be designed so that they can be conveniently maintained so as to minimize erosion, slope failure and unsightly conditions.

        (b)    This Section does not apply to man-made slopes five (5) feet in height or less.

        (c)    All man-made slopes shall be shown on tentative maps and shall be designated, labeled, and designed as one of the following slope types:

        (1)    Type “A.” Those proposed to be maintained by a public agency or by a group, such as a homeowners’ association, and which are located either adjacent to an arterial highway or within a park, greenbelt or other public or common open space area.

        (2)    Type “B.” Those proposed to be maintained by a group, such as a homeowners’ association, and which are located within or adjacent to individual lots and which are not within a park, greenbelt or other public or common open space area.

        (3)    Type “C.” Those proposed to be maintained by individuals and which are located within individual lots in such a manner that they are inappropriate for maintenance by a group such as a homeowners’ association.

        (d)    Man-made slopes shall be designed to resemble natural terrain where feasible, with a minimum of long, flat, inclined plane surfaces and acute angles.

        (e)    Man-made slopes shall be no steeper than two (2) feet horizontal to one (1) foot vertical.

        (f)    The maximum height of man-made slopes in excess of (steeper than) five (5) feet horizontal to one (1) foot vertical shall be as follows:

        (1)    Type “A.” No maximum.

        (2)    Type “B.” Thirty-five (35) feet.

        (3)    Type “C.” Twenty (20) feet.

        (g)    Man-made slopes shall not be constructed one on top of another or combined in such a manner so that they exceed the maximum heights specified in Subsection (f) of this Section. However, this limitation shall not apply to adjacent slopes on land abutting the subdivision, provided there is a visual and physical break of at least ten (10) usable feet, exclusive of drainage facilities, between the top of the lower slope and the toe of the upper slope.

        (h)    Lettered lots shall not include Type “C” slopes, unless such slopes will be directly visible from the probable building pad on the lot. In no case may man-made slopes situated downslope from a numbered lot be classified as a Type “C” slope. Such slopes shall be designated as Type “B” slopes.

        (i)     Automatic irrigation systems shall be incorporated into the design of Type “A” and Type “B” slopes. An irrigation system connected to the water system serving the main use of the lot shall be incorporated into the design of Type “C” slopes.

        (j)     The design of man-made slopes shall include landscaping in accordance with the requirements of Section 7.08.120.

        (k)    The design of man-made slopes shall include provisions to incorporate the use of reclaimed water if available within one thousand (1,000) feet of the project boundary. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.08.115 Parks.
        Local parks shall be shown on the tentative map as required by Chapter 7.36 and in a manner consistent with the General Plan. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.08.120 Landscaping and Screening.
        The design of the areas listed below shall include appropriate landscaping for aesthetic, noise suppression, fire protection, and/or erosion-control purposes:

        (a)    Man-made slopes greater than five (5) feet in height;

        (b)    Common areas;

        (c)    Roadway medians and parkway areas;

        (d)    Lots containing existing significant trees or other plants proposed to be preserves;

        (e)    Fuel breaks;

        (f)    Other open space areas. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.08.125 Coastal Zone Subdivisions.
        Any proposed subdivision lying wholly or partially within the coastal zone shall be designed to comply with and implement the goals, policies, and various components of the Land Use Plan of the applicable certified Local Coastal Program.

        (a)    All tentative tract maps and tentative parcel maps shall be processed in compliance with the provisions of Chapter 9.69 of the Zoning Code and/or with the appropriate coastal zone regulations in any applicable specific plan, in addition to the provisions of this Chapter. Each tentative tract and tentative parcel map is considered to be a discretionary permit for purposes of compliance with Chapter 9.69 of the Zoning Code and/or with the appropriate coastal zone regulation in any applicable specific plan.

        (b)    Prior to the approval of any tentative tract or parcel map, the advisory agency shall make the following finding in addition to the findings required by Sections 7.05.060 and 7.05.065: “The tentative map is consistent with the applicable certified Land Use Program and with the approved Coastal Development Permit.”

        If the above finding is not made or if a coastal development permit has not been approved, the tentative map shall not be approved. However, an application for a coastal development permit may accompany the tentative map and be processed concurrently with the map.

        (c)    When the certified Local Coastal Program indicates the location of a public accessway or of any permanent open space or conservation area within the boundaries of a proposed subdivision, such accessway, open space or conservation area shall be shown on the tentative map. When an accessway, open space or conservation area is already in existence at the time a tentative map is filed, the status of such accessway, open space or conservation area, whether public or private, and/or the number, if dedicated to the City, shall be identified on the map.

        When the exact location of a proposed accessway, open space or conservation area is not known at the time the tentative map is filed, a reservation, not to exceed one and one-half (11/2) times the actual accessway, open space or conservation area may be shown, accompanied with a statement that the accessway, open space, or conservation area will be located within the reservation area shown.

        The tentative map shall indicate whether the proposed accessway, open space or conservation area is to be private or public, in compliance with the LCP, and who will be responsible for the operation and maintenance of such accessway, open space or conservation area.

        Prior to recordation of the final map, the offer of dedication or easement for the accessway, open space or conservation areas that are proposed to be dedicated to the City shall be submitted to the Director. Within fifteen (15) working days after the documents have been submitted to the Director, the advisory agency shall make the following findings, if appropriate:

        (1)    The exact location of the accessway, open space or conservation area is within the reserved area shown on the approved tentative map;

        (2)    The accessway, open space or conservation area is consistent with the Land Use Plan of the certified LCP; and

        (3)    All of the proposed language of the document, including any accompanying maps and conditions, complies with all applicable policies and programs of the City.

        (d)    When a tentative map accompanies or follows a coastal development permit, the period of validity of the approval of the tentative map and of any extension of time shall be concurrent with the period of time during which the coastal development permit or any extension thereof is valid.

        (e)    After the final map and the dedication documents have been recorded, the Director shall forward a copy of the recorded documents, together with a copy of the approved tentative map, a copy of the coastal development permit and all applicable conditions and findings of approval to the Executive Director of the Coastal Commission. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.08.130 Rivers and Streams.
        (a)    Any proposed subdivision fronting upon a public waterway, river or stream shall be designed so as to provide reasonable public access by fee or easement from a public highway to and along that portion of the bank of the river or stream bordering or lying within the proposed subdivision. The extent, width and character of the public easement shall be reasonably defined to achieve reasonable public use of the public waterway, river or stream consistent with public safety.

        (b)    The governmental entity to which the access route will be offered for dedication shall be indicated on the map.

        (c)    In determining what is reasonable public access, the following factors shall be considered:

        (1)    That the easement may be for a foot trail, bicycle trail or horse trail;

        (2)    The size of the subdivision;

        (3)    The type of riverbank and the various appropriate recreational, educational and scientific uses, including, but not limited to, swimming, boating, diving, fishing, waterskiing, scientific collection and teaching; and

        (4)    The likelihood of trespass on private property and reasonable means of avoiding such trespass. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.08.135 Fire Protection.
        (a)    Any subdivision proposed to be located in an area shown in the General Plan to be a high or extreme fire hazard area shall provide appropriate fire protection by means of firebreaks, fuel modification programs, access roads, sufficient water supply, landscaping and open spaces, and such other methods that the Fire Chief has determined will ensure the public health, safety and welfare of the future occupants of the subdivision and the adjacent area.

        (b)    The design of any required fuel modification program shall include landscape architectural planning encompassing visual quality standards, watershed impact and erosion control and wildlife impact and other design features described in the fire hazard reduction design criteria. Said program shall include provisions for landscape architectural construction observation, inspection and maintenance.

        (c)    The cost of the design and implementation of any fuel modification program shall be the responsibility of the subdivider.

        (d)    A method or procedure for assuming continued maintenance of any required fuel modification program shall be provided by the subdivider and approved by the Fire Chief and the Director. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.08.140 Dangerous Areas to be Removed or Controlled.
        (a)    Areas proposed to be subdivided which are known to be dangerous by reason of geological conditions, unstable subsurface conditions, groundwater or seepage conditions, flood hazard, inundation or erosion by the ocean, or any other dangerous conditions, shall be approved for subdivision only when the Subdivision Committee finds that such conditions or hazards are to be removed or that appropriate measures or controls will be applied which will assure adequate protection to the subject property and to surrounding uses and improvements.

        (b)    Areas proposed for subdivision in FP-1, FP-2 and FP-3 Districts as defined in Chapter 9.31 of the Zoning Code shall provide for flood protection meeting the criteria set forth in the said regulations for all building sites. Flood elevation data adequate for such determination shall be provided for all subdivision proposals adjacent to or encroaching into FP Districts as provided in Chapter 9.31 of the Zoning Code. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.08.145 Deviations from Standards of Design.
        (a)    The Subdivision Committee may approve or conditionally approve tentative maps which deviate from the standards of design contained in the following sections:

 

        7.08.030   Lots/Parcels.

        7.08.035   Arterial Highways.

        7.08.045   Restricted Access to Highways.

        7.08.050   Street Widths.

        7.08.055   Dead-End or Cul-de-Sac Streets.

        7.08.060   Local Street and Highway Grades.

        7.08.065   Curved Local Street and Highway Radii.

        7.08.075   Local Street and Highway Corner Cutoffs and Corner Radii.

        7.08.080   Sidewalks and Pedestrianways.

        7.08.085   Bicycle and Equestrian Trails.

        7.08.090   Street Lighting.

        7.08.095   Underground Utility Lines.

        7.08.110   Man-Made Slopes.

        7.08.120   Landscaping and Screening.

        7.08.135   Fire Protection.

 

        (b)    The deviations from the standards of design contained in the Sections listed in Subsection (a) of this Section shall be identified by a note on the face of the tentative map, and the subdivider shall submit evidence of justification for each deviation.

        (c)    Special circumstances which may be cited to justify a deviation from the standards of design listed in Subsection (a) of this Section include, but are not limited to, the character of the community, alternative means of pedestrian circulation, environmental considerations, physical constraints, existing nearby uses, and a limited amount of ultimate traffic.

        (d)    A deviation from any of the standards listed in Subsection (a) of this Section may be approved only if the Subdivision Committee makes the following findings:

        (1)    That the requested deviation(s) will not have any detrimental impact on the health, safety or welfare of the residents or tenants of the proposed subdivision or the residents and/or tenants of surrounding properties;

        (2)    That the requested deviation(s) will not result in a subdivision which would be incompatible with the pattern of surrounding development;

        (3)    That the requested deviation(s) will not negatively impact the carrying capacity of the local vehicular circulation network;

        (4)    That the requested deviation(s) is necessary in order to create a land plan that is sensitive to environmental or physical constraints on or adjacent to the project site;

        (5)    That the requested deviation(s) will not result in any obstacles to the normal pedestrian circulation patterns;

        (6)    That the requested deviation(s) will create an enhanced site design that is clearly superior to a subdivision that would be built in accordance with the required standard(s).

        (e)    The Subdivision Committee shall take specific action on each requested deviation. Deviations not specifically approved shall be considered to be disapproved. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.08.150 Floodplain.
        Areas proposed for subdivision in floodplains shall comply with the following:

        (a)    All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.

        (b)    All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.

        (c)    All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage.

        (d)    Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and other proposed development. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

Chapter 7.10 DEDICATION
7.10.010 Required Dedication for Public Use or Benefit.
        The Subdivision Committee may require the dedication to the public, to the City or to such other public agency as may be appropriate of all real property or interest therein both on and off site which is required for public use or benefit, including but not limited to, the following:

        (a)    Local streets, arterial highways and transportation corridors;

        (b)    Alleys;

        (c)    Trails, paths and pedestrianways;

        (d)    Flood-control facilities;

        (e)    Parks;

        (f)    Easements for landscaping maintenance;

        (g)    Public utility easements;

        (h)    Public transit facilities;

        (i)     Other public easements;

        (j)     Accessways to the shoreline or to lakes and reservoirs as provided in Sections 7.08.125 and 7.08.130. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.10.015 Transfer of Ownership Required for Private Use or Benefit.
        The Subdivision Committee may require that the items listed in Section 7.10.010 be deeded for private use or benefit to a homeowners’ association or other responsible body. However, in no event shall dedications of a fee interest be made to any public or private utility. Dedications required for utilities shall be made in fee simple to the City, which shall provide for utility service pursuant to the terms of the appropriate franchise. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.10.020 Vehicular Access Rights and Abutters’ Rights to Arterial Highways and Local Streets.
        Whenever specified by the Subdivision Committee, offers of dedication of arterial highways or transportation corridors shall include the release and relinquishment of vehicular access rights to and from such facilities from any property shown within a final tract or parcel map abutting thereon. When the local agency finds that there is a particular circulation problem on a local street, release and relinquishment of access rights to and from said local street may be required. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.10.025 Elementary School Sites.
        The subdivider submitting a tentative tract map may be required to dedicate land for the elementary school facilities necessary to assure the residents of the subdivision adequate public school service in accordance with the requirements and procedures set forth in the Subdivision Map Act. Whenever the Subdivision Committee imposes such a dedication requirement, it may concurrently approve an alternate tentative map, to be effective in the event the school district affected does not enter into a binding commitment within thirty (30) days to accept the dedication. A dedication pursuant to this Section shall only be required at the request of a school district made within twenty (20) working days of the notice given pursuant to Section 7.05.020. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.10.030 Dedications for Utilities.
        Dedications required for utility purposes shall be made in fee simple to the City. In no event shall dedications for utility purposes be made to any public or private utility. Such dedications are to be made in fee simple to the City which shall provide for utility service pursuant to the terms of the appropriate franchise. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.10.035 Method of Dedication.
        Dedications and offers of dedication shall be made by a certificate on the final tract or parcel map. Separate instruments may be used with the approval of the Director, when permitted by law and when the subdivider intends to dedicate or offer for dedication real property prior to the approval of a final tract or parcel map. The City shall record a certificate with the County Recorder for that dedicated property except that which is used for open space, parks or schools. The certificate shall be attached to the map and shall contain the following information:

        (a)    The name and address of the subdivider dedicating the property;

        (b)    A legal description of the real property dedicated; and

        (c)    A statement that the City shall reconvey the property to the subdivider if the City makes a determination that the same public purpose for which the property was dedicated does not exist, or the property or any portion thereof is not needed for public utilities.

        The subdivider may request that the City make a determination that the same public purpose for which the dedication was required still exists, after payment of a fee which shall not exceed the amount reasonably required to make the determination. If the City decides to vacate, lease, sell or otherwise dispose of the dedicated property, the City shall give at least sixty (60) days’ notice to the subdivider whose name appears on the certificate before vacating, leasing, selling or otherwise disposing of the dedicated property. This notice is not required if the dedicated property will be used for the same public purpose for which it was dedicated. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.10.040 Exceptions.
        Dedications required by Section 7.10.010 shall not be required for any remainder parcel which is sufficient as to size and shape to be further divided in compliance with applicable zoning regulations, provided the Subdivision Committee determines that such dedications and improvements are not immediately necessary for public use or benefit and that the property owner will not be excused from a requirement to dedicate and install necessary improvements at a later time. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

Chapter 7.12 IMPROVEMENTS, MONUMENTATION AND SECURITY
7.12.010 Improvements Required.
        (a)    The subdivider shall grade and improve or agree to grade and improve all land shown on the final tract or parcel map for those dedications listed in Section 7.10.010. This shall be accomplished in compliance with the requirements of the approved tentative map in such a manner and with such improvements as are necessary for the general use of the lot or parcel owners in the subdivision and local traffic and drainage needs as a condition precedent to the approval and acceptance of the final tract or parcel map. All elevations shall be based on current Orange County Surveyor Vertical Datum. The grading plans and improvement plans shall make reference to the bench mark and elevation used for the design and engineering.

        (b)    The subdivider may be required to improve or agree to improve those dedications which are necessary or convenient to ensure conformity to or implementation of the General Plan. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.12.015 Subdivisions of Four or Less Parcels.
        (a)    Required improvements shall be noticed by certificate on the final parcel map or the instrument evidencing waiver of the parcel map. Except as otherwise specified in Subsection (c) of this Section, the certificate shall include a requirement for fulfillment of such improvements prior to issuance of any building permit or other grant of approval for development of the parcel, or for installation of the improvements at such earlier time as provided in the agreement.

        (b)    The agreement required by Section 7.12.030 shall be entered into prior to the Director’s approval of the parcel map for recordation, or prior to granting a waiver of the parcel map. Except as otherwise specified in Subsection (c) of this Section, the agreement shall provide for installation of the improvements prior to the granting of any building permit or other grant of approval for development of the parcel, or for the installation of the improvements at such earlier time as provided in the agreement.

        (c)    The requirements for installation of the improvements prior to issuance of building permits may be omitted from a parcel map when such a requirement is not a condition of approval of the parcel map or waiver of parcel map. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.12.020 Standards.
        Improvements shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the standards of design contained in Chapter 7.08 of this Code, the Standard Plans, and any other applicable standards adopted by the City Council. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.12.025 Improvement Plans.
        All improvement plans for the improvements proposed to be installed within or supplemental to the final tract or parcel map must be approved by the appropriate agency prior to approval of the final tract or parcel map. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.12.030 Agreements in Lieu of Improvements.
        If any improvements are not completed satisfactorily or any monuments not set before the final tract or parcel map is approved, the subdivider shall enter into an agreement with the City whereby, in consideration of the approval by the City of the final tract or parcel map, the subdivider agrees to perform and to furnish the equipment and material necessary to complete the required work within the time specified in the agreement. Such agreement shall be accompanied by security as provided in Sections 7.12.040 and 7.12.050. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.12.035 Plan Checking, Engineering and Inspection Fees.
        Subdivider(s) submitting detailed plans and specifications for approval required by Section 7.12.025 shall pay plan checking, engineering and inspection fees as established by resolution of the City Council:

        (a)    Engineering fee prior to approval of the plan check by the City Engineer; and

        (b)    Inspection fee prior to starting construction of bonded improvement at then applicable rates. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.12.040 Improvement Security.
        Security in the form specified by the Subdivision Map Act shall be furnished with every improvement agreement.

        (a)    If bonds are furnished by one (1) of the authorized corporate sureties:

        (1)    A performance bond in the amount of one hundred percent (100%) of the estimated cost of the improvement.

        (2)    A payment bond in the amount of one hundred percent (100%) of the estimated cost of the improvement.

        (b)    If money, instrument of credit or negotiable bonds are furnished, the amount of the security shall be one hundred percent (100%) of the estimated cost of the improvement. Said money, instrument of credit or negotiable bonds shall apply to both faithful performance and payment to the contractor, subcontractor, laborers, materialmen and other persons employed in the performance of the agreement. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.12.045 Release of Security.
        The Director is authorized to release security in accordance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and the Dana Point Municipal Code herein. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.12.050 Monumentation.
        (a)    Monuments shall be set for each tract and parcel map in accordance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and in accordance with the rules and procedures approved by the Director.

        (b)    The agreement referred to in Section 7.12.030 shall be accompanied by security in a sum not less than the cost of setting such monuments. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.12.055 Extension of Time.
        The Director is authorized to grant an extension of time to the agreement as specified in Section 7.12.030 if, in the Director’s opinion, a delay in the completion of the improvements is justified and the delay will not cause substantial inconvenience to the general public. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

Chapter 7.14 FEES IN LIEU OF DEDICATION OR IMPROVEMENT
7.14.010 Local Park Fees.
        Local park fees shall be paid as required by Section 7.36.050. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.14.015 Drainage Fees.
        (a)    The City Council may, from time to time after a public hearing and written notice to the owners of property therein, adopt master plans of drainage for various areas of the City. Such plans shall contain an estimate of the total costs of constructing the local drainage facilities required by the plan and a map of the area showing its boundaries and the location of the planned facilities.

        (b)    Upon filing of a final tract or parcel map and as a condition of approval of said final tract or parcel map, a drainage fee shall be paid to the Director for deposit in a local drainage facilities fund in the amount set forth in the legislative action adopting and establishing a master plan of drainage, if any, within which any portions of the subdivision may lie. Such charges and fees collected as a condition of subdivision approval shall hereinafter be referred to as drainage fees. In the event local drainage facilities are being constructed by the subdivider in conjunction with the subdivider’s improvements, an agreement to construct local drainage facilities may be accepted in lieu of part or all payment of drainage fees.

        (c)    The funds derived from the drainage fees shall be used for purposes of defraying the cost of designing and constructing planned local drainage facilities for the removal of surface and storm waters from the local drainage area described in such master plan of drainage.

        (d)    The City Council, in adopting a master plan of drainage, shall find and determine that the subdivision and development of property will require construction of the facilities described in said master plan and that the drainage fees are fairly apportioned within the local drainage area, both on the basis of benefits conferred on property proposed for subdivision and on the need for local drainage facilities within such area which would be assessable on such property if such costs were apportioned uniformly on a per-acre basis.

        (e)    The fee as to any property proposed for subdivision within an area covered by a master plan of drainage shall not exceed the pro rata share of the amount of the total estimated cost of all facilities within such area which would be assessable on such property if such costs were apportioned uniformly on a per-acre basis.

        (f)    Drainage fees required by this Section shall be paid into a local drainage facilities fund. A separate fund shall be established within each local drainage area. Moneys in such funds shall be expended for engineering and administrative services to obtain construction and on engineering and administrative services to obtain design of local drainage facilities by a duly registered civil engineer of those local drainage facilities within the planned local drainage area from which the fees comprising the fund were collected.

        (g)    At the discretion of the City Council, rights-of-way dedication, actual construction and design by a duly registered civil engineer, and payment of plan check, engineering and inspection fees for the improvement of local drainage facilities described in a duly adopted master plan of drainage may be accepted in lieu of the payment of drainage fees.

        (h)    Moneys may be advanced by the City from its General Fund or other sources to pay the cost of local drainage facilities within a local drainage area having a duly adopted master plan of drainage, and subsequently such moneys advanced may be reimbursed from the local drainage facilities fund for the local drainage area in which the drainage facilities described in the master plan were constructed.

        (i)     When required for the implementation of a duly adopted master plan of drainage so as to provide adequate drainage for a subdivision, an agreement may be entered into between the subdivider and City whereby the subdivider may advance funds for local drainage facilities within a local drainage area; provided, that the sole security for payment of funds or other consideration advanced shall be moneys subsequently accruing to a local drainage facilities fund for said local drainage area in which the facilities are constructed. Reimbursement shall be for the amount advanced only and shall not include interest or other charges.

        (j)     After completion of the facilities and the payment of all claims from any planned local drainage facilities fund, the City Council shall determine by resolution the amount of surplus, if any, remaining in any of such funds. Any such surplus shall be used, in such amounts as the Council may determine, for one (1) or more of the following purposes:

        (1)    For transfer to the General Fund of the City, provided that the amount of such transfer shall not exceed five percent (5%) of the total amount expended from the particular fund;

        (2)    For the construction of additional or modified facilities within the particular drainage or sanitary sewer area; or

        (3)    As a refund in the manner provided in Subsection (k) of this Section.

        (k)    Any surplus remaining in a planned local drainage facilities fund shall be refunded as follows:

        (1)    There shall be refunded to the current owners of property for which a fee was previously collected the balance of such moneys in the same proportion which each individual fee collected bears to the total of all individual fees collected from the particular drainage or sewer area.

        (2)    Where property for which a fee was previously collected has subsequently been subdivided into more than one lot, each current owner of a lot shall share in the refund payable to the owners of the property for which a fee was previously collected in the same proportion which the area of each individual lot bears to the total area of the property for which a fee was previously collected.

        (3)    There shall be transferred to the General Fund of the City any remaining portion of the surplus which has not been paid to or claimed by the persons entitled thereto within two (2) years from the date either of the completion of the improvements or the adoption by the City Council of a resolution declaring a surplus, whichever is later to occur. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

Chapter 7.18 MAJOR THOROUGHFARE AND BRIDGE FEES
7.18.010 Definitions.
        “Area of benefit” means a specified area wherein it has been determined that the real property located therein will benefit from the construction of a major thoroughfare or bridge project.

        “Bridge facilities” mean those locations identified in the transportation or flood control provisions of the Circulation Element or other element of the General Plan as requiring a bridge to span a waterway, a railway, freeway or canyon.

        The term “construction” as used in this Chapter includes preliminary studies, design, acquisition of right-of-way, administration of construction contacts, and actual construction.

        The term “major thoroughfare” means those roads designated as transportation corridors and major, primary, secondary, or commuter highways on the Master Plan of Arterial Highways in the Circulation Element of the General Plan. The primary purpose of such roads is to carry through traffic and provide a network connecting to and including the highway system. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.18.015 General Plan Applicability.
        The provisions herein for payment of a fee shall apply only if the major thoroughfare or bridge facility has been included in an element of the General Plan adopted by the City Council at least thirty (30) days prior to the filing of a map or application for a building permit and on land located within the boundaries of the area of benefit. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.18.020 Joint Powers Authority.
        For purposes of carrying out the provisions of this Chapter and in accordance with Government Code Section 66484.3, the City may enter into joint exercise of powers agreements with other local agencies and/or may form joint powers authorities and/or joint powers agencies.

        Fees paid pursuant to this Chapter may be utilized to defray all direct and indirect financing costs related to the construction of the bridges and major thoroughfares by the joint powers agency. Because the financing costs of bridges and major thoroughfares for which a toll charge shall be established or collected represent a necessary element of the total cost of those bridges and major thoroughfares, the joint powers agency constructing those facilities may include a charge for financing costs in the calculation of the fee rate. The charge shall be based on the estimated financing cost of any eligible portion of the bridges and major thoroughfares for which tolls shall be collected. The eligible portion shall be any or all portions of the major thoroughfare for which a viable financial plan has been adopted by the joint powers agency on the basis of revenues reasonably expected by the joint powers agency to be available to the thoroughfare, after consultation with representatives of the fee payers.

        For purposes of calculating the charge, financing costs shall include only reasonable allowances for payments and charges for principal, interest and premium on indebtedness, letter of credit fees and charges, remarketing fees and charges, underwriters’ discount and other costs of issuance, less net earnings on bridge and major thoroughfare funds by the joint powers agency prior to the opening of the facility to traffic after giving effect to any payments from the fund to preserve the federal income tax exemption on the indebtedness. For purposes of calculating the charge for financing costs in the calculation of the fee rate only, financing costs shall not include any allowance for the cost of any interest paid on indebtedness with regard to each eligible portion after the estimated opening of the portion to traffic as established by the joint powers agency. Any and all challenges to any financial plan or financing costs adopted or calculated pursuant to this Section shall be governed by Government Code Section 66484.3(k). (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

Chapter 7.20 TAXES AND ASSESSMENTS
7.20.010 Certificate from Tax Collector-Treasurer.
        Prior to the filing of a final tract map with the City Council, the subdivider shall file with the Orange County Surveyor a certificate from the Orange County Tax Collector-Treasurer stating that, according to the records of such office, there are no liens against the subdivision or any part thereof for unpaid state, county, municipal or local taxes or special assessments collected as taxes, except taxes or special assessments collected as taxes not yet payable. The subdivider shall file with the Orange County Surveyor a certificate by the Orange County Tax Collector-Treasurer giving his/her estimate of the amount of taxes and special assessments collected as taxes and special assessments collected as taxes which are a lien but not yet payable. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.20.015 Security.
        Whenever any part of the subdivision is subject to a lien for taxes or special assessments collected as taxes which are not yet payable, the final map shall not be recorded until the owner or subdivider executes and files with the Orange County Surveyor security conditioned upon the payment of all state, County, municipal and local taxes and the current installment of principal and interest of all special assessments collected as taxes, which at the time the final map is recorded are a lien against the property, but which are not yet payable. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.20.020 Apportionment.
        The apportionment of security and delinquencies shall be handled in accordance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

Chapter 7.22 PARCEL MAPS—REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES
7.22.010 Content and Form.
        The content and form of parcel maps shall be governed by the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and the Subdivision Manual. The Subdivision Committee may require additional information to be filed or recorded simultaneously with the map. The additional information shall be in the form of an additional map sheet which shall indicate its relationship to the map and contain a statement that the additional information is for informational purposes. Such additional information may include, but is not limited to, building setback lines, flood hazard zones, seismic lines and setbacks, geologic mapping, archaeological sites and possible boundary or title conflicts. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.22.015 Final Parcel Map Required.
        (a)    When a subdivision is proposed to be created through the tentative parcel map process, a final parcel map shall be filed for recording with the County Recorder and the County Surveyor pursuant to Government Code Section 66466. No proposed subdivision shall be complete until such parcel map has been filed for recording with the County Surveyor unless a waiver has been approved. If a tentative parcel map is filed and approved, the final parcel map shall be approved by the City Council in accordance with Sections 66457 and 66458 of the Government Code.

        (b)    A final parcel map, within commercial or industrial zoned areas, identifying lease line or lines for tax purposes may be filed for recording with the County Recorder without being required to comply with the tentative parcel map requirements of this Subdivision Code. Each parcel on such map shall be identified by letter and shall not be considered to be a separate building site. No transfers of fee title may be made in connection with such map. Identification shall be shown on the face of such map as to its purpose that it does not create building sites and that it does not permit transfer of fee title interest. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.22.020 Signatures Required.
        (a)    When dedications or offers of dedications are made on the final parcel map, all parties having any record title interest in the real property being subdivided shall consent to the preparation and recordation of the final parcel map by signing the required certificate. Such signatures shall be properly acknowledged. The certificate need not be signed by public entities and public utilities which own rights-of-way, easement or other interests which cannot ripen into a fee; provided, that:

        (1)    The Subdivision Committee determines that division and development of the property in the manner set forth on the map will not unreasonably interfere with the free and complete exercise of the public entity or public utility right-of-way or easement;

        (2)    The map contains a statement that the Subdivision Committee has determined that the division and development of the property in the manner set forth on the map will not unreasonably interfere with the free and complete exercise of the public entity or public utility right-of-way or easement; and

        (3)    The public entity or utility has been given the opportunity to object to such a determination in accordance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act.

        (b)    When dedications or offers of dedications are not being made, no owners’ or subdividers’ signature shall be required on the parcel map. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.22.025 Method of Approval.
        (a)    Final Parcel Map. The final parcel map shall be submitted to the Director, who shall examine the map within twenty (20) days of receipt thereof. If the Director is satisfied that the map is technically correct and conforms with the approved tentative parcel map and any conditions imposed thereon, the Director shall execute the certificate required by the Subdivision Map Act. Such certification by the Director shall constitute approval of the final parcel map.

        (b)    Agreements and Security. Whenever, as a condition of an approved tentative parcel map, agreements and/or security are required for installation of certain improvements, said agreements and security shall be approved by the City Council prior to recordation of the final parcel map. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.22.030 Filing with the County Recorder and County Surveyor.
        The Director shall transmit the approved final parcel map to the County Recorder for recordation within twenty (20) days from the time the parcel map is submitted for approval, unless the Director or subdivider requests an alternate time schedule for recordation. It shall be the obligation of the subdivider to cause a copy of the approved final parcel map to be filed with the County Surveyor in accordance with Government Code Section 66466. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

Chapter 7.24 FINAL MAPS—REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES
7.24.010 Content and Form.
        The content and form of final tract maps shall be governed by the provision of the Subdivision Map Act and the Subdivision Manual. The Subdivision Committee may require additional information to be filed or recorded simultaneously with the map. The additional information shall be in the form of an additional map sheet which shall indicate its relationship to the map and contain a statement that the additional information is for informational purposes. Such additional information may include, but is not limited to, building setback lines, flood hazard zones, seismic lines and setbacks, geologic mapping, archaeological sites and possible boundary or title conflicts. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.24.015 Final Tract Map Required.
        When a subdivision is proposed to be created through the tentative tract map process, a final tract map shall be filed for recording with the County Recorder and the County Surveyor pursuant to Government Code Section 66466. No proposed subdivision shall be complete until such tract map has been filed for recording. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.24.020 Signatures Required.
        All parties having any record title interest in the real property being subdivided shall consent to the preparation and recordation of the tract map by signing the required certificate. Such signatures shall be properly acknowledged. The certificate need not be signed by public entities and public utilities which own rights-of-way, easements or other interests which cannot ripen into a fee; provided, that:

        (a)    Division and development of the property in the manner set forth on the map will not unreasonably interfere with the free and complete exercise of the public entity or public utility right-of-way or easement;

        (b)    The map contains a statement that the Subdivision Committee has determined that the division and development of the property in the manner set forth on the map will not unreasonably interfere with the free and complete exercise of public entity or public utility right-of-way or easement; and

        (c)    The public entity or utility has been given an opportunity to object to such a determination in accordance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.24.025 Method of Approval.
        Final tract maps, together with any required improvement agreements and security, shall be submitted to the City Engineer for review and preliminary determination as to:

        (a)    Compliance with any conditions imposed on the approval of the tentative map;

and

        (b)    Substantial conformance with the approved tentative map and any improved alterations thereof.

        In the event the City Engineer determines that the subdivision is not in compliance or substantial conformance, the Director shall within ten (10) days of the date the final map was submitted, advise the subdivider in writing of his/her preliminary determination. The subdivider may appeal the Director’s determination to the Subdivision Committee or directly to the City Council in the event the map was originally approved on appeal to the City Council. Any such appeal shall be filed and heard in accordance with Section 2.04.10 et seq. of this Code. Upon hearing any such appeal, the Subdivision Committee or City Council shall make an advisory ruling to the City Engineer. The final determination as to whether the final tract map is in compliance and substantial conformance shall be made by the City Engineer.

        Within twenty (20) days (or more if requested by the subdivider) after the City Engineer determines that all conditions precedent to the approval of the tract map have been satisfied and any required improvement agreements and security are in order, the Director shall execute the certificate required by the Subdivision Map Act. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.24.030 Filing with the City Council.
        After the City Engineer executes the certificate, the Director shall transmit the tract map to the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall present the map and any required agreements, securities and approvals to the City Council for their approval and execution of the certificate by the City Clerk. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.24.035 Filing with the County Recorder and County Surveyor.
        The City Engineer shall transmit the approved final tract map to the County Surveyor for its certificate, then to the County Recorder for recordation, unless the City Engineer or subdivider requests an alternate time schedule for recordation. It shall be the obligation of the subdivider to cause a copy of the approved final tract map to be filed with the County Surveyor in accordance with Government Code Section 66466. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

Chapter 7.26 WAIVERS AND EXCEPTIONS
7.26.010 Waivers and Exceptions Permitted.
        When requested by the subdivider or by a governmental agency, waivers from the requirement for recording a parcel map and exceptions to the tentative map process may be approved, by the Subdivision Committee in compliance with the provisions of this Chapter. When any such waiver request is approved, a certificate of compliance may be recorded in lieu of a parcel map. The requirement for recording a parcel map shall not be waived when the Director finds that a survey and/or monumentation is necessary. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.26.015 Types of Subdivisions Eligible.
        Only the following types of subdivisions are eligible to receive a waiver from the requirement for recording a parcel map:

        (a)    Subdivisions containing four (4) or less parcels each of which is a minimum of five (5) acres in area and is proposed for further subdivision;

        (b)    Subdivisions wherein each parcel will have a gross area of twenty (20) acres or more and a right of vehicular access for a continuous width of not less than forty (40) feet to a maintained public street or highway having a right-of-way width of not less than forty (40) feet;

        (c)    Subdivisions wherein each parcel will have a gross area of not less than forty (40) acres.

        (d)    Subdivisions in accordance with Government Code Section 66428.1 if at least two-thirds of the owners of mobile homes who are tenants in the mobile home park sign a petition indicating their intent to purchase the mobile home park for purposes of converting it to tenant-owned, condominium ownership interest, and a field survey is performed, the requirement for a parcel map as a tentative and final map specified by Section 66426 of the Government Code, shall be waived unless any of the following exist:

        (1)    There are significant design or improvement requirements necessitated by health or safety concerns;

        (2)    Subsequent to recordation of the existing parcel or final map, there is an exterior boundary discrepancy that requires recordation of a new parcel or tentative and final map;

        (3)    The existing lot or lots were not created by a recorded parcel or final map;

        (4)    The conversion would result in the creation of additional parcels.

 

        If pursuant to Government Code Section 66428, the City imposes requirements on the applicant to mitigate health or safety conditions, no improvement bonds or other security device, except an unsecured improvement agreement, may be required. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.26.020 Waiver Procedure.
        A waiver from the requirement for recording a parcel map may be approved in compliance with the following procedure:

        (a)    A tentative map accurately describing the existing legally created parcel and each proposed parcel shall be submitted. Such tentative map shall be processed in compliance with the tentative map procedure except that it need not be prepared by a licensed land surveyor or civil engineer and need include only such information that the Director and the Subdivision Committee find to be necessary in order to make the required determinations.

        (b)    A waiver request shall accompany the tentative map. The exception to the tentative map requirements specified in Subsection (a) of this Section is permitted only when a tentative map proposes one of the subdivisions specified by Section 7.26.015 and when such map is accompanied by a waiver request.

        (c)    Prior to any action by the Subdivision Committee to approve a waiver, the Director shall examine the map and shall identify each proposed parcel as a building site or a non-building site.

        (d)    Prior to any action to approve a waiver, the Subdivision Committee shall find that the subdivision:

        (1)    Will comply with City requirements as to area, improvement and design, floodwater drainage control, appropriate improved public roads, sanitary disposal facilities, water supply availability, and environmental protection;

        (2)    Will satisfy any other requirements pertaining to the subdivision of land as specified in the Subdivision Map Act, the Subdivision Code, and any other applicable City ordinance; and

        (3)    Will not create any unnecessary conditions or situations that will be incompatible with existing and possible future uses of adjacent properties. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.26.025 Waiver Does Not Establish Parcels.
        The approval of a waiver of the requirement to record a parcel map does not create a subdivision or satisfy the requirements applicable to the division of a parcel of land. Any parcels shown on a tentative map for which a parcel map has been waived shall not be considered to be legally established until a certificate of compliance for such parcels has been filed in the Office of the County Recorder. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.26.030 Time to Record a Certificate of Compliance.
        A waiver of the requirement to record a parcel map is valid only for such time as the subject tentative map is valid, and a waiver approval shall expire concurrently with the expiration of the tentative map approval. After a waiver has been approved and within the period of validity of a tentative map, and when the Director has determined that all conditions and requirements of the tentative map have been satisfied, the Director shall cause a certificate of compliance to be recorded in compliance with the provisions of Chapter 7.30 of the Subdivision Code. In the event any required conditions have not been satisfied a conditional certificate of compliance may be recorded within the specified time period. Such conditional certificate of compliance shall contain a notice of the conditions that are required to be satisfied prior to the recordation of a certificate of compliance. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.26.035 Waiver for New Condominium Project.
        The requirements of the Subdivision Code are automatically waived when a new condominium project is created or established on an existing building site. This waiver is not applicable to an existing development project which is converted to a condominium project. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

Chapter 7.28 REVERSIONS TO ACREAGE
7.28.010 Reversion Authorized.
        Subdivided real property may be reverted to acreage pursuant to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act, this Chapter and the Subdivision Manual. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.28.015 Content and Form of Petitions for Reversion to Acreage.
        Petitions shall conform with such requirements as to form and content as may be specified in the Subdivision Manual and shall include a final tract map. If the land to be reverted consists of four (4) or less contiguous parcels under the same ownership, a parcel map may be submitted in lieu of the tract map. No reversion shall be complete until such map has been filed for recording with the County Recorder. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.28.020 Subdivision Committee Review.
        Petitions for reversion to acreage shall be reviewed by the Subdivision Committee. They shall make recommendations thereon to the Director within thirty (30) days of the date the petition was filed with the Director. Thereafter, the Director shall transmit the petition and the Subdivision Committee’s recommendations to the City Clerk, who shall set the matter for public hearing before the City Council. The Clerk shall publish a notice of the time and place of said hearing in accordance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and give written notice of the hearing to the petitioners. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.28.025 City Council Hearing.
        At the conclusion of the public hearing, the City Council may make such findings, including those set forth in the Subdivision Map Act, as the City Council deems appropriate. If the City Council intends to approve the reversion to acreage, the Council shall impose the conditions required by the Subdivision Map Act. If the proposed final or parcel map has been approved by the Director, the City Council may approve the reversion and authorize transmitting the map to the County Recorder for recordation. The City Council may disapprove the proposed reversion or my continue the matter until the final tract map or parcel map has been approved by the Director. Thereafter, the City Council may approve the reversion and authorize transmitting the map to the County Recorder for recordation. The Director shall then transmit the approved final tract or parcel map to the County Recorder for recordation, unless the Director or subdivider requests an alternate time schedule for recordation. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

Chapter 7.30 CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE
7.30.010 Approval.
        Certificates of compliance shall be approved by the Director. Conditional certificates of compliance shall be approved by the Subdivision Committee. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.30.015 Procedure.
        Requests for a certificate of compliance shall be processed and reviewed in compliance with the provisions and procedures set forth in the Subdivision Manual and Sections 66412.6 and 66499.35 of the Subdivision Map Act. No certificate of compliance or conditional certificate of compliance shall be valid until it has been recorded in the Office of the County Recorder. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.30.020 Appeal to City Council.
        Any interested person may appeal to the City Council from any action of the Director of Public Works on a certificate of compliance in accordance with Section 2.04.100 et seq. of this Code. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

Chapter 7.32 LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS
7.32.010 Application—Approval.
        For the purposes of this Chapter, a lot line adjustment is any division of land not requiring a subdivision tract map, as specified by the Subdivision Map Act, where adjustment is sought between two or more existing adjacent parcels, the land taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel, and a greater number of parcels than originally existed is not thereby created. The lot line adjustment shall be approved by the Director and the City Engineer as the advisory agency for purposes of the Subdivision Map Act.

        The City Engineer shall initially review the application for a lot line adjustment to determine if the application is complete. Thereafter, the Director and City Engineer shall limit their review and approval to a determination of whether or not the parcels resulting from the lot line adjustment will conform to the Zoning Code and this Code. In reviewing lot line adjustments proposals, the Director and City Engineer shall not impose conditions or exactions on the approval of a lot line adjustment except to conform to the Zoning Code and this Code, to facilitate the relocation of existing utilities, infrastructure, or easements and to require the prepayment of real property taxes prior to the approval of the lot line adjustment.

        No tentative map, parcel map or final map shall be required as a condition to the approval of a lot line adjustment. Any lot line adjustment so approved shall be reflected in a deed which shall be recorded. No record of survey shall be required for a lot line adjustment unless required by Business and Professions Code Section 872. The decision to approve or deny a lot line adjustment by the Director and the City Engineer, acting as the advisory agency, shall be in writing and sent by mail to the applicant within fifty (50) days from the date the application was complete. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.32.015 Parcel Map Optional.
        Nothing in this Chapter shall prohibit an applicant for a lot line adjustment from submitting a tentative parcel map in lieu of the procedure outlined herein. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.32.020 Appeal.
        Any person adversely affected by a decision of the advisory agency for this Chapter, may appeal that decision to the Planning Commission in accordance with Section 2.04.100 et seq. of this Code. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

Chapter 7.33 MERGER OF PARCELS
7.33.010 Authority to Merge Parcels.
        (a)    The Director is authorized to accept applications for the merger of two contiguous parcels or units of land with a contiguous parcel, or units of land held by the same owner if any one of the contiguous parcels or units of land held by the same owner does not conform to the standards for minimum parcel size, under the Zoning Code of the City applicable to the parcels or units of land, if all of the following requirements are satisfied:

        (1)    At least one (1) of the affected parcels is undeveloped by any structure for which a building permit was issued or for which a building permit was not required at the time of construction, or is developed only with an accessory structure or accessory structures, or is developed with a single structure, other than an accessory structure, that is also partially sited on a contiguous parcel or unit.

        (2)    With respect to any affected parcel, one (1) or more of the following conditions exists:

        (A)   The parcel comprises less than five thousand (5,000) square feet in area at the time of the determination of merger.

        (B)   The parcel was not created in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances in effect at the time of its creation.

        (C)   The parcel does not meet current standards for sewage disposal and domestic water supply.

        (D)   The parcel does not meet slope stability standards.

        (E)   The parcel has no legal access which is adequate for vehicular and safety equipment access and maneuverability.

        (F)    The parcel development would create health or safety hazards.

        (G)   The parcel is inconsistent with the applicable general plan and any applicable specific plan, other than minimum lot size or density standards.

        (b)    For purposes of determining whether contiguous parcels are held by the same owner, ownership shall be determined as of the date that notice of intention to determine status is recorded as provided by Section 7.33.020.

        (c)    The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply if any one of the following conditions exist:

        (1)    On or before July 1, 1981, one (1) or more of the contiguous parcels or units of land is enforceable restricted open-space land pursuant to a contract, agreement, scenic restriction or open space easement, as defined and set forth in Section 421 of the Revenue and Taxation Code.

        (2)    On July 1, 1981, one (1) or more of the contiguous parcels or units of land is timberland as defined in subdivision (f) of Section 51104 of the Government Code or is land devoted to an agricultural use as defined in subdivision (b) of Section 51201 of the Government Code.

        (3)    On July 1, 1981, one (1) or more of the contiguous parcels or units of land is located within two thousand (2,000) feet of the site on which an existing commercial mineral resource extraction use is being made, whether or not the extraction is being made pursuant to a use permit issued by the City.

        (4)    On July 1, 1981, one (1) or more of the contiguous parcels or units of land is located within two thousand (2,000) feet of a future commercial mineral resource extraction site as shown on a plan for which a use permit or other permit authorizing commercial mineral resource extraction has been issued by the City.

        (d)    For purposes of Subsections (c)(3) and (c)(4) of this Section, “commercial mineral resource extraction site” means gas, oil, hydrocarbon, gravel or sand extraction, geothermal wells, or other similar commercial mining activity. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.33.015 Recordation of Notice.
        A merger of parcels becomes effective when the City causes to be filed for recording with the County Recorder a notice of merger specifying the names of the record owners and particularly describing the real property. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.33.020 Notice of Intent to Determine Status.
        Prior to recording a notice of merger, the City shall cause to be mailed by certified mail to the then current record owner of the property a notice of intention to determine status, notifying the owner that the affected parcels may be merged pursuant to the standards specified on the merger ordinance, and advising the owner of the opportunity to request a hearing on determination of status and to present evidence at the hearing that the property does not meet the criteria for merger. The notice of intention to determine status shall be filed for recording with the County Recorder on the date that notice is mailed to the property owner. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.33.025 Request for Hearing on Determination of Status.
        At any time within thirty (30) days after recording of the notice of intention to determine status, the owner of the affected property may file with the City a request for a hearing on determination of status. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.33.030 Hearing—Time, Date and Place.
        Upon receiving a request for a hearing on determination of status from the owner of the affected property pursuant to Section 7.33.016, the City shall fix a time, date and place for a hearing to be conducted by the City Council or an advisory agency, and shall notify the property owner of that time, date and place for the hearing by certified mail. The hearing shall be conducted not more than sixty (60) days following the City’s receipt of the property owner’s request for the hearing, but may be postponed or continued with the mutual consent of the City and the property owner. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.33.035 Hearing—Evidence—Determination of Status.
        At the hearing, the property owner shall be given the opportunity to present any evidence that the affected property does not meet the standards for merger specified in this Chapter.

        At the conclusion of the hearing, the City Council or an advisory agency shall make a determination that the affected parcels are to be merged or are not to be merged and shall so notify the owner of its determination. A determination of nonmerger may be made whether or not the affected property meets the standards for merger specified in Section 7.33.010. A determination of merger shall be recorded within thirty (30) days after conclusion of the hearing, as provided for in Section 7.33.015. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.33.040 Failure to Request Hearing—Determination of Merger.
        If, within the thirty (30) day period specified in Section 7.33.025, the owner does not file a request for a hearing in accordance with Section 7.33.035, the City may, at any time thereafter, make a determination that the affected parcels are to be merged or are not to be merged. A determination of merger shall be recorded as provided for in Section 7.33.015 no later than ninety (90) days following the mailing of notice required by Section 7.33.020. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.33.045 Determination Not to Merge—Release of Notice of Intent to Determine Status—Recordation Clearance Letter.
        If, in accordance with Section 7.33.035 or 7.33.040 the City determines that the subject property shall not be merged, the City shall cause to be recorded in the manner specified in Section 7.33.015 a release of the notice of intention to determine status, recorded pursuant to Section 7.33.020 and shall mail a clearance letter to the then current owner of record. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.33.050 Failure to Comply with this Chapter.
        (a)    The failure of the City to comply with the requirements of this Chapter for the merger of contiguous parcels or units of land held in common ownership shall render void and ineffective any resulting merger or recorded notice of merger and no further proceedings under the provisions of this Chapter shall be required for the purpose of sale, lease or financing of those contiguous parcels or units, or any of them, until such time as the parcels or units of land have been lawfully merged by subsequent proceedings initiated by the City which meet the requirements of this Chapter.

        (b)    The failure of the City to comply with the requirements of any prior law establishing requirements for the merger of contiguous parcels or units of land held in common ownership, shall render voidable any resulting merger or recorded notice of merger. From and after the date the City determines that its actions did not comply with the prior law, or a court enters a judgment declaring that the actions of the City did not comply with the prior law, no further proceedings under the provisions of this Chapter shall be required for the purpose of sale, lease or financing of such contiguous parcels or units, or any of them, until such time as the parcels or units of land have been lawfully merged by subsequent proceedings initiated by the City which meet the requirements of this Chapter. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

Chapter 7.34 NOTICES OF VIOLATION
7.34.010 Tentative Notices of Violation.
        Whenever the Director or City Engineer has information indicating that real property has been divided in violation of the Subdivision Map Act or the Subdivision Code, the Director shall file for recording with the County Recorder a tentative notice of violation describing the real property in detail, naming the owners thereof, describing the violation, and stating that an opportunity will be given to the owner to present evidence on the issue whether the property has been divided in violation of the Subdivision Map Act or this Title. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.34.015 Receipt of Evidence.
        Upon recordation of a tentative notice of violation, the Director shall bring the matter before the Subdivision Committee, which shall schedule a meeting at which evidence as to why a final notice of violation should not be recorded may be presented. The owner of the land in question shall be given at least thirty (30) days’ written notice of said meeting, unless the owner requests an earlier determination. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.34.020 Subdivision Committee Determination.
        (a)    If the Subdivision Committee determines that there has been no violation, the Director shall file for recording a release of the tentative notice of violation with the County Recorder.

        (b)    If the Subdivision Committee determines that there has been a violation, or if within sixty (60) days of receipt of such copy, the owner of such real property fails to inform the Director of his/her/their objection to recording the notice of violation, the Director shall file a final notice of violation with the County Recorder. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.34.025 Release by Certificate of Compliance.
        A notice of violation may be released by a certificate of compliance pursuant to Chapter 7.30 of this Code. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

Chapter 7.36 DEDICATION OF LAND FOR PARK FACILITIES AND PAYMENT OF IN-LIEU FEES
7.36.010 Purpose.
        This chapter is adopted to implement the provisions of the Quimby Act which authorize a city to require the dedication of land for park facilities or payment of in-lieu fees incident to and as a condition of the approval of a tentative tract map or tentative parcel map for certain subdivisions.

        Further, the purposes and objectives of this Chapter are:

        (a)    To preserve, enhance and improve the quality of the physical environment of Dana Point;

        (b)    To provide a procedure for the acquisition and development of local park facilities;

        (c)    To ensure that adequate park and recreation facilities will be provided; and

        (d)    To provide regulations requiring five (5) acres of land, or the proportionate share thereof, for each one thousand (1,000) residents of the City of Dana Point be provided by persons proposing to establish dwelling units. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.36.015 Parkland Dedication Requirements.
        The dedication of land for park facilities shall be required by the advisory agency incident to and as a condition of the approval of a tentative map or tentative parcel map for a subdivision if the subdivision contains fifty-one (51) or more separate lots or parcels, or consists of a condominium project containing fifty-one (51) or more dwelling units, excepting therefrom the conversion of an existing multifamily residential building, which is more than five (5) years old, to a condominium project. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.36.020 Standards for Determining the Amount of Dedicated Parkland.
        The amount of land required to be dedicated to the City for park facilities incident to and as a condition of the approval of a tentative map or tentative parcel map for a subdivision shall be consistent with the standards and policies for park facilities, adopted in the General Plan or an applicable specific plan and shall bear a reasonable relationship to the need for park facilities by the inhabitants of the subdivision. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.36.025 Maximum Amount of Dedicated Parkland Which May be Required.
        Except as otherwise provided by this Chapter, the number of acres or fraction of an acre of land required to be dedicated to the City for park facilities incident to and as a condition of the approval of a tentative map or tentative parcel map for a subdivision shall be the product of the following:

        (a)    The maximum number of dwelling units permitted within the subdivision as determined from the zoning regulations applicable to the subdivision; multiplied by

        (b)    The average number of residents per dwelling unit within the incorporated territory of the City, as determined by the most recent federal census or a census taken pursuant to the provisions of Title 4, Division 3, Part 2 of the California Government Code (commencing with Section 40200); multiplied by

        (c)    Five thousandths (.005) of an acre per person. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.36.030 Adjustments to the Amount of Dedicated Parkland Which May be Required to Account for Private Open Space.
        (a)    Where a tentative map or a tentative parcel map is approved for a condominium project, planned development or a real estate development which includes private open space set aside for active recreational purposes, then the maximum number of acres or fraction thereof required to be dedicated to the city for park facilities incident to and as a condition of the approval of a tentative map or tentative parcel map shall be reduced by an amount equal to twenty-five percent (25%) of the number of acres or fraction of an acre of such private open space set aside for active recreational purposes.

        (b)    For purposes of this section, private open space set aside for active recreational purposes shall include any private open space within the subdivision other than yards, court areas, setbacks, and other open areas required by zoning regulations of the City which meets all of the following requirements:

        (1)    The private open space is open to and accessible by all residents of the subdivision;

        (2)    The private open space includes one (1) or more of the following active recreational elements:

        (a)    Open spaces dedicated to the active recreational pursuits such as soccer, golf, baseball, softball and football,

        (b)    Tennis courts, badminton courts, shuffleboard courts or similar hardsurfaced areas especially designed and exclusively used for court games, and

        (c)    Recreational swimming pools and other swimming areas; and

        (3)    Use of the private open space is restricted for active recreational purposes by a recorded covenant which runs with the land and which can only be terminated with the prior consent of the City Council. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.36.035 Application of Parkland Dedication Requirements to Subdivision Containing Lots and Parcels Likely to be Further Subdivided.
        Where an application is filed for approval of a tentative map or tentative parcel map for a subdivision which contains less than fifty-one (51) lots or parcels, such subdivision, nevertheless, shall be deemed to contain fifty-one (51) or more lots or parcels for purposes of land dedication requirements provided for by this Chapter where the advisory board, based on all available evidence determines that one (1) or more lots within the subdivision are likely to be further subdivided in a manner which would create a total of fifty-one (51) or more lots or parcels within the entire subdivision. This evidence shall include, but not be limited to, the kind of development that would be permitted within the subdivision pursuant to the General Plan or any applicable specific plan. Moreover, where a subdivision contains lots and parcels likely to be further subdivided, the advisory agency shall determine the maximum number of acres and/or fraction of an acre to be dedicated to the City for park facilities in the manner provided by this Chapter. This number shall be based on the maximum number of dwelling units which would be permitted within the subdivision pursuant to the provisions of the General Plan or any relevant specific plan rather than on the zoning regulations applicable to the subdivision. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.36.040 Improvements to Dedicated Parkland and Adjoining Public Rights-of-Way.
        When the advisory agency has required the dedication of land for park facilities incident to and as a condition of the approval of a tentative map or tentative parcel map for a subdivision, the advisory agency shall, as a further condition of such approval, require the construction and installation of the following public improvements within the dedicated parkland and adjoining public rights-of-way:

        (a)    Storm drainage facilities necessary for the conveyance and disposal of stormwaters generated within or flowing through the dedicated parkland;

        (b)    Fencing necessary in order to provide an appropriate barrier between the dedicated parkland and adjoining properties;

        (c)    Street improvements within the adjoining public rights-of-way including, but not limited to, street paving, sidewalks, curbs, gutters, street trees and traffic control devices; and

        (d)    Any other public improvements which the advisory agency determines are necessary in order to make the dedicated parkland suitable for development as a park facility. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.36.045 Use of Dedicated Parkland.
        Where parkland has been dedicated to and accepted by the City in accordance with the conditions of approval of a tentative map or tentative parcel map for a subdivision, such parkland shall be used for the purpose of developing neighborhood or community park and recreational facilities which serve the residents of the subdivision in accordance with a parkland development schedule adopted by the City Council. Such parkland development schedule shall be adopted by the City Council within twelve (12) months of the acceptance by the City of dedicated parkland or on or before the date the Council adopts the first annual City budget next following such acceptance, whichever last occurs, and shall specify how and when such parkland will be used for the development of neighborhood or community park facilities which serve the inhabitants of the community. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

 

7.36.050 Payment of In-Lieu Fees for Park and Recreation Purposes.
        The Subdivision Committee may only require payment of in-lieu fees in subdivisions containing fifty (50) or less lots or parcels. However, when a condominium project, stock cooperative or community apartment project exceeds fifty (50) dwelling units, a dedication of land may be required notwithstanding the fact that the number of parcels may be less than fifty (50).

        The Subdivision Committee may elect to impose the condition of payment of in-lieu fees for park and recreation purposes instead of dedication of parkland if the location or topography of the subdivision is not conducive to the development of parks and recreation facilities at this location. Such in-lieu fees shall be equal to the value of the parkland that would have been dedicated pursuant to Section 7.36.025 plus the cost of improvements pursuant to Section 7.36.040. (Added by Ord. 95-03, 2/14/95)

Title 8 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
Chapter 8.01 GRADING AND EXCAVATION CONTROL
Chapter 8.02 CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODE
Chapter 8.03 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE
Chapter 8.04 UNIFORM SIGN CODE
Chapter 8.08 TENT CODE
Chapter 8.10 RELOCATED BUILDINGS CODE
Chapter 8.11 HOUSING AUTHORITY
Chapter 8.12 UNIFORM HOUSING CODE
Chapter 8.14 CALIFORNIA ELECTRICAL CODE
Chapter 8.16 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE
Chapter 8.18 UNIFORM SWIMMING POOL, SPA AND HOT TUB CODE
Chapter 8.20 CALIFORNIA MECHANICAL CODE
Chapter 8.22 UNIFORM SOLAR ENERGY CODE
Chapter 8.24 CALIFORNIA FIRE CODE
Chapter 8.26 CALIFORNIA ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS CODE
Chapter 8.28 CALIFORNIA ADMINISTRATIVE CODE
Chapter 8.30 CALIFORNIA ENERGY CODE
Chapter 8.32 CALIFORNIA GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE
Chapter 8.33 EXPEDITED ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATION PERMITTING
Chapter 8.34 CALIFORNIA HISTORICAL BUILDING CODE
Chapter 8.36 CALIFORNIA EXISTING BUILDING CODE
Chapter 8.38 CALIFORNIA REFERENCED STANDARDS CODE
Chapter 8.40 REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION
Chapter 8.42 VERY HIGH FIRE HAZARD SEVERITY AND EMBER ZONES

Chapter 8.01 GRADING AND EXCAVATION CONTROL
Article 1. General Provisions
8.01.010 Title Reference to Code.
        This Article shall be known as and may be cited as the “City of Dana Point Grading and Excavation Code.” “Code,” as referred to in this Article, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, shall mean the City of Dana Point Grading and Excavation Code. The requirements of this Code should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this Code imposes restrictions different from those imposed in any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose more protective standards, for human health or the environment, shall take precedence. (Added by Ord. 98-03, 3/10/98; amended by Ord. 03-04, 2/12/03; Ord. 03-18, 12/10/03; Ord. 10-09, 10/25/10)

 

8.01.020 Grading Manual.
        (a)    The Director shall formulate and modify as necessary such rules, procedures, and interpretations as may be necessary or convenient to administer this Article. Such rules, procedures and interpretations shall be referred to as the “City of Dana Point Grading Manual” or the “Grading Manual.” The Director is hereby authorized to incorporate further amendments into the Grading Manual provided such amendments are consistent with this division.

        (b)    The Grading Manual shall include provisions to assure that the water quality requirements relevant to activities subject to this division apply to all such activities.

        (c)    In the event of any conflict between said Grading Manual and this Code, the provisions of this Code shall govern. The provisions of the Grading Manual, to the extent that they are made conditions of any grading permit by the Director, shall be binding on the permittee. (Added by Ord. 98-03, 3/10/98; amended by Ord. 03-04, 2/12/03; Ord. 03-18, 12/10/03; Ord. 10-09, 10/25/10)

 

8.01.030 Purpose and Intent.
        It is the intent of this Code to safeguard life, limb, property, and the public welfare, and to comply with storm water permits issued to the City, by regulating grading on private property in the City of Dana Point. (Added by Ord. 98-03, 3/10/98; amended by Ord. 03-04, 2/12/03; Ord. 03-18, 12/10/03; Ord. 10-09, 10/25/10)

 

8.01.040 Scope.
        This Code sets forth rules and regulations to control excavation, grading, and earthwork construction, including fills and embankments, and establishes administrative requirements for issuance of grading permits and approval of plans and inspection of grading construction in accordance with the requirements for grading and excavation as contained in the California Building Code then in effect as adopted and modified by City ordinance, and any water quality requirements relevant to activity subject to this Chapter. (Added by Ord. 98-03, 3/10/98; amended by Ord. 03-04, 2/12/03; Ord. 03-18, 12/10/03; Ord. 10-09, 10/25/10)

 

Article 2. Definitions
8.01.050 Definitions.
        “Approval” shall mean a written engineering or geological opinion by the responsible engineer, geologist of record or responsible principal of the engineering company concerning the progress and completion of the work unless it specifically refers to the Director.

        “Approved plans” shall mean the current grading plans which bear the signature of approval of the Director.

        “Approved testing agency” shall mean a facility whose testing operations are controlled and monitored by a registered civil engineer and which is equipped to perform and certify the tests required by this Code, or the Grading Manual, as determined by the Director. This determination may be appealed to the City Council.

        “Borrow” means earth material acquired from an off-site location for use in grading on a site.

        “Building Official” shall mean the Director of Community Development or the Director’s duly delegated representative.

        “City Inspector” shall mean an inspector duly authorized by the Director to perform inspection of grading, concrete placement and related constructed work or other grading-related work approved by the Director.

        “Civil engineer” shall mean a professional engineer registered in the State of California to practice in the field of civil engineering.

        “Civil engineering” shall mean the application of the knowledge of the forces of nature, principles of mechanics and the properties of materials for the evaluation, design, and construction of civil works for the beneficial uses of mankind.

        “Clearing, brushing, and grubbing” shall mean the removal of vegetation (grass, brush, trees, and similar plant types) by mechanical means.

        “Commercial coach” means a vehicle with or without motive power, designed and equipped for human occupancy for industrial, professional or commercial purposes, and shall include a trailer coach.

        “Compaction” means the densification of a fill by mechanical means.

        “Director” shall mean Director of Public Works and Engineering Services or the Director’s duly delegated representative.

        “Earth material” means any rock, natural soil or fill and/or any combination thereof.

        “Engineering geologist” shall mean a geologist certified in the State of California to practice engineering geology.

        “Engineering geology” shall mean the application of geologic knowledge and principles in the investigation and evaluation of naturally occurring rock and soil for use in the design of civil works.

        “Erosion” means the wearing away of the ground surface as a result of the movement of wind, water, and/or ice.

        “Erosion control system” means an effective combination of source control practices that protect the soil surface and prevent soil particles from being detached by rainfall, flowing water or wind, and sediment control practices that trap soil particles after they have been detached and moved by rain, flowing water or wind, to protect adjacent private property, watercourses, public facilities and receiving waters from an abnormal deposition of sediment or dust.

        “Excavation” means the mechanical removal of earth material.

        “Fill” means a deposit of earth material placed by artificial means.

        “Grade” shall mean the vertical location of the ground surface.

        (1)    “Existing grade” is the ground surface prior to grading.

        (2)    “Finish grade” is the final grade of the site which conforms to the approved plan.

        (3)    “Natural grade” is the ground surface unaltered by artificial means.

        (4)    “Rough grade” is the stage at which the grade approximately conforms to the approved plan.

        “Grading” means any excavating or filling or combination thereof.

        “Grading contractor” means a contractor licensed and regulated by the State of California who specializes in grading work or is otherwise licensed to do grading work.

        “Grading permit” means an official document or certificate issued by the Director authorizing grading activity as specified by approved plans and specifications.

        “Hillside site” means a site which entails cut and/or fill grading of three (3) feet or more in vertical height below or above natural ground; or a combination fill-over-cut slope equal to or greater than five (5) feet in vertical height; or where the existing grade is twenty percent (20%) or greater; and which may be adversely affected by drainage and/or stability conditions within or from outside the site, or which may cause an adverse effect on adjacent property.

        “Mobile home” means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, designed and equipped to contain not more than two (2) dwelling units to be used with or without a foundation system. Mobile home does not include recreational vehicle, commercial coach, or factory-built housing.

        “Natural state” is the natural environment which existed prior to any grading and includes but is not limited to native plants and natural undulating slopes with environmentally sensitive habitat indigenous to the area.

        “Owner” means any person, agency, firm, or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in a given real property.

        “Precise grading permit” means a permit that is issued on the basis of approved plans which show the precise structure location, finish elevations, and all on site improvements.

        “Rainy season” is predetermined by the City and at the time of this printing is established as from October 1st through April 30th.

        References. Unless indicated otherwise, or as reasonably appears from the context, references in this Code to the civil engineer, the soil engineer, the geologist, and the engineering geologist refer to the professional person(s) preparing, signing, or approving the project plans and specifications which comprise the approved grading plan, and which professional person appears of record pursuant to Article 3 of this Chapter or that person’s successor appearing pursuant to Section 8.01.440, Transfer of Responsibility for Approval.

        “Rough grading permit” means a permit that is issued on the basis of approved plans which need not show a structure location but must show interim building pad drainage to the degree required by the Director.

        “Site” means any lot or parcel of land or contiguous combination thereof, under the same ownership, where grading is performed or permitted.

        “Slope” means an inclined ground surface, the inclination of which is expressed as a ratio of horizontal distance to vertical distance.

        “Soil” means naturally occurring surficial deposits overlying bedrock.

        “Soil engineer” means a civil engineer duly registered in the State of California whose field of expertise is soil mechanics.

        “Soil engineering” shall mean the application of the principles of soil mechanics in the investigation, evaluation and design of civil works involving the use of earth materials and the inspection and testing of the construction thereof.

        “Special inspector” means an inspector duly licensed by the Director to perform inspection of asphalt concrete placement and related construction work or other grading-related work approved by the Director.

        “Stockpiling” shall mean imported compactable earth greater than twenty-five (25) cubic yards temporarily placed for future fill on or off site (no deleterious material).

        “Storm water permits” are any permits issued by a regional, state or federal agency regulating storm water flow over and from any project subject to this division, including, but not limited to, National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (“NPDES”) permits for Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems (MS4) permits and state general permits.

        “Terrace” means a relatively level step constructed in the face of a graded slope surface for drainage and maintenance purposes.

        “Water quality requirements” are requirements relevant to activities subject to storm water permits. (Added by Ord. 98-03, 3/10/98; amended by Ord. 03-04, 2/12/03; Ord. 03-18, 12/10/03; Ord. 10-09, 10/25/10)

Article 3. Permits Required
8.01.060 Grading Permits Required.
        No person shall conduct any grading, clearing, brushing, or grubbing on natural or existing grade that is preparatory to grading, without first having obtained a grading permit from the Director. Exceptions to this requirement are as follows or as otherwise determined by the Director:

        (a)    An excavation below finished grade for basements and footings of a building, mobile home, retaining wall, or other structure authorized by a valid building permit or construction permit. This shall not exempt any excavation having an unsupported height greater than five (5) feet after the completion of such structure. This shall not prohibit a minimum fee grading permit or soil or geologic report from being required for foundation design and inspection purposes when, in the opinion of the Director, stability or flooding considerations warrant such inspection. Further, fill made with the excavated material is not exempt from a grading permit, unless otherwise waived by the Director.

        (b)    Cemetery graves.

        (c)    Refuse disposal sites controlled by other regulations.

        (d)    Earthwork construction regulated by the federal, state, county agencies, or City, or by any local agency as defined by Government Code Sections 53090 through 53095 (special districts). Pipeline or conduit excavation and backfill conducted by local agencies or public utilities. Earthwork construction performed by railway companies on their operating property. This exemption, however, shall apply only when the earthwork construction takes place on the property, or dedicated rights-of-way or easements of the above agencies.

        (e)    Excavation and backfill for installation of underground utilities by public utilities or companies operating under the authority of a franchise or public property encroachment permit.

        (f)    Exploratory excavations under the direction of soil engineers or engineering geologists, provided all excavations are properly backfilled. All such excavations and trenches are subject to the applicable sections of Title 8 of the State Orders, Division of Industrial Safety.

        (g)    An excavation which does not exceed twenty-five (25) cubic yards on any one site and which is less than one (1) foot in vertical depth.

        (h)    A fill less than one (1) foot in depth placed on natural grade with a slope flatter than five (5) horizontal to one (1) vertical (5:1), which does not exceed twenty-five (25) cubic yards on any one lot and does not obstruct a drainage course.

        (i)     A fill less than three (3) feet in depth, not intended to support structures or mobile homes, which does not exceed twenty-five (25) cubic yards on any one lot and does not obstruct a drainage course. (Added by Ord. 98-03, 3/10/98; amended by Ord. 03-04, 2/12/03; Ord. 03-18, 12/10/03; Ord. 10-09, 10/25/10)

 

8.01.070 Grading Permit, Paving.
        No person shall construct pavement surfacing in excess of three thousand (3,000) square feet, on natural or existing grade without a valid grading permit unless waived by the Director or a separate improvement plan for such paving is approved and signed by an authorized City official. Resurfacing or maintenance of paved surfaces shall be exempt from this requirement. (Added by Ord. 98-03, 3/10/98; amended by Ord. 03-04, 2/12/03; Ord. 03-18, 12/10/03; Ord. 10-09, 10/25/10)

 

8.01.080 Grading Permit, Watercourse Alteration.
        No person shall alter an existing watercourse, channel, or revetment by excavating, or placing fill, rock protection or structural improvements without a valid grading permit, unless waived by the Director or performed as interim protection under emergency flood fighting conditions. (Added by Ord. 98-03, 3/10/98; amended by Ord. 03-04, 2/12/03; Ord. 03-18, 12/10/03; Ord. 10-09, 10/25/10)

 

8.01.090 Grading Permit, Construction.
        No person shall perform any construction for which a building permit is required, without a grading permit, unless waived by the Director. The following building categories shall be exempt from this requirement, provided that such construction does not alter an existing watercourse, channel or revetment: roofing, block walls, swimming pools, patio covers, driveways or on-site paving less than three thousand (3,000) square feet in area, patio enclosures less than four hundred (400) square feet in area, and building additions less than four hundred (400) square feet in area. (Added by Ord. 98-03, 3/10/98; amended by Ord. 03-04, 2/12/03; Ord. 03-18, 12/10/03; Ord. 10-09, 10/25/10)

 

8.01.100 Grading Permit, Stockpiling.
        (a)    The City requires a grading permit to stockpile soil on a lot or parcel. A site plan of the lot shall be submitted showing the area in which the stockpile is to be placed, the approximate amount of soil to be stockpiled, and the erosion control system to be used.

        (b)    The placement of the stockpile shall not adversely effect the safety, use, or stability of any structure, nor create a nuisance because of dust or erosion therefrom, nor block a public way or drainage course; nor shall such placement of stockpile material constitute a hazard to public welfare or endanger property. Stockpiling in a residential zone may be permitted under this Section for purposes of providing fill material to be used on-site only. Stockpiling in residential zones for purposes of selling of material shall be prohibited.

        (c)    The grading permit for stockpiling shall expire one (1) year after issuance thereof. A new permit shall be required annually. (Added by Ord. 98-03, 3/10/98; amended by Ord. 03-04, 2/12/03; Ord. 03-18, 12/10/03; Ord. 10-09, 10/25/10)

 

8.01.110 Excavation Blasting Permit.
        No person shall possess, store, sell, transport or use explosives and blasting agents to do any excavation without a permit from the Orange County Fire Department and authorization by the Director. (Added by Ord. 98-03, 3/10/98; amended by Ord. 03-04, 2/12/03; Ord. 03-18, 12/10/03; Ord. 10-09, 10/25/10)

 

8.01.120 Types of Grading Permits.
        (a)    Either a rough grading permit or a precise grading permit may be issued for grading work upon completion of an application in accordance with Subarticle 5 of the Grading Manual and approval by the Director. The rough or precise grading permit is the option of the permittee provided that the plans satisfy the requirements of Subarticle 5 of the Grading Manual.

        (b)    Building permits may be issued for a site graded under a valid precise or rough grading permit upon completion and approval of rough grade inspection, as specified in Section 8.01.450(e), Site Inspection by the Director, of this Code. A Building Permit shall not be issued unless written certification that the rough grading has been completed in accordance with the City approved plans is received from an applicant’s Engineer(s) of Record.

        (c)    Building permits shall not be issued for a site graded under a rough grading permit until a new precise grading permit has been issued, the provisions of Subsection (b) of this Section have been satisfied, or the precise grading permit has been deemed by the Director to be unnecessary. (Added by Ord. 98-03, 3/10/98; amended by Ord. 03-04, 2/12/03; Ord. 03-18, 12/10/03; Ord. 10-09, 10/25/10)

Article 4. Organization and Enforcement
8.01.130 Powers and Duties of the Director.
        (a)    The provisions of Section 202, Powers and Duties of Building Official, of the California Building Code shall apply to grading construction work. The Director of Public Works shall serve in that capacity in the City of Dana Point.

        (b)    Stop or Correct Work Orders. Whenever any grading work is being done contrary to the provisions of this Code or the grading permit, the Director may order the work stopped or corrected by notice in writing served on any persons engaged in the doing or causing such work to be done, and any such persons shall forthwith stop or correct such work until authorized by the Director to proceed with the work.

        (c)    Whenever any building or grading work is being done contrary to any water quality requirements related to activities subject to this Chapter, the Director may take any enforcement action provided under this Code. (Added by Ord. 98-03, 3/10/98; amended by Ord. 03-04, 2/12/03; Ord. 03-18, 12/10/03; Ord. 10-09, 10/25/10)

 

8.01.140 Violations and Penalties.
        (a)    It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to do grading in the City of Dana Point, or cause the same to be done, contrary to, or in violation of, any of the provisions of this Code.

        (b)    The issuance of a building permit, performance of building permit inspections, or issuance of a certificate of use and occupancy may be withheld for property on which a violation of the provisions of this Code exist, including work performed not in accordance with approved plans, until such violation has been corrected to the satisfaction of the Building Official and/or the Director. The Building Official, as appropriate, shall consult with the Director.

        (c)    No tentative tract map or parcel map shall be approved for property on which a violation of the provisions of this Code exists, including work performed not in accordance with approved grading plans, unless conditioned to require such violation to be corrected or mitigated to the satisfaction of the Director prior to recordation.

        (d)    No zone change or discretionary permit per the City of Dana Point Zoning Regulations shall be approved for property on which a violation of the provisions of this Code exists, including work performed not in accordance with approved grading plans, unless conditioned to require such violation to be corrected or mitigated to the satisfaction of the Director prior to the issuance of any building permits.

        (e)    The Building Official, in consultation with the Director, shall determine if the corrective or mitigating action itself requires the approval of a site development permit per the City of Dana Point Zoning Regulations and/or an Initial Study per CEQA.

        (f)    Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this Code is guilty of a misdemeanor, and each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this Code is committed, continued, or permitted, and upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment for not more than six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. In addition to any such fine or imprisonment, the court may also require such party to correct or mitigate the grading violation to the satisfaction of the Director.

        (g)    In addition to the provisions of the subsections above, a notice of violation of this Code may be recorded in accordance with the following procedures:

        (1)    Notice of Intent. A written notice of intent to record a notice of violation shall be served on the current owner of record of the property. Such notice shall describe the property, the violation and the action necessary to correct or mitigate the violation. The notice shall inform the owner that a notice of violation will be recorded if the owner does not, within twenty (20) days of receipt thereof, either correct the violation or request a meeting with the Director as set forth below. The notice shall include a copy of this Section and be substantially as follows:

 

        Notice of Continuing Violation of the City of Dana Point Grading and Excavation Code.

 

        Notice is hereby given that the City of Dana Point has determined that a violation of the above Code exists on the following described property (description). The violation consists of (description).

 

        While a violation of the above Code exists, the City of Dana Point may refuse to approve building or occupancy permits, subdivision maps, use permits, and other discretionary permits and development approvals.

        (2)    Correction of Violation. If, within twenty (20) days of receipt of a notice of intent, the owner corrects the violation, no notice of violation shall be recorded. The Director may grant extensions of time for good cause.

        (3)    Meeting. If the owner requests a meeting, the Director shall schedule a meeting. Notice of the meeting shall be served on the owner not less than fifteen (15) days prior thereto. The Director may reschedule the meeting from time to time for a good cause with adequate notice to the landowner. At the meeting, the owner may be represented by counsel and may present any relevant evidence that violations do not exist.

        (4)    Decision, Notice. Within thirty (30) days following completion of the meeting, the Director shall issue and serve on the owner the Director’s determination as to whether or not a notice of violation will be recorded. This determination shall be supported by appropriate findings on all material issues raised at the meeting. The decision of the Director shall be final with respect to recordation of a notice of violation, but shall not affect other proceedings under this Section.

        (5)    Recordation. If the Director determines that a notice will be recorded, such notice shall be recorded fifteen (15) or more days after service of notice of the decision.

        (6)    Release of Notice. When a violation is corrected or mitigated to the satisfaction of the Director, if a notice of violation had been recorded, the Director shall cause a release to be recorded. Said release shall refer to the notice of violation and shall state that the violation described therein has been corrected. (Added by Ord. 98-03, 3/10/98; amended by Ord. 03-04, 2/12/03; Ord. 03-18, 12/10/03; Ord. 10-09, 10/25/10)

 

8.01.150 Hazardous Conditions.
        (a)    Hazardous conditions exist when the state of any natural ground, natural slopes, excavation, fill, drainage device, or impairment of water quality, all of which exist on private property, is a menace to life or limb, or a danger to public safety, or endangers or adversely affects the safety, usability or stability of adjacent property, structures, or public facilities.

        (b)    The Director may examine or cause to be examined every condition reported as hazardous as set forth in Subsection (a) of this Section.

        (c)    Notice of Hazardous Condition. In any case where a hazardous condition is found by the Director, the Director shall give notice, setting forth the finding to all owners of the property affected by the hazardous condition, authorized representative of the owners or a permittee under any active permit which gives permittee control of the property issued pursuant to this Code, hereinafter referred to as “owner,” of such required corrective work. The notice may state the time and place of a hearing to be held if the owner fails to comply with any demand for corrective work or reports. The purpose of the hearing would be for the presentation of evidence concerning the hazardous conditions and demand for corrective work or submission of reports. The notice shall set forth the right of the owner to be present at the hearing, at the owner’s option, and introduce such relevant evidence on the issues as the owner desires. If the time and place of any hearing scheduled for the presentation of evidence is not included in the initial notice(s), it shall be included in a subsequent notice.

        (d)    Evidence. At the time and place so specified for the hearing, evidence shall be submitted as to the facts of any condition as to reasonably establish its existence, and the Director or the Director’s designee, as Hearing Officer, shall determine whether the facts presented reasonably establish the existence of a hazardous condition to the satisfaction of the Hearing Officer. Evidence may further be submitted as to the worker reports considered necessary to correct or determine work to correct said hazard.

        (e)    Order, Finality and Appeal. If the Director determines the existence of a hazardous condition, the Director shall determine whether such hazards are subject to corrective work and/or the need for more analysis through the preparation of reports and shall order such work or reports and specify a completion time.

        (1)    Finality of Order. The determination and order may be made orally at the hearing and shall be written and transmitted to the owner within a reasonable time. The determination and order shall become final within five (5) days, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, from the time it is first rendered, except in the event that the owner was not present at the City hearing, within five (5) days of the mailing of the order to the last known address of said owner.

        (2)    Appeal. The owner may, at any time prior to the determination and order becoming final, appeal in writing the decision of the Director to the City Council.

        (f)    Completion of Work. The owner shall, following the finality of the determination and order of the Director, or, if appealed, the determination and order of the City Council, commence the corrective action ordered or preparation of reports and such work or submissions shall be completed within the specified time.

        (g)    Failure to Complete Work. If the owner neglects or fails to complete the corrective work or submit the reports ordered by the Director or City Council within the specified time, the Director may: (1) cause the work to be performed or reports to be prepared, or (2) advise the owner of the need for corrective work and warn him/her that, in the absence of such corrective work, subsequent future hazards may occur which could result in an order to vacate the premises. Nothing in this Subsection (g) shall be construed to limit the type of remedy or relief which the Director may have under any other provision of law.

        (h)    Costs. Costs incurred by the City to perform any corrective work or prepare reports under Subsection (g) of this Section shall be charged to the owner. The Director may apply to the City Council to cause the costs to be paid and levied as a special assessment against the property and collected in a manner provided for special assessments.

        (i)     Vacation of Property. If necessary, the notice and order in Subsection (c) or (e) of this Section shall include the requirement that the property, a portion thereof or adjacent sites be vacated within a specified time, in the interest of public safety, pending the finality of any determination and order or completion of corrective work.

        At the request of the Director, the Building Official shall cause the property to be posted at conspicuous locations with a notice containing at least the following:

 

        UNSAFE TO OCCUPY

        DO NOT ENTER

        Building Official, City of Dana Point

        Date Posted _________________

        Said posted notice may also contain the date, time and place of the hearing and the name, address and telephone number of the office or Building Official where additional information may be obtained.

        Such posted notices shall remain posted until any necessary corrective work is completed. Such posted notices shall not be removed without written permission of the Building Official, and no person shall enter the property except for the purpose of making the required corrections or preparing reports.

        (j)     Service of Notices. The notices and order required by Subsections (c) and (e) of this Section may be served either:

        (1)    By mailing a copy by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner’s address as designated on papers, applications, or permits on file with the Director; or

        (2)    By personally delivering a copy to the owner’s address as designated on papers, applications or permits on file with the Director; or

        (3)    If the owner is absent from his or her place of residence and from his usual or designated place of business, by leaving a copy with some person of suitable age and discretion at either place, and sending a copy by certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the owner or authorized representative at his or her place of residence; or

        (4)    If such place of residence and business cannot be ascertained, or a person of suitable age or discretion there cannot be found, then by affixing a copy in a conspicuous place on the property, building, or structure and also delivering a copy to the person there residing, if any, or to the person in charge, if any; and also sending a copy by certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the owner at the place where the property, building or structure is situated, or to the owner at his or her last known or designated address, or both. (Added by Ord. 98-03, 3/10/98; amended by Ord. 03-04, 2/12/03; Ord. 03-18, 12/10/03; Ord. 10-09, 10/25/10)

 

8.01.160 Reserved.
        (Added by Ord. 98-03, 3/10/98; amended by Ord. 03-04, 2/12/03; Ord. 03-18, 12/10/03; Ord. 10-09, 10/25/10)

 

8.01.170 Reserved.
        (Added by Ord. 98-03, 3/10/98; amended by Ord. 03-04, 2/12/03; Ord. 03-18, 12/10/03; Ord. 10-09, 10/25/10)

 

Article 5. Grading Permit Requirements
8.01.180 Permits Required.
        Except as exempted in Section 8.01.060, Grading Permits Required, of this Code, no person shall conduct any grading or clearing, brushing, or grubbing on natural grade or existing grade that is preparatory to grading, without first obtaining a grading permit from the Director. A separate permit shall be required for each site and may cover both excavations and fills.

        When such operations involve the extraction or relocation of more than five thousand (5,000) cubic yards, such operations are also subject to the approval of a site development permit application. The total number of cubic yards shall be the larger of cut, including any export, or fill, including any import.

        A site development permit is not required under the following conditions:

        (a)    Grading and excavation conducted in compliance with approved sand and gravel extraction operations, an approved tentative map or use permit;

        (b)    Grading and excavation conducted in compliance with a building permit when limited to the area within the perimeter (footprint) of the structure, e.g., basement/foundation;

        (c)    Grading and excavation conducted in compliance with an approved area plan;

        (d)    Emergency grading to correct recent acts of nature;

        (e)    Other exceptions as defined in Section 8.01.060.

        When any operation requiring a grading permit is in the coastal zone, such operation is also subject to the approval of a coastal development permit. (Added by Ord. 98-03, 3/10/98; amended by Ord. 03-04, 2/12/03; Ord. 03-18, 12/10/03; Ord. 10-09, 10/25/10)

 

8.01.190 Application.
        (a)    To obtain a grading permit, the applicant must first file an application in writing on a form furnished by the Director. The grading permit application shall be accompanied by information required by the Director and as specified in the Grading Manual. Each person applying to the City for a grading or building permit for projects for which compliance with a State General Permit for Discharges of Storm Water Associated with Construction Activity (General Construction Permit) is required must submit satisfactory proof to City that coverage under the General Construction Permit has been obtained, before the City shall issue any grading or building permit on the construction project. Documents required under the General Construction Permit shall be maintained on-site during grading and construction and shall be made available upon the request of any City inspector. The project must also comply with all activities required by the City’s Storm Water/Surface Runoff Water Quality Ordinance and Local Implementation Plan (LIP). Each person applying to the City for a grading or building permit for projects for which compliance with the General Construction Permit is not required must submit evidence that the grading project will be in compliance with the provisions of all applicable storm water permits, including, but not limited to, the implementation of all applicable best management practices (BMPs), and in compliance with all activities required by the City’s Storm Water/Surface Runoff Water Quality Ordinance and LIP.

        (b)    Applications for which no grading permit is issued within one hundred eighty (180) days following the date of application shall expire by limitation and plans submitted for checking may thereafter be returned to the applicant or destroyed by the Director. The Director may extend the time for action by the applicant up to three (3) additional one hundred eighty (180) day periods upon written request by the applicant showing that circumstances beyond the control of the applicant have prevented action from being taken. Extensions shall only be issued in one hundred eighty (180) day increments, and shall be approved by the Director. In order to renew action for an application after expiration, the applicant may be requested to resubmit plans and pay new plan check fees, unless otherwise waived by the Director.

        (c)    The Director shall approve the grading permit application once all City requirements have been satisfied. (Added by Ord. 98-03, 3/10/98; amended by Ord. 03-04, 2/12/03; Ord. 03-18, 12/10/03; Ord. 10-09, 10/25/10)

 

8.01.200 Plans and Specifications.
        (a)    Each application for a grading permit shall be accompanied by plans and specifications, and supporting data consisting of soil engineering and engineering geology reports, as specified in Section 8.01.220, Soil Engineering and Engineering Geology Reports, of this Code.

        (b)    Grading plans and specifications shall be prepared and signed by a civil engineer or authorized professional, unless otherwise approved by the Director. This requirement may be extended to any project when, in the opinion of the Director, critical drainage or geologic factors may be involved and there is need for civil engineering design and control.

        (c)    Plans and reports as specified by the Storm Water/Surface Runoff Water Quality Control Ordinance, the City’s LIP and any of its referenced documents. (Added by Ord. 98-03, 3/10/98; amended by Ord. 03-04, 2/12/03; Ord. 03-18, 12/10/03; Ord. 10-09, 10/25/10)

 

8.01.210 Information on Plans and Specifications.
        Grading plans and specifications shall be prepared in accordance with the grading requirements of Section 8.01.420, Grading Requirements, of this Code and Subarticle 5 of the Grading Manual. (Added by Ord. 98-03, 3/10/98; amended by Ord. 03-04, 2/12/03; Ord. 03-18, 12/10/03; Ord. 10-09, 10/25/10)

 

8.01.220 Soil Engineering and Engineering Geology Reports.
        A soil engineering and engineering geology report shall be required for grading projects, unless otherwise waived by the Director. The reports shall conform to the guidelines presented in the Grading Manual and shall include information appropriate for the site including any information required by the Director. Recommendations included in the reports and approved by the Director shall be incorporated in the grading plans or specifications. The soil engineer and engineering geologist shall review and sign the grading plans to assure inclusion of their recommendations. The Director may require that the soil engineering report be reviewed by a third party registered civil engineer and that the engineering geology report be reviewed by a third party certified engineering geologist. The cost of the review shall be paid by the grading permit applicant. (Added by Ord. 98-03, 3/10/98; amended by Ord. 03-04, 2/12/03; Ord. 03-18, 12/10/03; Ord. 10-09, 10/25/10)

 

8.01.230 Issuance, Expiration and Renewal.
        (a)    Every grading permit issued shall be valid for a period of two (2) years from the date of issuance.

        (b)    Every grading permit issued shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the work authorized by such grading permit is not commenced within two (2) years from the date of such grading permit or if the work authorized by such grading permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days.

        (c)    The time limitations and provisions of Section 303, Permits issuance, of the California Building Code as amended are applicable to grading permits, except as stated in Subsections (c)(1) and (2) below:

        (1)    A grading permit issued hereunder shall expire upon a change of ownership if the grading work thereon, for which said grading permit was issued, has not been completed, and a new grading permit shall be required for the completion of the work. If the time limitations of Subsections (a) and (b) of this Section are not applicable and if no changes have been made to the plans and specifications last submitted to the Director, no charge shall be made for the issuance of the new grading permit under such circumstances. If, however, changes have been made to the plans and specifications last submitted to the Director, fees based on the valuation of the additional work, additional yardage and necessary plan checking as provided for in Subarticle 6 of the Grading Manual shall be charged to the grading permit applicant, unless otherwise waived by the Director.

        (2)    The Director may extend the two (2) year expiration time limit on grading permits not to exceed four (4) successive periods of one hundred eighty (180) days each upon written request by the applicant showing that circumstances beyond the control of the applicant have prevented action from being taken. If additional time to complete the work is needed beyond the allowable extensions noted herein, and the applicant has produced good justification for not completing the work, the Director may extend the grading permit beyond the indicated extensions.

        (d)    The Director may require that grading operations and project designs be modified if delays occur which incur weather-related problems not considered at the time the grading permit was issued, and further subject to the provisions of Section 8.01.240, Denial of Permit, of this Code.

        (e)    If the permittee presents satisfactory reasons for failure to continue or begin the work within the period specified in Subsection (b) of this Section, the Director, upon receiving a written request, may grant an extension of time as specified in Subsection (c)(2) of this Section without additional fees, provided that:

        (1)    No changes have been made in the original plans and specifications for such work.

        (2)    Suspension or abandonment has not exceeded two (2) years.

        (3)    A re-endorsement of the compliance of the plans with the applicable regulations by the Public Works Department, shall be obtained, if deemed necessary.

        Such request for extensions must be submitted no later than the sixtieth (60th) day following the date on which said grading permit would otherwise expire. If the permittee fails to request an extension within the time provided, the Director may still renew the grading permit, but the applicant may be subject to additional processing fees.

        (f)    If the permittee is unable to complete the work by the end of a two (2) year period, the Director may renew the grading permit on an annual basis for a fee of one-half the amount required for the original permit for such work unless otherwise approved by the Director, provided no changes have been made in the original plans and specifications for such work.

        (g)    A new grading permit shall be required for restoration of a site to a “natural state” as defined in Section 8.01.050. The issuance fee for this restoration permit shall be two (2) times the permit fee normally required for a grading permit.

        (h)    Any person who commences grading operations and fails to obtain a grading permit required by this Code shall be required to return the property to a “natural state” and shall procure a permit to do so and pay all fees required. (Added by Ord. 98-03, 3/10/98; amended by Ord. 03-04, 2/12/03; Ord. 03-18, 12/10/03; Ord. 10-09, 10/25/10)

 

8.01.240 Denial of Permit.
        (a)    The Director shall not issue a grading permit in any case where the Director finds that the work as proposed by the applicant is liable to constitute a hazard to property or result in the deposition of debris on any public way or interfere with any existing drainage course. If it can be shown to the satisfaction of the Director that the hazard can be essentially eliminated by the construction of retaining structures, buttress fills, drainage devices or by other mitigation measures or means, the Director may issue the grading permit with the condition that such work be performed.

        (b)    If, in the opinion of the Director, the land area for which grading is proposed is subject to geological or flood hazard to the extent that no reasonable amount of corrective work can eliminate or sufficiently reduce the hazard to human life or property, the grading permit and the building permits for habitable structures shall be denied.

        (c)    The Director may require plans and specifications to be modified in order to mitigate anticipated adverse environmental effects of proposed grading projects. The Director may, under circumstances where the significant adverse environmental effects of a proposed grading project cannot be mitigated, deny the issuance of a grading permit.

        (d)    The Director may require plans and specifications to be modified in order to make them consistent with the City of Dana Point General Plan, Specific Plans, Zoning Code, water quality requirements, or other rules, regulations, or conditions applicable to the project, the Director may deny the grading permit if the proposed project cannot be designed in accordance with these rules, regulations or conditions. (Added by Ord. 98-03, 3/10/98; amended by Ord. 03-04, 2/12/03; Ord. 03-18, 12/10/03; Ord. 10-09, 10/25/10)

 

8.01.250 Time of Grading Operations.
        Grading and equipment operations within one-half mile of a structure for human occupancy shall not be conducted between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. nor on Saturdays, Sundays and City of Dana Point recognized holidays. The Director, however, may permit grading or equipment operations during specific hours after 5:00 p.m. or before 7:00 a.m. or on Saturdays, Sundays and City of Dana Point recognized holidays if the Director determines that such operations are not detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare of the inhabitants of such a structure. Permitted hours of operation may be shortened by the Director’s finding of a previously unforeseen effect on the health, safety, or welfare of the surrounding community. However, no grading permit that has been issued, nor any provision of this Section, shall be construed to be a waiver of the applicability of the provisions set forth in Article 1, Division 6, Title 4 of the Codified Ordinances of the County of Orange relating to noise control. (Added by Ord. 98-03, 3/10/98; amended by Ord. 03-04, 2/12/03; Ord. 03-18, 12/10/03; Ord. 10-09, 10/25/10)

 

8.01.260 Responsibility of Permittee.
        It shall be the responsibility of the permittee to be knowledgeable of the conditions and/or restrictions of the grading permit as outlined in applicable sections of this Code, the Grading Manual, and as contained on the approved grading plans and in the approved soil and geology reports. The permittee shall also be responsible to maintain in an obvious and accessible location on the site, a copy of the grading plans and any applicable storm water pollution control documents bearing the signature of approval by the Director.

        All grading permits, waivers or exemptions issued hereunder shall be deemed to include the provisions that the permittee, the permittee’s agents, contractors and employees, shall carry out the proposed work in accordance with the approved plans and specifications, where such approval is required, and in accordance with any applicable water quality requirements prepared and maintained pursuant to federal or state requirements or a County directive, and in compliance with all requirements of the permit and this Article. Failure to carry out the work in accordance with approved plans and specifications, the applicable water quality requirements, and in compliance with all requirements of the permit and this Article shall be a violation of this Article. (Added by Ord. 98-03, 3/10/98; amended by Ord. 03-04, 2/12/03; Ord. 03-18, 12/10/03; Ord. 10-09, 10/25/10)

 

8.01.270 Protection of Adjoining Property.
        Each adjacent owner is entitled to the lateral and subjacent support which his or her land receives from the adjoining land, subject to the right of the owner of the adjoining land to make proper and usual excavations on the same for purposes of construction or improvement as provided by law. Section 832 of the California Civil Code is contained in Appendix G of the Grading Manual. (Added by Ord. 98-03, 3/10/98; amended by Ord. 03-04, 2/12/03; Ord. 03-18, 12/10/03; Ord. 10-09, 10/25/10)

 

8.01.280 Import and Export of Earth Material.
        Where earth materials are moved on public roadways from or to the site of an earth grading operation, all the following requirements shall apply:

        (a)    Either water or dust palliative or both must be applied for the alleviation or prevention of excessive dust resulting from the loading or transportation of earth from or to the project site on public roadways. The permittee shall be responsible for maintaining public rights-of way used for handling purposes in a condition free of dust, earth, or debris attributed to the grading operation.

        (b)    Loading and transportation of earth from or to the site must be accomplished between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. unless prior approval is given by the Director. The proposed haul route must be submitted to the Director for review and approval.

        (c)    Access roads to the premises shall be only at points designated on the approved grading plan.

        (d)    The last fifty (50) feet of the access road, as it approaches the intersection with the public roadway, shall have a grade not to exceed three percent (3%). There must be three hundred (300) feet clear, unobstructed sight distance to the intersection from both the public roadway and the access road. If the three hundred (300) feet sight distance cannot be obtained, flagmen shall be posted. The last fifty (50) feet of the access road must be constructed of gravel or equivalent material.

        (e)    A stop sign conforming to the requirements of the California Vehicle Code shall be posted at the entrance of the access road to the public roadway, if deemed necessary by the Director.

        (f)    An advance warning sign must be posted on the public roadway four hundred (400) feet on either side of the access intersection, carrying the words “truck crossing,” if deemed necessary by the Director. The sign shall be diamond shape, each side being thirty (30) inches in length, shall have a yellow background, and the letters thereon shall be five (5) inches in height. The sign shall be placed six (6) feet from the edge of the pavement and the base of the sign shall be five (5) feet above the pavement level. The advance warning sign shall be covered or removed when the access intersection is not in use. (Added by Ord. 98-03, 3/10/98; amended by Ord. 03-04, 2/12/03; Ord. 03-18, 12/10/03; Ord. 10-09, 10/25/10)

 

Article 6. Fees
8.01.290 Grading Plan Check Fees.
        Before accepting a grading permit application and plans and specifications for checking, the Director shall collect a plan-checking fee as approved by Resolution of the City Council and as provided in Subarticle 6 of the Grading Manual. (Added by Ord. 98-03, 3/10/98; amended by Ord. 03-04, 2/12/03; Ord. 03-18, 12/10/03; Ord. 10-09, 10/25/10)

 

8.01.300 Grading Permit Fees.
        (a)    A fee for each grading permit shall be paid to the City prior to issuance of a grading permit as approved by Resolution of the City Council and as provided in Subarticle 6 of the Grading Manual.

        (b)    Failure to pay fees and obtain a permit before commencing work shall be deemed a violation of this Code, except when it can be proven to the satisfaction of the Director that an emergency existed which made it impractical to first obtain the grading permit. A violation shall result in an assessment of double permit fees for work done prior to grading permit issuance. Payment of a double fee shall not relieve any person from fully complying with the requirements of this Code nor from any other penalties prescribed herein.

        (c)    Additional fees approved by Resolution of the City Council and contained in Subarticle 6 of the Grading Manual shall be paid as required to the Director. (Added by Ord. 98-03, 3/10/98; amended by Ord. 03-04, 2/12/03; Ord. 03-18, 12/10/03; Ord. 10-09, 10/25/10)

 

8.01.310 Emergency Work; Cost Recovery Fees.
        If the Director performs or causes the performance of emergency or other work on private property, the Director shall charge the property owner all direct and indirect costs which are necessary to complete the work to the Director’s satisfaction. In addition, the City may charge a mobilization cost equal to ten percent (10%) of the cost for performing the work. (Added by Ord. 98-03, 3/10/98; amended by Ord. 03-04, 2/12/03; Ord. 03-18, 12/10/03; Ord. 10-09, 10/25/10)

 

Article 7. Bonds
8.01.320 Grading Permit Bonds.
        (a)    Grading Permit Bonds Required. A grading permit shall not be issued unless the permittee shall first post with the Director a grading permit bond executed by the owner and a corporate surety authorized to do business in the State of California as a surety in an amount specified in Subarticle 7 of the Grading Manual. The grading permit bond is required to assure that the work, if not completed in accordance with approved plans and specifications, will be corrected to eliminate hazardous conditions and/or threats to environmental conditions, including but not limited to a threat to water quality. This requirement may be waived at the discretion of the Director if the Director determines that:

        (1)    No hazardous situation is likely to occur as a result of incomplete or improper grading; or

        (2)    No adverse effect is likely to occur to subject property, adjacent property or an existing or proposed structure thereon as a result of incomplete or improper grading; or

        (3)    No significant drainage, erosion, flooding or siltation problems will exist as a result of incomplete or improper grading; or

        (4)    No water quality threat to human or environmental health will occur as a result of incomplete or improper grading; or

        (5)    No adverse geological or environmental impacts will occur as a result of incomplete or improper grading; or

        (6)    No conditions of the permit warrant a financial guarantee to assure their satisfactory completion.

        (b)    An additional cash grading permit bond in an amount determined by the Director may be required to ensure the completion of finish grading under the grading permit as a condition of occupancy and energizing utilities. A grading permit bond in an amount determined by the Director may be required for permits involving temporary earthen stockpiles to ensure their timely removal. A grading permit bond in an amount determined by the Director may be required to protect City streets during hauling operations.

        (c)    Failure to Complete Work. In the event of failure to comply with all of the conditions and terms of the grading permit, the Director may order the work authorized by the grading permit to be completed or put in a safe condition to the Director’s satisfaction. The surety executing such grading permit bond or deposit shall continue to be firmly bound under a continuing obligation for the payment of all necessary costs and expenses that may be incurred or expended in causing any and all such work to be done. In the case of a cash deposit, said deposit or any unused portion thereof, shall be refunded to the permittee.

        (d)    Default in Performance of Conditions. Whenever the Director finds or determines that a default has occurred in the performance of any requirement of a condition of a grading permit, written notice thereof shall be given to the principal and, when applicable, to the surety on the grading permit bond. Such notice shall specify the work to be done, the estimated cost thereof and the period of time deemed by the Director to be reasonably necessary for the completion.

        After receipt of such notice, the surety shall, within the time specified, cause or require the work to be performed, or failing therein, shall pay over to the Director the estimated cost of doing the work as set forth in the notice. Upon receipt of such monies the Director may cause the required work to be performed and completed. The surety shall pay the Director actual costs in excess of the estimate amount plus a mobilization charge specified in Section 8.01.310, Emergency Work; Cost Recovery Fees, of this Code.

        (e)    Grading Permit Bond or Cash Deposit Required for Return of the Property to “Natural State.” Whenever the Director determines that the property shall be returned to its “natural state” in accordance with the provisions of this Code, a grading permit bond or cash deposit, in an amount determined by the Director, will be required for faithful performance, labor and materials, grading, installation of landscaping and maintenance until the property is returned to the “natural state,” which completion date shall be determined by the Director. (Added by Ord. 98-03, 3/10/98; amended by Ord. 03-04, 2/12/03; Ord. 03-18, 12/10/03; Ord. 10-09, 10/25/10)

 

Article 8. Cuts
8.01.330 Cuts.
        Cut slopes shall be no steeper than two (2) horizontal to one (1) vertical (2:1) unless otherwise recommended in the soil engineering or engineering geology report and approved by the Director. The slope of cut surfaces shall be no steeper than is safe for the intended use. (Added by Ord. 98-03, 3/10/98; amended by Ord. 03-04, 2/12/03; Ord. 03-18, 12/10/03; Ord. 10-09, 10/25/10)

 

Article 9. Fill
8.01.340 Fills.
        (a)    Unless otherwise approved by the Director and recommended in the approved soil engineering report, fills shall conform to Subarticle 9 of the Grading Manual. The provisions therein may be waived for minor fills not intended to support structures upon written request by the applicant on a form prescribed by the Director.

        (b)    The Director may require that the soil tests or testing be performed by an approved testing laboratory.

        (c)    Fill slopes shall be no steeper than two (2) horizontal to one (1) vertical (2:1) unless otherwise recommended in the soil engineering report and approved by the Director. The slope of fill surfaces shall be no steeper than is safe for the intended use. (Added by Ord. 98-03, 3/10/98; amended by Ord. 03-04, 2/12/03; Ord. 03-18, 12/10/03; Ord. 10-09, 10/25/10)

 

Article 10. Setbacks
8.01.350 Setbacks.
        The setbacks and other restrictions specified by Subarticle 10 of the Grading Manual are minimum and may be increased by the Director or by the recommendation of a civil engineer, soil engineer or engineering geologist, if necessary for safety and stability or to prevent damage to structures or adjacent properties from sediment deposition, erosion, water runoff of the slopes or to provide access for slope and drainage structure maintenance. The minimum setback may be reduced only in special circumstances where stability is proven to the satisfaction of the Director by the soil engineer or engineering geologist and other factors are of primary importance. (Added by Ord. 98-03, 3/10/98; amended by Ord. 03-04, 2/12/03; Ord. 03-18, 12/10/03; Ord. 10-09, 10/25/10)

 

 

Article 11. Drainage and Terracing
8.01.360 Drainage and Terracing.
        Drainage facilities and terracing shall conform to the provisions of Subarticle 11 of the Grading Manual unless otherwise approved by the Director and delineated on the approved grading plan. (Added by Ord. 98-03, 3/10/98; amended by Ord. 03-04, 2/12/03; Ord. 03-18, 12/10/03; Ord. 10-09, 10/25/10)

 

Article 12. Asphalt Concrete Pavement
8.01.370 Asphalt Concrete Pavement.
        (a)    Asphalt concrete pavement for surfacing of parking lots, private streets or other similar use shall conform to the provisions of Subarticle 12 of the Grading Manual unless otherwise approved by the Director.

        (b)    The site soil engineer or special inspector shall inspect the construction of asphalt paved areas and verify to the Director that the work has been performed in compliance with the provisions of this Section.

        (c)    Asphalt concrete pavement within the public right-of-way shall be tested by the permittee, unless otherwise approved by the Director. All testing results shall be submitted to the Director for review and approval. (Added by Ord. 98-03, 3/10/98; amended by Ord. 03-04, 2/12/03; Ord. 03-18, 12/10/03; Ord. 10-09, 10/25/10)

 

Article 13. Erosion Control
8.01.380 Erosion Control and Water Quality Requirement Systems.
        (a)    Erosion prevention is to be used as the most important measure for keeping sediment on site during construction. Sediment controls are to be used as a supplement to erosion prevention for keeping sediment on-site during construction.

        (b)    The faces of cut and fill slopes and project site shall be prepared and maintained to control against erosion in accordance with this Article. Where cut slopes are not subject to erosion due to the erosion-resistant character of the materials, such protection may be omitted upon approval by the Director.

        (c)    An effective erosion control system shall be employed to control erosion and provide safety. Applicable Erosion Control, Sediment Control, Wind Erosion, Tracking Control, Non-Storm Water Management and Waste Management and Materials Pollution Control Best Management Practices (BMPs) from the most current California Storm Water Quality Associate Construction BMP Handbook shall be implemented for each project.

        (d)    No grading work in excess of two hundred (200) cubic yards will be allowed during the rainy season on any single grading site under permit unless an erosion control system has been approved or waived by the Director.

        (e)    Paved streets, sidewalks, and other improvements shall be maintained in a neat and clean condition free of loose soil, construction debris and trash. Street sweeping or other equally effective means shall be used on a regular basis to prevent storm flows from carrying sediment and debris outside the project boundaries. Watering shall not be used to clean streets except for fine material not otherwise removed by sweeping or other mechanical means.

        (f)    The civil engineer or other qualified individual who prepared the grading plan and designed the erosion control devices shall be responsible for inspection and modification of the devices, as necessary, during the rainy season. Significant modifications to erosion control shall be approved by the Director.

        (g)    Desilting facilities designed for twenty-five (25) year storm intensity shall be provided at drainage outlets from the graded site.

        (h)    Desilting basins shall be designed to provide a minimum desilting capacity equal to the current City of Dana Point standards as established by the Director.

        (i)     Desilting basins shall be constructed around the perimeter of projects whenever feasible when it provides improved maintenance access from paved roads during wet weather.

        (j)     Desilting basins constructed of compacted earth shall be compacted to a relative compaction of ninety percent (90%) of maximum density. A soil engineering report, prepared by the soil engineer, which includes the type of field testing performed, location and results of testing, shall be submitted to the Director for approval upon completion of the desilting basins.

        (k)    Equipment and workers for emergency work shall be made available at all times during the rainy season. Necessary materials shall be available on-site and stockpiled at convenient locations to facilitate rapid construction of temporary devices when rain is imminent.

        (l)     Slope stabilization must be used on all active slopes in preparation for and during rain events regardless of season and on all active and inactive slopes during the rainy season.

        (m)   Erosion protection shall consist of effective planting of all slopes in excess of five (5) feet high unless otherwise approved by the Director. Slopes exceeding fifteen (15) feet high may require an adequate sprinkler system, as determined by the Director.

        (n)    City-approved protection for the slopes shall be installed as soon as feasible, which may be prior to rough grade approval. Effective planting shall be installed and fully germinated, and shall effectively cover the required slopes prior to final approval unless otherwise approved by the Director.

        (o)    The erosion control provisions shall take into account drainage patterns during the current and future phases of grading throughout the rainy season.

        (p)    All removable protective devices shown shall be in place at the end of each working day when the five (5) day rain probability forecast exceeds forty percent (40%).

        (q)    Graded areas around the tract perimeter must drain away from the face of slopes at the conclusion of each working day.

        (r)    Vegetation clearing and brushing activities shall not be initiated during the rainy season on any sites which are not adequately protected with desilting basins or other temporary drainage or control measures.

        (s)    Erosion control plans shall consider preservation of natural hydrologic features, riparian buffers and corridors, and clearly indicate areas not to be disturbed.

        (t)     In addition to the requirements specified above, the permittee shall perform all work in accordance with the water quality requirements.

        (u)    Any violation of an applicable federal or state-issued storm water permit, or failure to conform to the City’s water quality requirements prepared pursuant to such a permit or pursuant to this Article or to the City’s Code, Chapter 15.10, or failure to comply with storm water related provisions of a City-issued grading permit or of a grading plan prepared to secure such a permit, is also a violation of this Section. (Added by Ord. 98-03, 3/10/98; amended by Ord. 03-04, 2/12/03; Ord. 03-18, 12/10/03; Ord. 10-09, 10/25/10)

 

 

8.01.390 Erosion Control Plans.
        Erosion control plans prepared in accordance with Subarticle 13 of the Grading Manual and any applicable storm water permit issued to the City and the permittee shall be submitted to the Director for approval by September 1st each year for all projects under grading permits. Plans are required to be submitted even though no revisions to the erosion control are required. The erosion control plan may be waived for grading projects on single residential lot projects providing that an erosion control system, meeting the approval of the Director, has been installed, placed, planted or constructed prior to the City’s defined rainy season. (Added by Ord. 98-03, 3/10/98; amended by Ord. 03-04, 2/12/03; Ord. 03-18, 12/10/03; Ord. 10-09, 10/25/10)

 

8.01.400 Erosion Control and Water Quality Control Maintenance.
        (a)    After each rainstorm, silt and debris shall be removed from the erosion control system devices and the basins pumped dry. Slope protection measures damaged by a rainstorm shall be immediately repaired.

        (b)    After each rainstorm, the performance of the erosion control system shall be evaluated and revised and repaired as necessary.

        (c)    Devices shall not be moved or modified without the approval of the Director.

        (d)    The contractor shall be responsible and shall take necessary precautions to prevent public trespass onto areas where impounded water creates a hazardous condition.

        (e)    The contractor and permittee or project owner shall be responsible for continual maintenance of the devices. In the event of failure or refusal by the contractor, permittee or project owner to properly maintain the devices, the Director may cause emergency maintenance work to be done to protect adjacent private and public property and environmental resources. The cost shall be charged to the owner and shall include an initial mobilization cost plus the cost of doing the work as contained in Article 6 of this Chapter.

        (f)    In the event the Director must cause emergency maintenance work to be done, the Director may revoke the grading permit in writing. The grading permit shall not be renewed until an erosion control system and/or other systems necessary to comply with water quality requirements approved by the Director are installed and a fee of one-half the amount required for the original grading permit paid by the owner. The Director may waive installation of an erosion control system during the City’s defined dry season (non-rainy season).

        (g)    If any grading subject to Section 8.01.060, Grading Permits Required, of this Code has commenced on private property without a valid grading permit, the property owner may be required to prepare and implement an erosion control plan and other plans required under the water quality requirements that have been approved by the Director. In the event of failure by the property owner to install an approved erosion control system and/or other systems necessary to comply with water quality requirements, the Director may cause emergency work to be done to protect adjacent private and public property. The procedures of Section 8.01.150, Hazardous Conditions, of this Code need not apply for emergency erosion control work during the City’s defined rainy season and emergency work necessary to protect environmental resources. The cost shall be charged to the owner in accordance with Subsection (e) of this Section. (Added by Ord. 98-03, 3/10/98; amended by Ord. 03-04, 2/12/03; Ord. 03-18, 12/10/03; Ord. 10-09, 10/25/10)

 

 

Article 14. Grading Inspection
8.01.410 General.
        All grading operations for which a grading permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the Director. (Added by Ord. 98-03, 3/10/98; amended by Ord. 03-04, 2/12/03; Ord. 03-18, 12/10/03; Ord. 10-09, 10/25/10)

 

8.01.420 Grading Requirements.
        (a)    It shall be the responsibility of the civil engineer or other qualified individual who prepares the grading plan approved by the Director to incorporate all recommendations from the soil engineering and engineering geology reports and any applicable storm water permits or reports into the grading plan. The civil engineer or other qualified individual who prepares the grading plan shall also be responsible for the professional inspection and approval of the grading within that person’s area of technical specialty. This responsibility shall include, but need not be limited to, inspection and approval as to the establishment of line, grade and drainage of the development area. The project civil engineer and/or general contractor shall act as the coordinating agent in the event the need arises for liaison between the project professional grading contractor, and the Director, the civil engineer or other qualified person who prepares and signs the grading plan shall also be responsible for the preparation of revised plans, erosion control plans, storm water pollution control and water quality documents, and the submission of as-graded grading plans when required by the Director upon completion of the work. The civil engineer or other qualified individual that prepared grading plans for permitting shall be responsible to provide construction oversight for the project sufficient to allow the preparation of as-built plans and certifications that the work was completed in accordance with the plans prepared. The grading permit shall not be finalized unless as-built plans and certifications are received to the satisfaction of the Director.

        (b)    Soil engineering and engineering geology reports shall be required as specified in Section 8.01.220, Soil Engineering and Engineering Geology Reports, of this Code. During grading, all necessary reports, compaction data, soil engineering and engineering geology recommendations shall be submitted to the owner by the soil engineer and engineering geologist. The owner shall submit copies of the report to the civil engineer and two (2) copies of all reports to the Director.

        (c)    The soil engineer’s area of responsibility shall include, but need not be limited to, the professional inspection and approval concerning the preparation of ground to receive fills, testing for required compaction, testing of impermeable fill cap, stability of all finish slopes, design of buttress fills, subdrain installation and incorporation of data supplied by the engineering geologist.

        (d)    The engineering geologist’s area of responsibility shall include, but need not be limited to, professional inspection and written approval of the adequacy of natural ground for receiving fills, the stability of cut slopes with respect to geological matters, and the need for subdrains or other groundwater drainage devices. He or she shall report his or her findings to the soil engineer and the civil engineer for engineering analysis. He or she shall inspect unsuitable soil removal, placement of subdrain and preparation of benching prior to placement of fill.

        (e)    The Director may expeditiously inspect the project at the various stages of work requiring approval and at any more frequent intervals as may be necessary to determine that adequate control is being exercised by the professional consultants.

        (f)    When preliminary soil engineering reports are not required by the Director, the Director may require inspection and testing by an approved testing agency. The testing agency’s responsibility shall include, but need not be limited to, approval of cleared areas and benches to receive fill, and the compaction of fills.

        (g)    The Director shall not issue any permit, waiver, or exemption pursuant to this Article unless the Director finds that the work authorized by the permit, waiver or exemption complies with applicable water quality requirements. (Added by Ord. 98-03, 3/10/98; amended by Ord. 03-04, 2/12/03; Ord. 03-18, 12/10/03; Ord. 10-09, 10/25/10)

 

8.01.430 Notification of Noncompliance.
        If, in the course of fulfilling their responsibility under this Code, the civil engineer, the soil engineer, the engineering geologist, or the testing agency finds that the work is not being done in conformance with the provisions of the approved specifications and grading plans, the discrepancies shall be reported immediately in writing to the person in charge of the grading work and to the Director. Recommendations for corrective measures, if necessary, shall be submitted to the owner. The owner shall submit two (2) copies of all recommendations and reports to the Director. (Added by Ord. 98-03, 3/10/98; amended by Ord. 03-04, 2/12/03; Ord. 03-18, 12/10/03; Ord. 10-09, 10/25/10)

 

8.01.440 Transfer of Responsibility for Approval.
        If the civil engineer, the soil engineer, the engineering geologist, the testing agency, or the grading contractor of record are changed during the course of the work, the work shall be stopped unless: (1) the owner submits a letter of notification verifying the change of the responsible professional; and (2) the new responsible professional submits in writing that that person has reviewed all prior reports and/or plans (specified by date and title) and work performed by the prior responsible professional and that the professional concurs with the findings, conclusions, and recommendations, and is satisfied with the work performed. The professional person may modify or revise recommendations, specifications or work performed if accompanied by supporting data and approved by the Director. The professional must state that the professional assumes all responsibility within that person’s professional purview as of a specified date. All exceptions must be justified to the satisfaction of the Director.

        Exception. Where clearly indicated that the firm, not the individual engineer and/or geologist, is the contracting party, the designated engineer or geologist may be reassigned and another engineer and/or geologist within the firm may assume responsibility. (Added by Ord. 98-03, 3/10/98; amended by Ord. 03-04, 2/12/03; Ord. 03-18, 12/10/03; Ord. 10-09, 10/25/10)

 

8.01.450 Site Inspection by the Director.
        (a)    Prior to the approval of any grading plans and specifications, the Director may inspect the site to determine that the plans and specifications are current and reflect existing conditions.

        (b)    The permittee or the permittee’s agent shall notify the Director when the grading operations specified in Subarticle 14 of the Grading Manual are ready for inspection.

        (c)    If the inspector finds the soil or other conditions not as stated in the approved plans and soil or geology reports or as in additional information which was required for issuance of the grading permit, the inspector, using reasonable judgment, may refuse to allow further work until approval is obtained for a revised grading plan which will conform to the conditions.

        (d)    The provisions of Section 202(d), Stop Orders, of the California Building Code shall apply to all grading work and whenever the Director determines that any work does not comply with the terms of a permit, or this Code, or that the soil or other conditions are not as stated on the grading permit, the Director may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on any persons engaged in doing or causing of such work to be done and any such persons shall forthwith stop such work until authorized by the Director to proceed with the work.

        (e)    Prior to the issuance of Building Permits for a graded site, the rough grading shall be completed in accordance with Subarticle 14 of the Grading Manual and to the satisfaction of the responsible civil engineer, engineering geologist, soil engineer, or other authorized professional and the Director. Certification in writing is required by the civil engineer, engineering geologist, soil engineer, and/or other authorized professional prior to issuance of a Building Permit.

        (f)    Whenever any work on which inspections are required is covered or concealed by additional work without first having been inspected, the Director may require by written notice, that such work be exposed for examination. The work of exposing and recovering shall not entail or be subject to expense by the City.

        (g)    Whenever any building or grading work is being done contrary to the provisions of the water quality requirements related to activities subject to this Article, the Director, in addition to any duties and powers specified in this Article, may utilize any enforcement provisions specified in City Code, Chapter 15.10. (Added by Ord. 98-03, 3/10/98; amended by Ord. 03-04, 2/12/03; Ord. 03-18, 12/10/03; Ord. 10-09, 10/25/10)

 

8.01.460 Special Inspections.
        (a)    The Director may establish special inspection requirements in accordance with Section 306, Special Inspections, of the California Building Code, as amended, for special cases involving grading or paving related operations. Special cases may apply to work where in the opinion of the Director it is necessary to supplement the resources or expertise available for inspection.

        (b)    Inspection fees ensuring compliance with an order to return a property to its “natural state” shall be three (3) times the usual inspection fee for all installation of grading, landscape and irrigation, until the property has achieved eighty percent (80%) coverage, as determined by the Director. The minimum site inspection for ensuring compliance with an order to return a property to its “natural state” shall be two (2) inspections per month until the eighty percent (80%) coverage is achieved. (Added by Ord. 98-03, 3/10/98; amended by Ord. 03-04, 2/12/03; Ord. 03-18, 12/10/03; Ord. 10-09, 10/25/10)

 

Article 15. Completion of Work
8.01.470 Final Reports.
        Upon completion of the rough grading work and at the final completion of the work, the Director may require the written approvals, reports, drawings and supplements thereto specified in Subarticle 15 of the Grading Manual. (Added by Ord. 98-03, 3/10/98; amended by Ord. 03-04, 2/12/03; Ord. 03-18, 12/10/03; Ord. 10-09, 10/25/10)

 

8.01.480 Notification of Completion.
        The permittee or his or her agent shall notify the Director when the grading operation is ready for final inspection, and certifications have been prepared by the civil engineer, soils engineer, and/or other authorized professional of record indicating that all work has been completed in accordance with the approved plans and reports. All work including installation of all drainage facilities and their protective devices and all erosion control measures must be completed in accordance with the final approved grading plan and the required reports approved by the Director before final approval of the grading permit is given by the Director, the Director may approve the grading work prior to completion of all work in special cases of extreme hardship and if no hazard exists and an adequate grading permit bond is posted to assure completion of all re-

maining work. (Added by Ord. 98-03, 3/10/98; amended by Ord. 03-04, 2/12/03; Ord. 03-18, 12/10/03; Ord. 10-09, 10/25/10)

Chapter 8.02 CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODE
8.02.001 Adoption of the California Building Code.
        The City Council of the City of Dana Point hereby adopts for the purpose of prescribing regulations for the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, improving, removal, conversion, demolition, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area and maintenance of all buildings and structures by reference the California Code of Regulations Title 24, Part 2, known and designated as the California Building Code (CBC), 2019 Edition, based on the 2018 International Building Code as published by the International Code Council, including Division II in Chapter 1 and Appendix I and with the modifications set forth below. The provisions of this Code shall constitute the building code regulations of the City. The California Building Code is on file for public examination in the office of the Building Official. (Added by Ord. 07-09, 12/4/07; amended by Ord. 16-08, 11/15/16; Ord. 19-05, 12/3/19)

 

8.02.010 Amendments, Additions and Deletions.
        1.     Subsection [A] 101.1 of Section 101 of Division II of CBC is hereby amended to read as follows:

 

[A] 101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the California Building Code of the City of Dana Point, hereinafter referred to as “this code.”

 

        2.     Subsection [A] 101.2 of Section 101 of Division II of CBC is hereby amended to add a second paragraph that reads:

 

The provisions of this code shall apply to and affect all of the territory of the City of Dana Point, except work located primarily in a public way, public utility towers and poles, mechanical equipment not specifically regulated in these codes, hydraulic flood control structures, facilities for the production, generation, storage or transmission of water or electrical energy by a local agency unless requested otherwise by the local authority/agency.

 

        3.     Subsection [A] 105.2 of Section 105 of Division II of CBC is hereby amended by deleting items 1 through 13 under “Building” and replacing them with the following:

 

        Building:

 

1.     One-story detached accessory buildings used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses and structures, such as portable shade cloth structures, provided the floor area does not exceed 120 square feet (11 m2). Such structures must comply with the setback and height requirements of the City Zoning Ordinance and the Fire Code.

 

2.     Masonry or concrete fences not over 36 inches (914 mm) in height above lowest adjacent grade, and all other fences not over six (6) feet (1,829 mm) in height above lowest adjacent grade.

 

Exception: Walls and fences less than six (6) feet (1829 mm) in height which are required as a condition of project approval, guard system or pool barrier system are required to have permits.

 

3.     Oil derricks.

 

4.     Retaining walls that are not over three (3) feet (914 mm) in height measured from the bottom of footing to the top of wall unless supporting a surcharge or impounding Class I, II or IIIA liquids.

 

5.     Water tanks supported directly on grade if the capacity does not exceed 5,000 gallons and the ratio of height to diameter or width does not exceed 2:1.

 

6.     Decks, platforms or similar structures, walkways, sidewalks and driveways not more than 30 inches (762 mm) above adjacent grade, and not over any basement or story below and are not part of an accessible route.

 

7.     Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting and similar finish work that does not involve electrical, mechanical or plumbing work and providing this work is not part of a Code Enforcement case or action.

 

8.     Temporary motion picture, television and theater stage sets and scenery.

 

9.     Prefabricated swimming pools accessory to a Group R-3 occupancy that are less than 18 inches (457 mm) deep, do not exceed 5,000 gallons and are installed entirely above ground.

 

10.   Shade cloth structures constructed for nursery or agricultural purposes, not including service systems.

 

11.   Swings and other playground equipment accessory to detached one- and two-family dwellings.

 

12.   Window awnings supported by an exterior wall that do not project more than 54 inches (1,372 mm) from the exterior wall and do not require additional support of Group R-3 and U occupancies.

 

13.   Nonfixed and movable fixtures, cases, racks, counters and partitions not over five (5) feet nine (9) inches (1,753 mm) in height.

 

14. Radio and television antenna, and flagpoles not over twelve (12) feet (3,658 mm) in height measured from grade.

 

Unless otherwise exempted, separate plumbing, electrical and mechanical permits will be required for the above-exempted items.

 

Any of the above items that are located on a Coastal Bluff, Flood Plain Overlay District, Environmentally Sensitive Area or subject to a discretionary Planning Division approval or as otherwise required by the Planning Division or any other authority/agency is not exempt from permits.

 

        4.     Subsection [A] 105.3.1 of Section 105 of Division II of CBC is hereby amended to read in its entirety as follows:

 

[A] 105.3.1 Action on Application. The building official shall examine or cause to be examined applications for permits and amendments thereto within a reasonable time after filing. If the application or the construction documents do not conform to the requirements of pertinent laws, or if the building, structure, or property is not in compliance with any and all federal, state, local laws, and ordinances and all fines, levies, and abatement costs are not paid in full, the building official shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons therefor. If the building official is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirement of this code and laws and ordinances applicable thereto, the building official shall issue a permit therefor as soon as possible. The building official shall not issue any permits to an applicant if the building, structure, or property is not in compliance with all federal, state, local laws, and ordinances and all fines, levies, and abatement cost are not paid in full.

 

        5.     Subsection [A] 105.3.2 of Section 105 of Division II of CBC is hereby amended to read in its entirety as follows:

 

[A] 105.3.2 Time Limitation of Application. An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned 180 days after the date of filing, unless such application has been pursued in good faith or permit has been issued; except that the building official is authorized to grant one extension of time for additional periods not exceeding 180 days. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. In order to renew action on an application after expiration, the applicant shall resubmit plans and pay a new plan check fee.

 

        6.     Subsection [A] 105.5 of Section 105 of Division II of CBC is hereby amended to read in its entirety as follows:

 

[A] 105.5 Expiration. Every permit issued by the Building Official under the provisions of this Code shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the building or work authorized by such permit is not commenced within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of such permit. Work shall be considered suspended or abandoned if substantial approval of one of the required progress inspections is not accomplished every 180 days as determined by the Building Official. Before such work can be re-commenced a new permit shall be first obtained to do so, and the fee therefore shall be one-half the amount required for a new permit for such work; provided, however, that:

 

1.     No changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications for such work; and

 

2.     Such suspension or abandonment has not exceeded one (1) year; and

 

3.     A re-endorsement of the compliance of the plans with the applicable regulations, by the Building Official, shall be obtained.

 

In order to renew action on a permit after expiration, the permittee shall pay a new full permit fee.

 

Any permittee holding an unexpired permit may apply for an extension of the time within which work may commence under that permit when the permittee is unable to commence work within the time required by this section for good and satisfactory reasons. The Building Official may extend the time for action by the permittee for a period not exceeding one hundred eighty (180) days upon written request by the permittee showing that circumstances beyond the control of the permittee have prevented action from being taken. Such written request shall be submitted no later than sixty (60) days after expiration of the permit. No permit shall be extended more than once.

 

        7.     A new Subsection [A] 105.8 is hereby added to Section 105 of Division II of CBC to read in its entirety as follows:

 

[A] 105.8 Maintenance of Property During Construction. During construction, all property shall be maintained in a reasonably clean and well-kept manner. All lumber and building materials shall be neatly piled or stacked in a safe manner and stored in the rear yard of the residential property or inside the building construction perimeter, except that building materials may be stored in a front yard for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days. A waiver of this requirement may be obtained from the Building Official or his/her designated representative if the construction is screened from view from adjacent occupied or public property with fencing materials approved by city zoning and building regulations.

 

        8.     A new Subsection [A] 105.9 is hereby added to Section 105 of Division II of CBC to read in its entirety as follows:

 

[A] 105.9 Requirement and Responsibility of Permittee. Permits as required by this Chapter shall be issued only to the following individuals:

 

1.     Duly Licensed Contractor/Contractor Proxy. A duly licensed contractor acting in compliance with the provisions of Sections 7000 through 7199 of the California Business and Professions Code, or a contractor proxy acting for a duly licensed contractor acting in compliance with the provisions of Sections 7000 through 7199 of the California Business and Professions Code with the completed Contractor Permit Proxy form in compliance with Section 7031.5 of the California Business and Professions Code.

 

2.     Owner Builder/Authorized Agent of the Owner Builder. An owner of a one- or two-family dwelling and related accessory building or structure acting in compliance with the provisions of Section 7044 of the California Business and Professions Code, or an agent authorized to act on behalf of an owner acting in compliance with the provisions of Section 7044 of the California Business and Professions Code with the completed Authorization of Agent to Act on Owner’s Behalf form in compliance with Section 19825 of the California Health and Safety Code; provided however, that the improvements of the property are not intended or offered for sale, the owner occupies and is their principal place of residence or intends to occupy one (1) of the units where such permit is to be obtained for the twelve (12) months prior to the completion of the work, and the owner has not performed work on more than two (2) buildings or structures during any three-year period.

 

3.     Workers’ Compensation Insurance Verification. The Department is required by Section 3800(a) of the California Labor Code to verify workers’ compensation insurance prior to issuing a permit. The permittee shall sign a declaration under penalty of perjury verifying Workers’ Compensation Coverage or exemption from coverage as required by Section 19825 of the California Health and Safety Code.

 

4.     Responsibility. Permits shall be presumed to incorporate the provision that the permittee, the permittee’s agent, employees, contractors or subcontractors shall carry out the proposed work in accordance with the approved construction documents and with all provisions of this Title, municipal code or other ordinances of the City or laws and statutes of the State applicable thereto, whether specified or not. No approval shall relieve or exonerate any person from the responsibility of complying with the provisions and intent of this Title, municipal code or other ordinances of the City or laws and statutes of the State applicable thereto.

 

Permits issued are the responsibility of the applicant/permitee/property owner and to be maintained in an active state until final inspection is granted or obtained. An applicant/permitee of a permit which allows said permit to expire is in violation of this code.

 

        9.     Subsection [A] 107.1 of Section 107 of Division II of CBC is hereby amended to read as follows:

 

[A] 107.1 General. Submittal documents consisting of construction documents, statement of special inspections, geotechnical report and other data shall be submitted in two or more sets with each permit application. The construction documents shall be prepared by a registered design professional where required by the statues of the jurisdiction in which the project is to be constructed, these documents also include Electrical/Mechanical/Plumbing plans and load calculations for residential and non-residential buildings meeting the threshold outlined in the policy. Where special conditions exist, the building official is authorized to require additional construction documents to be prepared by a registered design professional.

 

        10.   A new Subsection [A] 107.2.6 is added to Section 107 of Division II of CBC to read in its entirety as follows:

 

[A] 107.2.6 Soil report. A Soil report shall be submitted with all permit applications for new construction and additions. Soil Reports shall be prepared by a professional engineer licensed by the State to prepare such reports. The Building Official may waive this requirement if he/she finds that the scope of work applied for does not necessitate a soil report.

 

        11.   Subsection [A] 107.3 of Section 107 of Division II of CBC is hereby amended to add a second paragraph that reads as follows:

 

When submittal documents are required by Section [A] 107.1, a plan review fee shall be paid at the time of submitting the submittal documents for plan review. Said plan review fees are separate fees from the permit fees specified in Section [A] 109.2 and are in addition to the permit fees. Said plan review fee shall be as set forth in the City Council Fee Resolution. The initial plan review fee is for one complete review and one re-check review. Reviews beyond the initial and the re-check shall require additional fees as set forth in the City Council Fee Resolution.

 

        12.   Subsection [A] 107.5 of Section 107 of Division II of CBC is hereby amended to add a second paragraph that reads as follows:

 

The approved plans, permit application and inspection card and other construction documents required by the Building Official shall be imaged after the final inspection and will be a permanent record in the City. The applicant shall pay the cost of imaging at the time of permit. Said imaging fee shall be as set forth in the City Council Fee Resolution.

 

        13.   Subsection [A] 109.2 of Section 109 of Division II of CBC is hereby amended by adding a sentence at the end to read as follows:

 

The fee for each permit shall be as set forth in the City Council Fee Resolution unless otherwise specified by this code.

 

        14.   Subsection [A] 109.3 of Section 109 of Division II of CBC is hereby amended to add a second paragraph that reads as follows:

 

The Building Official shall make the determination of value or valuation under any provisions of this code. The valuation shall be determined by using rational methods established by the Building Official that reasonably establish the construction value or the contract price of the actual construction cost. The value of work to be used in computing the Building Permit and Building Plan Review fees shall be the total value of all construction work for which the permit is issued, as well as, all finish work, painting, roofing, electrical, plumbing, heating, air conditioning, elevators, fire extinguishing systems and any other permanent equipment.

 

        15.   Subsection [A] 109.4 of Section 109 of Division II of CBC is hereby amended to add a second paragraph that reads as follows:

 

An investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, shall be collected whether or not a permit is then or subsequently issued. The investigation fee shall be equal to the amount of the permit fee required by this code. The payment of such investigation fee shall not exempt any person from compliance with all other provisions of this code nor from any penalty prescribed by law.

 

        16.   Subsection [A] 109.6 of Section 109 of Division II of CBC is hereby amended to read in its entirety as follows:

 

[A] 109.6 Refunds. The building official may authorize refunding of any fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid or collected.

 

The building official may authorize refunding of not more than 80 percent of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this code.

 

The building official may authorize refunding of not more than 80 percent of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit for which a plan review has been paid is withdrawn or canceled before any plan reviewing is done.

 

The building official shall not authorize refunding of any fee paid except on written application filed by the original permittee not later than 180 days after the date of payment. No refund will be made for less than $25.00. Permit and plan check fees will be refunded in their entirety when collected in error.

 

        17.   A new Subsection [A] 110.7 is hereby added to Section 110 of Division II of CBC to read in its entirety as follows:

 

[A] 110.7 Reinspections. A reinspection fee may be assessed for each inspection or reinspection when such portion of work for which inspection is called is not complete or when corrections called for are not made.

 

This subsection is not to be interpreted as requiring reinspection fees the first time a job is rejected for failure to comply with the requirements of this Code, but as controlling the practice of calling for inspections before the job is ready for such inspection or reinspection.

 

Reinspection fees may be assessed when the inspection record card is not posted or otherwise made available on the work site, the approved plans are not readily available to the inspector, for failure to provide access on the date for which inspection is requested, or for deviating from plans requiring the approval of the Building Official.

 

To obtain a reinspection, the applicant shall file an application therefore in writing upon a form furnished for that purpose and pay the reinspection fee as established by the City Council Fee Resolution.

 

In instances where reinspection fees have been assessed, no additional inspection of the work will be performed until the required fees have been paid.

       

        18.   Subsection [A] 111.3 of Section 111 of Division II of CBC is hereby amended to add a second paragraph that reads as follows:

 

The application fee for such Temporary Certificate of Occupancy shall be as established by the City Council Fee Resolution. The Temporary Certificate of Occupancy may be subject to such conditions as deemed necessary by the Building Official. The Temporary Certificate of Occupancy expires 30 days after issuance and may be renewed for additional 30 day periods upon providing acceptable justification, the payment of a new application fee for each 30 day period and approval by the Building Official. The violation or failure of any such condition imposed shall be grounds for revocation of such Temporary Certificate of Occupancy.

        19.   Subsection [A] 113.1 of Section 113 of Division II of CBC is hereby amended to read in its entirety as follows:

 

[A] 113.1 General. In order to hear and decide appeals of the orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of this code, there shall be and is hereby created a board of appeals. The board of appeals shall be the City Council or a hearing officer appointed by the City Council.

 

        20.   Subsection [A] 113.3 of Section 113 of Division II of CBC is hereby deleted.

 

        21.   Subsection [A] 114.4 of Section 114 of Division II of CBC is hereby amended to add a second paragraph that reads as follows:

 

Any person, firms, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this Code shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and each such person shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this Code is committed, continued, or permitted, and upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment for not more than six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

 

        22.   A new Section [A] 117 is hereby added to Division II of CBC to read in its entirety as follows.

 

[A] 117.1 Underground Utilities Required. The Building Official shall, as a condition precedent to the issuance of a Building Permit, require all utility services located within the exterior boundary lines of lot or parcel of property to be installed underground if:

 

1.     The property is to be developed with a new or relocated main building;

 

2.     The remodeling, alteration, or addition to an existing main building exceeds fifty (50) percent of the value and/or area of the existing building;

 

3.     A residential building or use is converted to any nonresidential use or purpose.

 

For purposes of this section, the term “main building” shall mean a building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot or building site on which it is located.

 

The owner or developer of the property is responsible for complying with requirements of this section and shall provide all necessary facilities on the property to receive such service from the supplying utilities.

 

If it is determined that practical difficulties, or unreasonable hardships inconsistent with the purposes of this chapter and unique to a particular parcel of property, would result from the literal interpretation of this section, the Building Official may waive, modify, or delay the imposition of any undergrounding requirement imposed pursuant to the section upon written application of any affected property owner. The Building Official shall notify the applicant of his decision in writing by certified mail. If the Building Official determines to delay the installation of the required underground utilities, he may require a recorded agreement guaranteeing the future performance of the work, together with adequate performance security enforceable by the City in the form of a cash deposit, bond, letter of credit, or other instrument satisfactory to the City Attorney or require the installation of an over/under electrical service with the underground conduit being installed out to an approved pull-box in the parkway in conformance with current utility requirements.

 

For purposes of this section, appurtenances and associated equipment such as, but not limited to, surface-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts in an underground system, may be placed above ground.

Any person dissatisfied with the decision of the Building Official may file an appeal pursuant to Section 2.04.100 to 2.04.130 of the Dana Point Municipal Code.

 

        23.   Subsection 201.4 of Section 201 of Division II of CBC is hereby amended to replace the first paragraph that reads as follows:

 

Where terms, phases and words are not defined, they shall have their ordinary accepted meanings within the context with which they are used. Webster’s Third New International Dictionary of the English Language, Unabridged (1961 edition, through the 2002 addenda), shall be considered as providing ordinarily accepted meaning unless the context requires otherwise.

 

        24.   Section 202 of CBC is hereby amended by adding/revising the following definitions as follows:

 

[F] FLOOR AREA, FIRE SPRINKLERS. For the purpose of calculating square footage for application of fire sprinkler requirements, the floor area shall be determined to include the entire square footage of a room or designated area where any work or modifications are being made or proposed.

 

[F] SPARK ARRESTER. A listed device constructed of noncombustible material specifically for the purpose of meeting one of the following conditions:

 

1.     Removing and retaining carbon and other flammable particles/debris from the exhaust flow of an internal combustion engine in accordance with California Vehicle Code Section 38366.

2.     Fireplaces that burn solid fuel in accordance with California Building Code Chapter 28.

 

[A] SURCHARGE. A surcharge on a retaining wall is any load in addition to level grade, within that area defined by a 45 degree angle from the bottom of the footing to level grade. Examples of a surcharge may be a building or structure, fence, vehicle, driveway, slope or similar condition above level grade, within the hatched “Surcharge Area” shown in the figure below

.

[A] SURCHARGE LOAD. A surcharge load is an additional load superimposed onto the earth pressure force to yield the total lateral force.

 

[A] SWIMMING POOL(S). Any structure intended for swimming, recreational bathing or wading that contains water over 18 inches deep. This includes in-ground, above-ground and on-ground pools; hot tubs; spas and fixed-in-place wading pools.

 

        25.   Subsection 406.2.4 of Section 406 of CBC is hereby amended by deleting the exception and amending to read in its entirety as follows:

 

Floor surfaces shall be of concrete or similar approved noncombustible and nonabsorbent materials. The area of floor used for parking of automobiles or other vehicles shall be sloped to facilitate the movement of liquids to a drain or toward the main vehicle entry doorway with an approved oil separator or trap discharging to sewers in accordance with the California Plumbing Code.

 

        26.   Subsection [F] 502.1 of Section 502 of the CBC is hereby amended to read in its entirety as follows:

 

[F] 502.1 Address Identification. New and existing buildings shall have approved address numbers, building numbers or approved building identification on the building placed in a position that is plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property. Multi-family dwellings and non-residential buildings that have access from an alley or thoroughfare shall have an additional set of address number installed that is visible from said alley or thoroughfare. These numbers shall contrast with their background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numbers or alphabetical letters. Numbers shall be a minimum of 4 inches (101.6 mm) high with a minimum stroke width of 0.5 inch (12.7 mm) for R-3 occupancies, for all other occupancies the numbers shall be a minimum of 6 inches high with a minimum stroke width of 1 inch. Where access is by a private road and the building cannot be viewed from the public way, a monument, pole or other sign or means shall be used to identify the structure.

 

        27.   Subsection 701A.1 of Section 701A of CBC is hereby amended to read as follows:

 

701A.1 Scope. This chapter applies to building materials, systems and/or assemblies used in the exterior design and construction of new buildings and qualifying alterations/additions located in any Fire Hazard Severity Zone or Wildland-Urban Interface Fire Area designated by the enforcing agency as defined in Section 702A.

 

        28.   Subsection 701A.3 of Section 701A of CBC is hereby amended by deleting exception number 4 and amending the first paragraph to read as follows:

 

701A.3 Application. New buildings and qualifying alterations/additions (as defined in 701A.3.1.1 below) located in any Fire Hazard Severity Zone or Wildland-Urban Interface Fire Area designated by the enforcing agency constructed after the application date shall comply with the provisions of this chapter.

 

        29.   Subsection 701A.3.1 of Section 701A of CBC is hereby amended by deleting the words “all sections of this chapter, including all of the following areas” and by adding item #4 to read as follows:

 

4.     Land designated by the City of Dana Point as defined in Fig 701A-1 (Ember Zones 1 & 2) shall comply only with section 701A.3.2 and 701A.3.3. These requirements shall be applicable to building permits submitted on or after the effective date of the local ordinance. Ember Zones 1 & 2 shall not be considered Wildland Urban Interface Fire Area.

 

        30.   A new Subsection 701A.3.1.1 is hereby added to Section 701A of CBC to read in its entirety as follows:

 

701A.3.1.1 Existing Buildings. When an existing building undergoes alterations or additions, only those construction elements altered or added to the original structure shall comply with this chapter.

 

        31.   A new Subsection 701A.3.3 is hereby added to Section 701A of CBC to read in its entirety as follows:

 

701A.3.3 Construction Features Designated by the Enforcing Agency: Ember Zone 1.

 

New buildings and qualifying alterations/additions located within Ember Zone 1 for which an application for a building permit is submitted on or after the effective date of this ordinance shall comply only with the following sections of this chapter:

1.     703A - Standards of Quality, as applicable

2.     704A - Ignition Resistant Construction, as applicable

3.     705A - Roofing

4.     706A - Vents

 

        32.   A new Subsection 701A.3.4 is hereby added to Section 701A of CBC is hereby amended to read as follows:

 

701A.3.4 Construction Features Designated by the Enforcing Agency: Ember Zone 2.

 

New buildings and qualifying alterations/additions located within Ember Zone 2 for which an application for a building permit is submitted on or after the effective date of this ordinance shall comply only with the following sections of this chapter:

1.     703A - Standards of Quality, as applicable

2.     704A - Ignition Resistant Construction, as applicable

3.     705A - Roofing

4.     706A - Vents

5.     Decking

Decks, porches, balconies and stairs shall comply with the requirements of Section 709A when: (a) the walking surface area of a single deck or balcony is greater than 100 square feet (increased to 120 square feet when connected to a stair), and (b) located within 100 feet of fuel modification or open space containing unmanaged, non-irrigated vegetation.

 

Decking within a Fuel Modification Zone. Decking located within any portion of a fuel modification zone shall be entirely non-combustible.

 

6.     Accessory Structures

Applicability. The provision of this section shall apply to patio covers located closer than 100 feet from fuel modification or open space containing unmanaged, non-irrigated vegetation.

 

Requirements. The patio covers shall be constructed of noncombustible or ignition-resistant materials.

 

Exception: When the construction features meet all of the following:

A.    Columns: Minimum dimension of 4x4 (nominal dimension in inches)

B.     Horizontal beams: Minimum 4x6 (nominal dimension in inches)

C.     Top horizontal members: A minimum of 2-inch spacing is provided between the members.

D.    The ledger meets the ignition-resistant material definition as prescribed in CBC Section 702A.

 

        33.   Subsection [F] 903.2 of Section 903 of CBC is hereby amended to read in its entirety as follows:

 

[F] 903.2 Where Required. Approved automatic sprinkler systems in new buildings and structures shall be provided in the locations described in this section and in Section 903.2 of the California Fire Code as amended by the City of Dana Point as follows:

 

1.     New Buildings: In addition to the requirements of section 903.2.1 through 903.2.13, approved automatic sprinkler systems in new buildings and structures shall be provided as follows (Exception: Group R Detached one- two-family dwellings and townhouses as required by section 903.2.8):

 

1.1   Throughout all Groups A, I, E, and H Occupancies.

1.2   Throughout all Group B, F, M, and S Occupancies exceeding 1,000 square feet.

1.3   Throughout all Group U Occupancies exceeding 6,000 square feet.

 

For the purposes of this section, fire walls shall not define separate buildings.

 

2.     Existing Building:

 

1.     Alteration: When the floor area of the Alteration within any two-year period exceeds 75% of area of the existing structure and the alteration includes structural modifications other than seismic upgrade.

 

2.     Addition: Sprinkler protection shall be provided throughout the entire building when:

 

1.     Existing building less than 5,000 ft2: where 20% or more is added and the gross floor area exceeds 5,000 square feet.

2.     Existing building equal or greater than 5,000 ft2: where more than 1,000 ft2 is added.

3.     The existing building has fire sprinklers installed.

 

        34.   Subsection [F] 903.2.8 of Section 903 of CBC is hereby amended to read in its entirety as follows:

 

[F] 903.2.8 Group R. An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3 shall be provided throughout all buildings with a Group R fire area as follows:

 

1.     New Buildings: An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout all new buildings.

 

2.     Existing R-3 Buildings: An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout when one of the following conditions exists:

 

1.     When the floor area of alterations within any two year period exceeds 50 percent of gross floor area of the existing structure and the building gross floor area exceeds 5,500 square feet; or:

 

2.     When an existing Group R Occupancy is being substantially renovated, and where the scope of the renovation is such that the Building Code Official determines that the complexity of installing a sprinkler system would be similar as in a new building.

 

Exceptions:

 

1.     Existing Group R-3 occupancies converted to Group R-3.1 occupancies not housing bedridden clients, not housing nonambulatory clients above the first floor and not housing clients above the second floor.

2.     Existing Group R-3 occupancies converted to Group R-3.1 occupancies housing only one bedridden client and complying with Section 425.8.3.3.

3.     Pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 13113 occupancies housing ambulatory children only, none of whom are mentally ill or developmentally disabled, and the buildings or portions thereof in which such children are housed are not more than two stories in height, and buildings or portions thereof housing such children have an automatic fire alarm system activated by approved smoke detectors.

4.     Pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 13143.6 occupancies licensed for protective social care which house ambulatory clients only, none of whom is a child (under the age of 18 years), or who is elderly (65 years of age or over).

 

When not used in accordance with Section 504.2 or 506.3 an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Subsection 903.3.1.2 shall be allowed in Group R-2.1 occupancies.

 

An automatic sprinkler system designed in accordance with Subsection 903.3.1.3 shall not be utilized in Group R-2.1 or R-4 occupancies.

 

        35.   Subsection [F] 903.3.5.3 of Section 903 of CBC is hereby added to read as follows:

 

[F] 903.3.5.3 Hydraulically Calculated Systems. The design of hydraulically calculated fire sprinkler systems shall not exceed 90% of the water supply capacity.

 

Exception: When static pressure exceeds 100 psi, and when required by the fire code official, the fire sprinkler system shall not exceed the water supply capacity specified by Table 903.3.5.3.

 



 

        36.   Subsection [F] 905.4 of Section 905 of CBC is hereby amended by adding item 7 as follows:

 

7.     The centerline of the 2.5″ (64mm) outlet shall be no less than 18″ (457) above and no more than 24″ (610mm) above the finished floor.

 

        37.   Subsection [P] 1503.4 of Section 1503 of CBC is hereby amended by adding a second paragraph to read as follows:

 

Water that accumulates on a roof shall be effectively drained and conveyed from the roof to a storm drain, street gutter, or other locations approved by the Building Official. Such water shall be conveyed through gutters, leaders, associated piping or other non-erodible surface drainage devices as approved by the Building Official. For any minor or small roofs, the Building Official may exempt this requirement.

 

        38.   Table 1505.1 in Subsection 1505.1 of Section 1505 of CBC is hereby amended to read as follows:

 

TABLE 1505.1a

MINIMUM ROOF COVERING CLASSIFICATION
FOR TYPES OF CONSTRUCTION


IA

IB

IIA

IIB

IIIA

IIIB

IV

VA

VB

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

For SI: 1 Foot = 304.8 mm, 1 square foot = 0.0929 m2

a Unless otherwise required in accordance with Chapter 7A

 

        39.   Subsections 1505.1.1, 1505.1.2, 1505.1.3 of Section 1505 of CBC are hereby deleted and replaced with new Subsections 1505.1.1 and 1505.1.2 to read in its entirety as follows:

 

1505.1.1 Roof Coverings. The roof covering or roofing assembly on any new structure regulated by this code shall be Class A fire retardant roof minimum as classified in Section 1505.2. Non-combustible roof covering may be applied in accordance with the manufacturer’s requirements in lieu of a fire retardant roofing assembly. Wood roofing materials are prohibited unless pressure treated and approved for fire retardant of Class A minimum. For existing structure when ten percent (10%) or more of the total roof area is re-roofed within any one-year period, shall have a Class A fire retardant roof covering for entire roof area. For existing structure when less than ten percent (10%) of the total roof area is re-roofed within any one-year period, shall have a fire retardant roof covering class equal to or greater than the existing roof covering and not less than Class B.

 

1505.1.2 Certification. Contractors installing roof assemblies or the building owner shall, prior to final approval of installation, provide a certificate of the roof assembly classification to the building inspector upon request.

 

        40.   Subsection 1807.1.6 of Section 1807 of CBC is hereby amended to read as follows:

       

1807.1.6 Prescriptive Design of Concrete and Masonry Foundation Walls. Concrete and masonry foundation walls that are laterally supported at the top and bottom shall be permitted to be designed and constructed in accordance with this section. Prescriptive design of foundation walls shall not be used for structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E or F.

 

        41.   A new Subsection 3109.3 is hereby added to Section 3109 of CBC and is hereby amended to read in its entirety as follows:

 

3109.3 Public Swimming Pools. Public swimming pools shall be completely enclosed by a fence at least 5 feet in height or a screen enclosure.

 

        42.   Subsection 115923(b) of Section 3109 of CBC is hereby amended to read in its entirety as follows:

 

(b)    A minimum height of 60 inches above grade measured on the side of the barrier that faces away from the swimming pool.

 

        43.   A new Subsection 3109.1.1 is hereby added to Section 3109 of CBC to read as follows:

 

3109.1.1 Sound Attenuation. Filters, heating systems, and pumps installed to serve pool, spa, hot tub, waterfall or any body of water, shall be enclosed and soundproofed. An acoustical report prepared by a licensed or approved acoustical professional can be used to substitute for sound wall enclosures as long as the report demonstrates the compliance of the requirements specified in Chapter 11.10 of the Dana Point Municipal Code.

 

        44.   Chapter 35 Referenced Standards is adopted in its entirety with the following amendments:

 

NFPA 13, 2016 Edition, Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems is hereby amended as follows:

Section 6.7.3 is hereby revised to read as follows:

 

6.7.3 Fire department connections (FDC) shall be of an approved type. The location shall be approved and be no more than 150 feet from a public hydrant. The FDC may be located within 150 feet of a private fire hydrant when approved by the fire code official. The size of piping and the number of 2½″ inlets shall be approved by the fire code official. If acceptable to the water authority, it may be installed on the backflow assembly. Fire department inlet connections shall be painted OSHA safety red or as approved. When the fire sprinkler density design requires more than 500 gpm (including inside hose stream demand), or a standpipe system is included, four 2½″ inlets shall be provided.

 

Section 8.3.3.1 is hereby revised to read as follows:

 

8.3.3.1 When fire sprinkler systems are installed in shell buildings of undetermined use (Spec Buildings) other than warehouses (S occupancies), fire sprinklers of the quick-response type shall be used. Use is considered undetermined if a specific tenant/occupant is not identified at the time the fire sprinkler plan is submitted. Sprinklers in light hazard occupancies shall be one of the following:

 

1.     Quick-response type as defined in Section 3.6.4.8

2.     Residential sprinklers in accordance with the requirements of Section 8.4.5

3.     Quick response CMSA sprinklers

4.     ESFR sprinklers

5.     Standard-response sprinklers used for modifications or additions to existing light hazard systems equipped with standard-response sprinklers

6.     Standard-response sprinklers used where individual standard-response sprinklers are replaced in existing light hazard systems

 

Section 11.1.1.1 is hereby added as follows:

 

11.1.1.1 When fire sprinkler systems are required in buildings of undetermined use other than warehouses, they shall be designed and installed to have a fire sprinkler density of not less than that required for an Ordinary Hazard Group 2 use, with no reduction(s) in density or design area. Warehouse fire sprinkler systems shall be designed to Figure 16.2.1.3.2 (d) curve “G”. Use is considered undetermined if a specific tenant/occupant is not identified at the time the sprinkler plan is submitted. Where a subsequent use or occupancy requires a system with greater capability, it shall be the responsibility of the occupant to upgrade the system to the required density for the new use or occupancy.

 

Section 11.2.3.1.1.1 is hereby added as follows:

 

11.2.3.1.1.1 The available water supply for fire sprinkler system design shall be determined by one of the following methods, as approved by the fire code official:

1.     Subtract the project site elevation from the low water level for the appropriate pressure zone and multiply the result by 0.433;

2.     Use a maximum of 40 psi, if available;

3.     Utilize the OCFA water-flow test form/directions to document a flow test conducted by the local water agency or an approved third party licensed in the State of California.

 

NFPA 13D 2016 Edition, Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems in One- and Two-Family Dwellings and Manufactured Homes is hereby amended as follows:

Section 7.1.2 is hereby revised to read as follows:

 

7.1.2 The sprinkler system piping shall not have separate control valves installed unless supervised by a central station, proprietary, or remote station alarm service.

 

NFPA 14, 2013 Edition, Installation of Standpipe and Hose Systems is hereby amended as follows:

Section 7.3.1.1 is hereby revised to read as follows:

 

7.3.1.1 Class I and III Standpipe hose connections shall be unobstructed and shall be located not less than 18 inches or more than 24 inches above the finished floor. Class II Standpipe hose connections shall be unobstructed and shall be located not less than 3 feet or more than 5 feet above the finished floor.

 

NFPA 24, 2016 Edition, Standard for the Installation of Private Fire Service Mains and Their Appurtenances is hereby amended as follows:

Section 6.2.8.1 is hereby added as follows:

 

6.2.8.1 All indicating valves controlling fire suppression water supplies shall be painted OSHA red.

 

Exceptions:

1.     Brass or bronze valves on sprinkler risers mounted to the exterior of the building may be left unpainted.

2.     Where OS&Y valves on the detector check assembly are the only control valves, at least one OS&Y valve shall be painted red.

 

Section 6.2.9 is hereby revised to read as follows:

 

All connections to private fire service mains for fire protection systems shall be arranged in accordance with one of the following so that they can be isolated:

 

(1)    A post indicator valve installed not less than 40 ft. (12 m) from the building

 

(a)    For buildings less than 40 ft. (12 m) in height, a post indicator valve shall be permitted to be installed closer than 40 ft. (12 m) but at least as far from the building as the height of the wall facing the post indicator valve.

 

(2)    A wall post indicator valve

 

(3)    An indicating valve in a pit, installed in accordance with Section 6.4

 

(4)    A backflow preventer with at least one indicating valve not less than 40 ft. (12 m) from the building

 

(a)    For buildings less than 40 ft. (12 m) in height, a backflow preventer with at least one indicating valve shall be permitted to be installed closer than 40 ft. (12 m) but at least as far from the building as the height of the wall facing the backflow preventer.

 

(5)    Control valves installed in a fire-rated room accessible from the exterior

 

(6)    Control valves in a fire-rated stair enclosure accessible from the exterior

 

Section 10.1.5 is hereby added as follows:

 

10.1.5 All ferrous pipe and joints shall be polyethylene encased per AWWA C150, Method A, B, or C. All fittings shall be protected with a loose 8-mil polyethylene tube or sheet. The ends of the tube or sheet shall extend past the joint by a minimum of 12 inches and be sealed with 2 inch wide tape approved for underground use. Galvanizing does not meet the requirements of this section.

 

Exception: 304 or 316 Stainless Steel pipe and fittings

 

Section 10.4.1.1 is hereby revised to read as follows:

 

10.4.1.1 All bolted joint accessories shall be cleaned and thoroughly coated with asphalt or other corrosion-retarding material after installation.

 

Exception: Bolted joint accessories made from 304 or 316 stainless steel.

 

Section 10.4.1.1.1 is hereby added as follows:

 

10.4.1.1.1 All bolts used in pipe-joint assembly shall be 316 stainless steel.

 

Section 10.4.3.2 is hereby revised to read as follows:

 

10.4.3.2 Where fire service mains enter the building adjacent to the foundation, the pipe may run under a building to a maximum of 24 inches, as measured from the interior face of the exterior wall to the center of the vertical pipe. The pipe under the building or building foundation shall be 304 or 316 stainless steel and shall not contain mechanical joints or it shall comply with 10.4.3.2.1 through 10.4.3.2.4.

 

(Added by Ord. 07-09, 12/4/07; amended by Ord. 16-08, 11/15/16; Ord. 19-05, 12/3/19)

Chapter 8.03 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE
8.03.001 Adoption of the California Residential Code.
        The City Council of the City of Dana Point hereby adopts for the purpose of prescribing regulations for the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, improving, removal, conversion, demolition, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area and maintenance of all buildings and structures by reference the California Code of Regulations Title 24, Part 2.5, known and designated as the California Residential Code (CRC), 2019 Edition, based on the 2018 International Residential Code with Appendix V Swimming Pool Safety Act as published by the International Code Council, including Division II in Chapter 1 and Appendix H and O and with the modifications set forth below. The provisions of this Code shall constitute the One- and Two-Family and Townhouse building code regulations of the City. The California Residential Code is on file for public examination in the office of the Building Official. (Added by Ord. 16-08, 11/15/16; amended by Ord. 19-05, 12/3/19)

 

8.03.010 Amendments, Additions and Deletions.
        1.     Subsection R101.1 of Section R101 of Division II of CRC is hereby amended to read in its entirety as follows:

 

R101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the California Residential Code for One- and Two-family Dwellings and Townhouses of the City of Dana Point, hereinafter referred to as “this code.”

 

        2.     Subsection R101.2 of Section R101 of Division II of CRC is hereby amended to add a second paragraph that reads:

 

The provisions of this codes shall apply to and affect all of the territory of the City of Dana Point, except work located primarily in a public way, public utility towers and poles, mechanical equipment not specifically regulated in these codes, hydraulic flood control structures, facilities for the production, generation, storage or transmission of water or electrical energy by a local agency unless requested otherwise by the local authority/agency.

 

        3.     Subsection R105.2 of Section 105 of Division II of CRC is hereby amended by deleting items 1 through 10 under “Building” and replacing them with the following:

 

Building:

 

1.     One-story detached accessory buildings used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses and structures such as portable shade cloth structures, provided the floor area does not exceed 120 square feet (11 m2). Such structures must comply with the setback and height requirements of the City Zoning Ordinance and the Fire Code.

 

2.     Masonry or concrete fences not over 36 inches (914 mm) in height above lowest adjacent grade, and all other fences not over six (6) feet (1,829 mm) in height above lowest adjacent grade.

 

Exception: Walls and fences less than six (6) feet (1,829 mm) in height which are required as a condition of project approval, guard system or pool barrier system are required to have permits.

 

3.     Oil derricks.

 

4.     Retaining walls that are not over three (3) feet (914 mm) in height measured from the bottom of footing to the top of wall unless supporting a surcharge or impounding Class I, II or IIIA liquids.

 

5.     Water tanks supported directly on grade if the capacity does not exceed 5,000 gallons and the ratio of height to diameter or width does not exceed 2:1.

 

6.     Decks, platforms or similar structures, walkways, sidewalks and driveways not more than 30 inches (762 mm) above adjacent grade, and not over any basement or story below and are not part of an accessible route.

 

7.     Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting and similar finish work that does not involve electrical, mechanical or plumbing work and providing this work is not part of a Code Enforcement case or action.

 

8.     Temporary motion picture, television and theater stage sets and scenery.

 

9.     Prefabricated swimming pools accessory to a Group R-3 occupancy that are less than 18 inches (457 mm) deep, do not exceed 5,000 gallons and are installed entirely above ground.

 

10.   Shade cloth structures constructed for nursery or agricultural purposes, not including service systems.

 

11.   Swings and other playground equipment accessory to detached one- and two-family dwellings.

 

12.   Window awnings supported by an exterior wall that do not project more than 54 inches (1,372 mm) from the exterior wall and do not require additional support of Group R-3 and U occupancies.

 

13.   Nonfixed and movable fixtures, cases, racks, counters and partitions not over five (5) feet nine (9) inches (1,753 mm) in height.

 

14.   Radio and television antenna, and flagpoles not over twelve (12) feet (3,658 mm) in height measured from grade.

 

Unless otherwise exempted, separate plumbing, electrical and mechanical permits will be required for the above-exempted items.

Any of the above items that are located on a Coastal Bluff, Flood Plain Overlay District, Environmentally Sensitive Area or subject to a discretionary Planning Division approval or as otherwise required by the Planning Division or any other authority/agency is not exempt from permits.

 

        4.     Subsection R105.3.1 of Section R105 of Division II of CRC is hereby amended to read as follows:

 

R105.3.1 Action on Application. The building official shall examine or cause to be examined applications for permits and amendments thereto within a reasonable time after filing. If the application or the construction documents do not conform to the requirements of pertinent laws, or if the building, structure, or property is not in compliance with any and all federal, state, local laws, and ordinances and all fines, levies, and abatement cost are not paid in full, the building official shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons therefor. If the building official is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirement of this code and laws and ordinances applicable thereto, the building official shall issue a permit therefor as soon as possible. The building official shall not issue any permits to an applicant if the building, structure, or property is not in compliance with all federal, state, local laws, and ordinances and all fines, levies, and abatement cost are not paid in full.

 

        5.     Subsection R105.3.2 of Section R105 of Division II of CRC is hereby amended to read in its entirety as follows:

 

R105.3.2 Time Limitation of Application. An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned 180 days after the date of filing, unless such application has been pursued in good faith or permit has been issued; except that the building official is authorized to grant one extension of time for additional periods not exceeding 180 days. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. In order to renew action on an application after expiration, the applicant shall resubmit plans and pay a new plan check fee.

 

        6.     Subsection R105.5 of Section R105 of Division II of CRC is hereby amended to read in its entirety as follows:

 

R105.5 Expiration. Every permit issued by the Building Official under the provisions of this Code shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the building or work authorized by such permit is not commenced within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of such permit. Work shall be considered suspended or abandoned if substantial approval of one of the required progress inspections is not accomplished every 180 days as determined by the Building Official. Before such work can be re-commenced a new permit shall be first obtained to do so, and the fee therefore shall be one-half the amount required for a new permit for such work; provided, however, that:

 

1.     No changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications for such work; and

 

2.     Such suspension or abandonment has not exceeded one (1) year; and

 

3.     A re-endorsement of the compliance of the plans with the applicable regulations, by the Building Official, shall be obtained.

 

In order to renew action on a permit after expiration, the permittee shall pay a new full permit fee.

 

Any permittee holding an unexpired permit may apply for an extension of the time within which work may commence under that permit when the permittee is unable to commence work within the time required by this section for good and satisfactory reasons. The Building Official may extend the time for action by the permittee for a period not exceeding one hundred eighty (180) days upon written request by the permittee showing that circumstances beyond the control of the permittee have prevented action from being taken. Such written request shall be submitted no later than sixty (60) days after expiration of the permit. No permit shall be extended more than once.

 

        7.     A new Subsection R105.10 is hereby added to Section R105 of Division II of CRC to read in its entirety as follows:

 

R105.10 Maintenance of Property During Construction. During construction, all property shall be maintained in a reasonably clean and well-kept manner. All lumber and building materials shall be neatly piled or stacked in a safe manner and stored in the rear yard of the residential property or inside the building construction perimeter, except that building materials may be stored in a front yard for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days. A waiver of this requirement may be obtained from the Building Official or his/her designated representative if the construction is screened from view from adjacent occupied or public property with fencing materials approved by city zoning and building regulations.

 

        8.     A new Subsection R105.11 is hereby added to Section 105 of Division II of CRC to read in its entirety as follows:

 

R105.11 Requirement and Responsibility of Permittee. Permittee. Permits as required by this Chapter shall be issued only to the following individuals:

 

1.     Duly Licensed Contractor/Contractor Proxy. A duly licensed contractor acting in compliance with the provisions of Sections 7000 through 7199 of the California Business and Professions Code, or a contractor proxy acting for a duly licensed contractor acting in compliance with the provisions of Sections 7000 through 7199 of the California Business and Professions Code with the completed Contractor Permit Proxy form in compliance with Section 7031.5 of the California Business and Professions Code.

 

2.     Owner Builder/Authorized Agent of the Owner Builder. An owner of a one- or two-family dwelling and related accessory building or structure acting in compliance with the provisions of Section 7044 of the California Business and Professions Code, or an agent authorized to act on behalf of an owner acting in compliance with the provisions of Section 7044 of the California Business and Professions Code with the completed Authorization of Agent to Act on Owner’s Behalf form in compliance with Section 19825 of the California Health and Safety Code; provided however, that the improvements of the property are not intended or offered for sale, the owner occupies and is their principal place of residence or intends to occupy one (1) of the units where such permit is to be obtained for the twelve (12) months prior to the completion of the work, and the owner has not performed work on more than two (2) buildings or structures during any three-year period.

 

3.     Workers’ Compensation Insurance Verification. The Department is required by Section 3800(a) of the California Labor Code to verify workers’ compensation insurance prior to issuing a permit. The permittee shall sign a declaration under penalty of perjury verifying Workers’ Compensation Coverage or exemption from coverage as required by Section 19825 of the California Health and Safety Code.

 

4.     Responsibility. Permits shall be presumed to incorporate the provision that the permittee, the permittee’s agent, employees, contractors or subcontractors shall carry out the proposed work in accordance with the approved construction documents and with all provisions of this Title, municipal code or other ordinances of the City or laws and statutes of the State applicable thereto, whether specified or not. No approval shall relieve or exonerate any person from the responsibility of complying with the provisions and intent of this Title, municipal code or other ordinances of the City or laws and statutes of the State applicable thereto.

 

Permits issued are the responsibility of the applicant/permitee/property owner and to be maintained in an active state until final inspection is granted or obtained. An applicant/permitee of a permit which allows said permit to expire is in violation of this code.

 

        9.     Subsection R106.1 of Section R106 of Division II of CRC is hereby amended to read as follows:

 

R106.1 Submittal Documents. Submittal documents consisting of construction documents, statement of special inspections, geotechnical report and other data shall be submitted in two or more sets with each application for a permit. The construction documents shall be prepared by a registered design professional where required by the statues of the jurisdiction in which the project is to be constructed, these documents also include Electrical/Mechanical/Plumbing plans and load calculations for the one and two-family dwellings meeting the threshold outlined in the policy. Where special conditions exist, the building official is authorized to require additional construction documents to be prepared by a registered design professional.

 

        10.   A new Subsection R106.2.1 is added to Section R106 of Division II of CRC to read in its entirety as follows:

 

R106.2.1 Soil Report. A Soil report shall be submitted with all permit applications for new construction and additions. Soil Reports shall be prepared by a professional engineer licensed by the State to prepare such reports. The Building Official may waive this requirement if he/she finds that the scope of work applied for does not necessitate a soil report.

 

        11.   Subsection R106.3 of Section R106 of Division II of CRC is hereby amended to add a second paragraph that reads as follows:

 

When submittal documents are required by Section R106.1, a plan review fee shall be paid at the time of submitting the submittal documents for plan review. Said plan review fees are separate fees from the permit fees specified in Section R108.2 and are in addition to the permit fees. Said plan review fee shall be as set forth in the City Council Fee Resolution. The initial plan review fee is for one complete review and one re-check review. Reviews beyond the initial and the re-check shall require addition fees as set forth in the City Council Fee Resolution.

 

        12.   Subsection R106.5 of Section R106 of Division II of CRC is hereby amended to add a second paragraph that reads as follows:

 

The approved plans, permit application and inspection card and other construction documents required by the Building Official shall be imaged after the final inspection and will be a permanent record in the City. The applicant shall pay the cost of imaging at the time of permit. Said imaging fee shall be as set forth in the City Council Fee Resolution.

 

        13.   Subsection R108.2 of Section R108 of Division II of CRC is hereby amended by adding a sentence at the end to read as follows:

 

The fee for each permit shall be as set forth in the City Council Fee Resolution unless otherwise specified by this code.

 

        14.   Subsection R108.3 of Section R108 of Division II of CRC is hereby amended to add a second paragraph that reads as follows:

 

The Building Official shall make the determination of value or valuation under any provisions of this code. The valuation shall be determined by using rational methods established by the Building Official that reasonably establish the construction value or the contract price of the actual construction cost. The value of work to be used in computing the Building Permit and Building Plan Review fees shall be the total value of all construction work for which the permit is issued, as well as all finish work, painting, roofing, electrical, plumbing, heating, air conditioning, elevators, fire extinguishing systems and any other permanent equipment.

 

        15.   Subsection R108.5 of Section R108 of Division II of CRC is hereby amended to read in its entirety as follows:

 

R108.5 Refunds. The building official may authorize refunding of any fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid or collected.

 

The building official may authorize refunding of not more than 80 percent of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this code.

 

The building official may authorize refunding of not more than 80 percent of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit for which a plan review has been paid is withdrawn or canceled before any plan reviewing is done.

 

The building official shall not authorize refunding of any fee paid except on written application filed by the original permittee not later than 180 days after the date of payment. No refund will be made for less than $25.00. Permit and plan check fees will be refunded in their entirety then collected in error.

 

        16.   Subsection R108.6 of Section R108 of Division II of CRC is hereby amended to add a second paragraph that reads as follows:

 

An investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, shall be collected whether or not a permit is then or subsequently issued. The investigation fee shall be equal to the amount of the permit fee required by this code. The payment of such investigation fee shall not exempt any person from compliance with all other provisions of this code nor from any penalty prescribed by law.

 

        17.   A new Subsection R109.5 is hereby added to Section R109 of Division II of CRC to read in its entirety as follows:

 

R109.5 Reinspections. A reinspection fee may be assessed for each inspection or reinspection when such portion of work for which inspection is called is not complete or when corrections called for are not made.

 

This subsection is not to be interpreted as requiring reinspection fees the first time a job is rejected for failure to comply with the requirements of this Code, but as controlling the practice of calling for inspections before the job is ready for such inspection or reinspection.

 

Reinspection fees may be assessed when the inspection record card is not posted or otherwise made available on the work site, the approved plans are not readily available to the inspector, for failure to provide access on the date for which inspection is requested, or for deviating from plans requiring the approval of the Building Official.

 

To obtain a reinspection, the applicant shall file an application therefore in writing upon a form furnished for that purpose and pay the reinspection fee as established by the City Council Fee Resolution.

 

In instances where reinspection fees have been assessed, no additional inspection of the work will be performed until the required fees have been paid.

       

        18.   Subsection R110.4 of Section R110 of Division II of CRC is hereby amended to add a second paragraph that reads as follows:

 

The application fee for such Temporary Certificate of Occupancy shall be as established by the City Council Fee Resolution. The Temporary Certificate of Occupancy may be subject to such conditions as deemed necessary by the Building Official. The Temporary Certificate of Occupancy expires 30 days after issuance and may be renewed for additional 30 day periods upon providing acceptable justification, the payment of a new application fee for each 30 day period and approval by the Building Official. The violation or failure of any such condition imposed shall be grounds for revocation of such Temporary Certificate of Occupancy.

 

        19.   Subsection R112.1 of Section R112 of Division II of CRC is hereby amended to read in its entirety as follows:

 

R112.1 General. In order to hear and decide appeals of the orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of this code, there shall be and is hereby created a board of appeals. The board of appeals shall be the City Council.

 

        20.   Subsection R112.3 of Section R112 of Division II of CRC is hereby deleted.

        21.   Subsection R113.4 of Section R113 of Division II of CRC is hereby amended to add a second paragraph that reads as follows:

 

Any person, firms, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this Code shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and each such person shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this Code is committed, continued, or permitted, and upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment for not more than six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

 

        22.   A new Section R115 is hereby added to Division II of CRC to read in its entirety as follows.

 

R115.1 Underground Utilities Required. The Building Official shall, as a condition precedent to the issuance of a Building Permit, require all utility services located within the exterior boundary lines of lot or parcel of property to be installed underground if:

 

1.     The property is to be developed with a new or relocated main building;

 

2.     The remodeling, alteration, or addition to an existing main building exceeds fifty (50) percent of the value and/or area of the existing building;

 

3.     A residential building or use is converted to any nonresidential use or purpose.

 

For purposes of this section, the term “main building” shall mean a building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot or building site on which it is located.

 

The owner or developer of the property is responsible for complying with requirements of this section and shall provide all necessary facilities on the property to receive such service from the supplying utilities.

 

If it is determined that practical difficulties, or unreasonable hardships inconsistent with the purposes of this chapter and unique to a particular parcel of property, would result from the literal interpretation of this section, the Building Official may waive, modify, or delay the imposition of any undergrounding requirement imposed pursuant to the section upon written application of any affected property owner. The Building Official shall notify the applicant of his decision in writing by certified mail. If the Building Official determines to delay the installation of required underground utilities, he or she may require a recorded agreement guaranteeing the future performance of the work, together with adequate performance security enforceable by the City in the form of a cash deposit, bond, letter of credit, or other instrument satisfactory to the City Attorney or require the installation of an over/under electrical service with the underground conduit being installed out to an approved pull-box in the parkway in conformance with current utility requirements.

 

For purposes of this section, appurtenances and associated equipment such as, but not limited to, surface-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts in an underground system, may be placed above ground.

Any person dissatisfied with the decision of the Building Official may file an appeal pursuant to Section 2.04.100 to 2.04.130 of the Dana Point Municipal Code.

 

        23.   Subsection R201.4 of Division II of CRC is hereby amended to replace the first paragraph that reads as follows:

 

Where terms, phases and words are not defined, they shall have their ordinary accepted meanings within the context with which they are used. Webster’s Third New International Dictionary of the English Language, Unabridged (1961 edition, through the 2002 addenda), shall be considered as providing ordinarily accepted meaning unless the context requires otherwise.

 

        24.   Section R202 of Division II of CRC is hereby amended by adding the following definitions as follows:

 

FLOOR AREA, FIRE SPRINKLERS. For the purpose of calculating square footage for application of fire sprinkler requirements, the floor area shall be determined to include the entire square footage of a room or designated area where any work or modifications are being made or proposed.

 

HAZARDOUS FIRE AREA. Includes all areas identified within California Fire Code Section 4906.2 and other areas as determined by the Fire Code Official as presenting a fire hazard due to the presence of combustible vegetation, or the proximity of the property to an area that contains combustible vegetation.

 

OCFA. Orange County Fire Authority, fire authority having jurisdiction.

 

SPARK ARRESTER. A listed device constructed of noncombustible material specifically for the purpose of meeting one of the following conditions:

 

1.     Removing and retaining carbon and other flammable particles/debris from the exhaust flow of an internal combustion engine in accordance with California Vehicle Code Section 38366.

2.     Fireplaces that burn solid fuel in accordance with California Building Code Chapter 28.

 

SURCHARGE. A surcharge on a retaining wall is any load in addition to level grade, within that area defined by a 45 degree angle from the bottom of the footing to level grade. Examples of a surcharge may be a building or structure, fence, vehicle, driveway, slope or similar condition above level grade, within the hatched “Surcharge Area” shown in the figure below.



SURCHARGE LOAD. A surcharge load is an additional load superimposed onto the earth pressure force to yield the total lateral force.

 

SWIMMING POOL(S). Any structure intended for swimming, recreational bathing or wading that contains water over 18 inches deep. This includes in-ground, above-ground and on-ground pools; hot tubs; spas and fixed-in-place wading pools.

 

        25.   Table R301.2(1) of Section R301 of Division II of CRC is hereby amended to read as follows:

TABLE R301.2(1)
CLIMATIC AND GEOGRAPHIC DESIGN CRITERIA

GROUND SNOW LOAD

WIND DESIGN

SEISMIC DESIGN CATEGORY f

SUBJECT TO DAMAGE FROM

WINTER DESIGN TEMP e

ICE BARRIER UNDERLAYMENT

REQUIRED h

FLOOD HAZARDS g

AIR FREEZING INDEX i

MEAN ANNUAL TEMP j

Speed d (mph)

Topographic effects k

Special Wind Regionl

Windborne Debris Zonem

Weathering a

Frost Line Depth b

Termite c

Zero

110

No

No

No

D2 or E

Negligible

12-24″

Very Heavy

43

No

Yes/No

0

60

For SI: 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kPa, 1 mile per hour = 0.447 m/s.

 

a.      Weathering may require a higher strength concrete or grade of masonry than necessary to satisfy the structural requirements of this code. The weathering column shall be filled in with the weathering index (i.e., “negligible,” “moderate” or “severe”) for concrete as determined from the Weathering Probability Map [Figure R301.2(3)]. The grade of masonry units shall be determined from ASTM C 34, C 55, C 62, C 73, C 90, C 129, C 145, C 216 or C 652.

b.      The frost line depth may require deeper footings than indicated in Figure R403.1(1). The jurisdiction shall fill in the frost line depth column with the minimum depth of footing below finish grade.

c.      The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table to indicate the need for protection depending on whether there has been a history of local subterranean termite damage.

d.      The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with the wind speed from the basic wind speed map [Figure R301.2(4)].Wind exposure category shall be determined on a site-specific basis in accordance with Section R301.2.1.4.

e.      The outdoor design dry-bulb temperature shall be selected from the columns of 97 1/2 percent values for winter from Appendix D of the California Plumbing Code. Deviations from the Appendix D temperatures shall be permitted to reflect local climates or local weather experience as determined by the building official.

f.      The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with the seismic design category determined from Section R301.2.2.1.

g.      See City’s FIRM maps for Flood Hazard Locations.

h.      In accordance with Sections R905.2.7.1, R905.4.3.1, R905.5.3.1, R905.6.3.1, R905.7.3.1 and R905.8.3.1, where there has been a history of local damage from the effects of ice damming, the jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with “YES.” Otherwise, the jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with “NO.”

i.       The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with the 100-year return period air freezing index (BF-days) from Figure R403.3(2) or from the 100-year (99%) value on the National Climatic Data Center data table “Air Freezing Index-USA Method (Base 32°)” at www.ncdc.noaa.gov/fpsf.html.

j.       The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with the mean annual temperature from the National Climatic Data Center data table “Air Freezing Index-USA Method (Base 32°F)” at www.ncdc.noaa.gov/fpsf.html.

k.      In accordance with Section R301.2.1.5, where there is local historical data documenting structural damage to buildings due to topographic wind speed-up effects, the jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with “YES.” Otherwise, the jurisdiction shall indicate “NO” in this part of the table.

l.       In accordance with Figure R301.2(4)A, where there is local historical data documenting unusual wind conditions, the jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with “YES” and identify any specific requirements. Otherwise, the jurisdiction shall indicate “NO” in this part of the table.

m.    In accordance with Section R301.2.1.2.1, the jurisdiction shall indicate the wind-borne debris wind zone(s). Otherwise, the jurisdiction shall indicate “NO” in this part of the table.

 

        26.   A new Subsection R301.9 is hereby added to Section R301 of Division II of CRC to read in its entirety as follows:

 

R301.9 Fuel Modification Requirements for New Construction. All new structures and facilities adjoining land containing hazardous combustible vegetation shall be approved and in accordance with the requirements of OCFA Guideline C-05 “Vegetation Management Guideline – Technical Design for new Construction Fuel Modification Plans and Maintenance Program.”

 

        27.   Subsection R309.6 Fire sprinkler attached garages, and carports with habitable space above of Section R309 Division II of CRC is hereby amended by modifying the exception to read as follows:

 

Exception: An automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall not be required when additions or alterations are made to existing carports and/or garages that do not have an automatic fire sprinkler system installed unless a sprinkler system is required in accordance with California Fire Code Section 903.2.8.

 

        28.   Subsection R313.1 of Section R313 of Division II of CRC is hereby amended to read in its entirety as follows:

 

R313.1 Townhouse Automatic Fire Sprinklers Systems. An automatic residential fire sprinkler system installed in Townhouses as follows:

 

1.     New Buildings: An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout all new buildings.

 

2.     Existing R-3 Buildings: An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout when one of the following conditions exists:

 

1.     When the floor area of alterations within any two year period exceeds 50 percent of gross floor area of the existing structure and the building gross floor area exceeds 5,500 square feet; or:

2.     When an existing Group R Occupancy is being substantially renovated, and where the scope of the renovation is such that the Building Code Official determines that the complexity of installing a sprinkler system would be similar as in a new building.

 

Exceptions:

1.     Existing Group R-3 occupancies converted to Group R-3.1 occupancies not housing bedridden clients, not housing nonambulatory clients above the first floor and not housing clients above the second floor.

2.     Existing Group R-3 occupancies converted to Group R-3.1 occupancies housing only one bedridden client and complying with Section 425.8.3.3.

3.     Pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 13113 occupancies housing ambulatory children only, none of whom are mentally ill or developmentally disabled, and the buildings or portions thereof in which such children are housed are not more than two stories in height, and buildings or portions thereof housing such children have an automatic fire alarm system activated by approved smoke detectors.

4.     Pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 13143.6 occupancies licensed for protective social care which house ambulatory clients only, none of whom is a child (under the age of 18 years), or who is elderly (65 years of age or over).

 

        29.   Subsection R313.2 of Section R313 of Division II of CRC is hereby amended to read in its entirety as follows:

 

R313.2 One- and Two-Family Dwellings Automatic Fire Sprinklers Systems. An automatic residential fire sprinkler system installed in one- and two-family dwellings as follows:

 

1.     New Buildings: An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout all new buildings.

 

2.     Existing R-3 Buildings: An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout when one of the following conditions exists:

 

1.     When the floor area of alterations within any two year period exceeds 50 percent of gross floor area of the existing structure and the building gross floor area exceeds 5,500 square feet; or:

2.     When an existing Group R Occupancy is being substantially renovated, and where the scope of the renovation is such that the Building Code Official determines that the complexity of installing a sprinkler system would be similar as in a new building.

 

Exceptions:

1.     Existing Group R-3 occupancies converted to Group R-3.1 occupancies not housing bedridden clients, not housing nonambulatory clients above the first floor and not housing clients above the second floor.

2.     Existing Group R-3 occupancies converted to Group R-3.1 occupancies housing only one bedridden client and complying with Section 425.8.3.3.

3.     Pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 13113 occupancies housing ambulatory children only, none of whom are mentally ill or developmentally disabled, and the buildings or portions thereof in which such children are housed are not more than two stories in height, and buildings or portions thereof housing such children have an automatic fire alarm system activated by approved smoke detectors.

4.     Pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 13143.6 occupancies licensed for protective social care which house ambulatory clients only, none of whom is a child (under the age of 18 years), or who is elderly (65 years of age or over).

 

        30.   Subsection R313.3.6.2.2 of Section R313 of Division II of CRC is hereby amended by amending the first paragraph to read as follows:

 

Subsection R313.3.6.2.2 Calculation Procedure. Determination of the required size for water distribution piping shall be in accordance with the following procedure and California Fire Code Section 903.3.5.3.

 

        31.   Subsection R319.1 of Section R319 of Division II of CRC is hereby revised as follows:

 

R319.1 Address Identification. New and existing buildings shall have approved address numbers, building numbers or approved building identification on the building placed in a position that is plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property. These numbers shall contrast with their background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numbers or alphabetical letters. Numbers shall be a minimum of 4 inches (101.6 mm) high with a minimum stroke width of 0.5 inch (12.7 mm) for R-3 occupancies, for all other occupancies the numbers shall be a minimum of 6 inches high with a minimum stroke width of 1 inch. Where access is by a private road and the building cannot be viewed from the public way, a monument, pole or other sign or means shall be used to identify the structure.

 

        32.   Subsection R337.1.1 of Section R337 of CRC is hereby amended to read as follows:

 

R337.1.1 Scope. This chapter applies to building materials, systems and/or assemblies used in the exterior design and construction of new buildings and qualifying alterations/additions located in any Fire Hazard Severity Zone or Wildland-Urban Interface Fire Area designated by the enforcing agency as defined in Section R337.2.

 

        33.   Subsection R337.1.3 of Section R337 of CRC is hereby amended by deleting exception number 4 and amending the first paragraph to read as follows:

 

R337.1.3 Application. New buildings and qualifying alterations/additions (as defined in R337.1.3.1.1 below) located in any Fire Hazard Severity Zone or Wildland-Urban Interface Fire Area designated by the enforcing agency constructed after the application date and additions to and remodel of buildings constructed before 2012 located in areas currently designated as such, shall comply with the provisions of this chapter. The provisions shall also apply to additions, remodels, and accessory structures located within 100 feet of a fuel modification zone, vegetation, regardless of whether the property is currently located in a designated Fire Hazard Severity Zone or Wildland-Urban Interface Area, when materials and/or construction methods for exterior wildfire exposure were previously required at the property by the Building or Fire Code Official.

 

Exceptions:

1.     Building of an accessory character classified as group U occupancy and not exceeding 120 square feet in floor area, when located at least 30 feet from an applicable building.

2.     Buildings of an accessory character classification classified as a Group U occupancy of any size located at least 50 feet from an applicable building.

3.     Buildings classified as a Group U Agricultural Building, as defined in Section 202 of this code (see also Appendix C – Group U Agricultural Buildings), when located at least 50 feet from an applicable building.

 

        34.   Subsection R337.1.3.1 of Section R337 of CRC is hereby amended by deleting the words “all sections of this chapter, including all of the following areas” and by adding item number 4 to read as follows:

 

4.     Land designated by the City of Dana Point as defined in CBC Fig 701A-1 (Ember Zones 1 & 2) shall comply only with section R337.1.3.2 and R337.1.3.3. These requirements shall be applicable to building permits submitted on or after the effective date of the local ordinance. Ember Zones 1 & 2 shall not be considered Wildland Urban Interface Fire Area.

 

        35.   A new Subsection R337.1.3.1.1 is hereby added to Section R337 of CRC to read in its entirety as follows:

 

R337.1.3.1.1 Existing Buildings. When an existing building undergoes alterations or additions, only those construction elements altered or added to the original structure shall comply with this chapter.

 

        36.   A new Subsection R337.1.3.2 is hereby added to Section R337 of CRC to read in its entirety as follows:

 

R337.1.3.2 Construction Features Designated by the Enforcing Agency: Ember Zone 1.

 

New buildings and qualifying alterations/additions located within Ember Zone 1 for which an application for a building permit is submitted on or after the effective date of this ordinance shall comply only with the following sections of this chapter:

1.     R337.3 - Standards of Quality, as applicable

2.     R337.4 - Ignition Resistant Construction, as applicable

3.     R337.5 - Roofing

4.     R337.6 - Vents

 

        37.   A new Subsection R337.1.3.3 is hereby added to Section R337 of CRC is hereby amended to read as follows:

 

R337.1.3.3 Construction Features Designated by the Enforcing Agency: Ember Zone 2.

 

New buildings and qualifying alterations/additions located within Ember Zone 2 for which an application for a building permit is submitted on or after the effective date of this ordinance shall comply only with the following sections of this chapter:

 

1.     R337.3 - Standards of Quality, as applicable

2.     R337.4 - Ignition Resistant Construction, as applicable

3.     R337.5 - Roofing

4.     R337.6 - Vents

5.     Decking

Decks, porches, balconies and stairs shall comply with the requirements of Section R337.9.3 when a) the walking surface area of a single deck or balcony is greater than 100 square feet (increased to 120 square feet when connected to a stair), and b) located within 100 feet of fuel modification or open space containing unmanaged, non-irrigated vegetation.

 

Decking Within a Fuel Modification Zone. Decking located within any portion of a fuel modification zone shall be entirely non-combustible.

 

6.     Accessory Structures

Applicability. The provision of this section shall apply to patio covers located closer than 100 feet from fuel modification or open space containing unmanaged, non-irrigated vegetation.

 

Requirements. The patio covers shall be constructed of noncombustible or ignition-resistant materials.

 

Exception: When the construction features meet all of the following:

A.    Columns: Minimum dimension of 4x4 (nominal dimension in inches)

B.     Horizontal beams: Minimum 4x6 (nominal dimension in inches)

C.     Top horizontal members: A minimum of 2-inch spacing is provided between the members.

D.    The ledger meets the ignition-resistant material definition as prescribed in CBC Section 702A.

 

        38.   Subsection R405.1 of in Section R405 of Division II of CRC is hereby amended by deleting the exception.

        39.   Table R602.10.3(3) of Section R602 of Division II of CRC is hereby amended to read as follows:

 

 





 

        40.   Subsections R902.1.1, R902.1.2, R902.1.3 of Section R902 of Division II of CRC are hereby deleted and replaced with new Subsections R902.1.1 and R902.1.2 to read in its entirety as follows:

 

R902.1.1 Roof Coverings. The roof covering or roofing assembly on any new structure regulated by this code shall be Class A fire retardant roof minimum as classified in Section 1505.2 of the CBC. Non-combustible roof covering may be applied in accordance with the manufacturer’s requirements in lieu of a fire retardant roofing assembly. Wood roofing materials are prohibited unless pressure treated and approved for fire retardant of Class A minimum. For existing structure when ten percent (10%) or more of the total roof area is re-roofed within any one-year period, shall have a Class A fire retardant roof covering for entire roof area. For existing structure when less than ten percent (10%) of the total roof area is re-roofed within any one-year period, shall have a fire retardant roof covering class equal to or greater than the existing roof covering and not less than Class B.

 

R902.1.2 Certification. Contractors installing roof assemblies or the building owner shall, prior to final approval of installation, provide a certificate of the roof assembly classification to the building inspector upon request.

 

        41.   Subsection R903.4 of Section R903 of Division II of CRC is hereby amended by adding a second paragraph to read as follows:

 

Water that accumulates on a roof shall be effectively drained and conveyed from the roof to a storm drain, street gutter, or other locations approved by the Building Official. Such water shall be conveyed through gutters, leaders, associated piping or other non-erodible surface drainage devices as approved by the Building Official. For any minor or small roofs, the Building Official may exempt this requirement.

 

        42.   A new Subsection R1001.13 is hereby added to Section R1001 of CRC to read in its entirety as follows:

 

R1001.13 Outdoor Fireplaces, Fire Pits, Fire Rings, or Similar Devices. Outdoor fireplaces, fire pits, fire rings, or similar exterior devices shall comply with this section.

 

Exception: Barbeques, grills, and other portable devices intended solely for cooking.

 

        43.   A new Subsection R1001.13.1 is hereby added to Section R1001 of CRC to read as follows:

 

R1001.13.1 Gas-Fueled Devices. Outdoor fireplaces, fire pits and similar devices fueled by natural gas or liquefied-petroleum gas are allowed when approved by the Building Department and the device is designed to only burn a gas flame and not wood or other solid fuel. At R-3 occupancies, combustible construction shall not be located within three feet of an atmospheric column that extends vertically from the perimeter of the device. Where a permanent Building Department approved hood and vent is installed, combustible construction may encroach upon this column between the bottom of the hood and the vent opening. Where chimneys or vents are installed, they shall have a spark arrester in accordance with Section R1003.9.2.

 

        44.   A new Subsection R1001.13.2 is hereby added to Section R1001 of CRC to read as follows:

 

R1001.13.2 Devices Using Wood or Fuels Other Than Natural Gas or Liquefied-Petroleum Gas. Fireplaces burning wood or other solid fuel shall be constructed in accordance with Section R1001. Fires in a fireplace shall be contained within a firebox with an attached chimney. The opening in the face of the firebox shall have an installed and maintained method of arresting sparks. The burning of wood or other solid fuel in a device is not allowed within 15 feet of combustible structures, unless within a permanent or portable fireplace.

 

        45.   A new Subsection R1001.13.3 is hereby added to Section R1001 of CRC to read as follows:

       

R1001.13.3 Where Prohibited. The burning of wood and other solid fuels shall not be conducted within a fuel modification zone. Wood and other solid fuel burning fires in devices other than permanent fireplaces are not allowed within Wildfire Risk Areas (WRA) and adopted Fire Hazard Severity Zones (FHSZ) or in locations where conditions could cause the spread of fire to the WRA or FHSZ, unless determined by the Fire Code Official that the location or design of the device should reasonably prevent the start of a wildfire.

 

        46.   Section AO101, AO102, Subsections AO103.1, AO103.2 of Appendix O of CRC are hereby deleted and replaced with new Subsections AO103.3 to read in its entirety as follows:

 

AO103.3 Vehicular Gates or Other Barriers Across Required Fire Apparatus Access Roads. The installation of gates or other barriers across a required fire apparatus access road shall comply with the requirements set forth in the 2013 California Fire Code Section 503.6.

 

        47.   Chapter 44 Referenced Standards is hereby adopted and revised as follows:

 

NFPA 13, 2016 Edition, Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems is hereby amended as follows:

Section 6.7.3 is hereby revised as follows:

 

6.7.3 Fire department connections (FDC) shall be of an approved type. The location shall be approved and be no more than 150 feet from a public hydrant. The FDC may be located within 150 feet of a private fire hydrant when approved by the fire code official. The size of piping and the number of 2½″ inlets shall be approved by the fire code official. If acceptable to the water authority, it may be installed on the backflow assembly. Fire department inlet connections shall be painted OSHA safety red or as approved. When the fire sprinkler density design requires more than 500 gpm (including inside hose stream demand), or a standpipe system is included, four 2½″ inlets shall be provided.

 

Section 8.3.3.1 is hereby revised as follows:

 

8.3.3.1 When fire sprinkler systems are installed in shell buildings of undetermined use (Spec Buildings) other than warehouses (S occupancies), fire sprinklers of the quick-response type shall be used. Use is considered undetermined if a specific tenant/occupant is not identified at the time the fire sprinkler plan is submitted. Sprinklers in light hazard occupancies shall be one of the following:

 

1.     Quick-response type as defined in Section 3.6.4.8

2.     Residential sprinklers in accordance with the requirements of Section8.4.5

3.     Quick response CMSA sprinklers

4.     ESFR sprinklers

5.     Standard-response sprinklers used for modifications or additions to existing light hazard systems equipped with standard-response sprinklers

6.     Standard-response sprinklers used where individual standard-response sprinklers are replaced in existing light hazard systems.

       

Section 11.1.1.1 is hereby added as follows:

 

11.1.1.1 When fire sprinkler systems are required in buildings of undetermined use other than warehouses, they shall be designed and installed to have a fire sprinkler density of not less than that required for an Ordinary Hazard Group 2 use, with no reduction(s) in density or design area. Warehouse fire sprinkler systems shall be designed to Figure 16.2.1.3.2 (d) curve “G”. Use is considered undetermined if a specific tenant/occupant is not identified at the time the sprinkler plan is submitted. Where a subsequent use or occupancy requires a system with greater capability, it shall be the responsibility of the occupant to upgrade the system to the required density for the new use or occupancy.

 

Section 11.2.3.1.1.1 is hereby added as follows:

 

11.2.3.1.1.1 The available water supply for fire sprinkler system design shall be determined by one of the following methods, as approved by the fire code official:

 

1.     Subtract the project site elevation from the low water level for the appropriate pressure zone and multiply the result by 0.433;

2.     Use a maximum of 40 psi, if available;

3.     Utilize the OCFA water-flow test form/directions to document a flow test conducted by the local water agency or an approved third party licensed in the State of California.

 

NFPA 13D 2016 Edition, Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems in One- and Two-Family Dwellings and Manufactured Homes is hereby amended as follows:

Section 7.1.2 is hereby revised as follows:

 

7.1.2 The sprinkler system piping shall not have separate control valves installed unless supervised by a central station, proprietary, or remote station alarm service.

 

(Added by Ord. 16-08, 11/15/16; amended by Ord. 19-05, 12/3/19)

Chapter 8.04 UNIFORM SIGN CODE
8.04.001 Adoption of the Uniform Sign Code.
        There is adopted by the City Council of the City of Dana Point, for the purpose of prescribing regulations for the installation of signs, that certain Code known as the Uniform Sign Code, 1997 Edition, published by the International Conference of Building Officials save and except such portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended, and which Code not less than one copy has been made and is now filed in the Office of the Clerk of the City Council; and the same is adopted and incorporated by reference as fully as if set forth at length herein. (Added by Ord. 02-12, 9/24/02)

 

8.04.010 Section 103.4 Amended.
        Section 103.4 of the Uniform Sign Code is amended to read as follows:

 

        103.4        Violations and Penalties. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert, or demolish, equip, use, occupy, or maintain any building or structure, or cause or permit the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of this Code.

 

        Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this Code shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor; and each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this Code is committed, continued, or permitted; and upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment for not more than six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

(Added by Ord. 02-12, 9/24/02)

 

8.04.012 Fees—Section 304 Amended.
        Section 304 of the Uniform Sign Code is amended to read as follows:

 

        Section 304—FEES

        304.1 Permit fees. A fee as established by resolution of the City Council shall be paid for each permit at time of issuance.

 

        304.2 Plan Check fees. A plan-checking fee shall be paid to the Director at the time of submitting plans and specifications for checking. Said plan-checking fee shall be established by resolution of the City Council.

 

        304.3 Investigation fee. An investigation fee as established by resolution of the City Council may be charged by the Director whenever any work for which a permit is required by this Code has been commenced without first obtaining said permit. This fee shall be paid and the investigation shall be made prior to the issuance of any permit for said work. An investigation fee may be charged for any investigation of a sign, work reports, certification or any other related work requested by an owner or authorized agent of such owner.

 

        304.4 Reinspections. A reinspection fee may be assessed for each inspection or reinspection when such portion of work for which inspection is called is not complete or when corrections called for are not made.

 

        This subsection is not to be interpreted as requiring fees the first time a job is rejected for failure to comply with the requirements of this Code, but as controlling the practice of calling for inspection before the job is ready for such inspection or reinspection.

 

        Reinspection fees may be assessed when the permit card is not properly posted on the work site, the approved plans are not readily available to the inspector, for failure to provide access on the date for which inspection is requested, or for deviating from plans requiring the approval of the Director.

 

        To obtain a reinspection, the applicant shall file an application therefor in writing upon a form furnished for that purpose and pay the reinspection fee as established by resolution of the City Council.

 

        In instances where reinspection fees have been assessed, no additional inspection of the work will be performed until the required fees have been paid.

 

        304.5 Double Fees. Failure to obtain a sign permit prior to the erection of a sign shall require the payment of a double fee; however, payment of the double fee shall not relieve any person from fully complying with other provisions of this article, nor from liability to penalties prescribed herein.

(Added by Ord. 02-12, 9/24/02)

 

8.04.014 Inspections—Section 306 Amended.
        Section 306 of the Uniform Sign Code is amended to read as follows:

 

        SECTION 306—INSPECTIONS

 

        306.1 General. Signs for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the building official.

 

        Footing inspections may be required by the building official for signs having footings.

 

        Signs containing electrical wiring shall be subject to the provisions of the Electrical Code, and the electrical components used shall bear the label of an approved agency.

 

        The building official may order the removal of a sign that is not maintained in accordance with the provisions of Section 305.

 

        Signs may be reinspected at the discretion of the building official.

 

        Approval as a result of an inspection shall not be construed to be an approval of a violation of the provisions of this Code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction. Inspections presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this Code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be valid.

 

        It shall be the duty of the permit applicant to cause the work to remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes. Neither the building official nor the jurisdiction shall be liable for expense entailed in the removal or replacement of any material required to allow inspection.

 

        306.2 Inspection Record Card. Work requiring a permit shall not be commenced until the permit holder or an agent of the permit holder shall have posted or otherwise made available an inspection record card such as to allow the building official to conveniently make the required entries thereon regarding inspection of the work. This card shall be maintained available by the permit holder until final approval has been granted by the building official.

 

        306.3 Inspection Requests. It shall be the duty of the person doing the work authorized by a permit to notify the building official that such work is ready for inspection. The building official may require that every request for inspection be filed at least one working day before such inspection is desired. Such request may be in writing or by telephone at the option of the building official.

 

        It shall be the duty of the person requesting any inspections required by this Code to provide access to and means for inspection of such work.

 

        306.4        Approval Required. Work shall not be done beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining the approval of the building official. The building official, upon notification, shall make the requested inspections and shall either indicate that portion of the construction is satisfactory as completed, or shall notify the permit holder or an agent of the permit holder wherein the same fails to comply with this Code. Any portions which do not comply shall be corrected and such portion shall not be covered or concealed until authorized by the building official.

        There shall be a final inspection and approval of all signs when completed and ready for use.

(Added by Ord. 02-12, 9/24/02)

 

8.04.016 Unsafe and Unlawful Signs—Section 307 Amended.
        Section 307 is added to the Uniform Sign Code to read as follows:

 

        SECTION 307—UNSAFE AND UNLAWFUL SIGNS

 

        307.1 Inspection. The Director shall inspect at such time as he deems necessary each sign regulated by this article for the purpose of ascertaining whether the sign is secure or insecure and whether it is in need of removal or repair.

 

        If the Director shall find that any sign regulated herein is unsafe or insecure, or is a menace to the public, or has been constructed, erected or maintained in violation of the provisions of this article, it shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal in accordance with the procedure specified in Section 102 of the California Building Code, as amended by the City of Dana Point.

 

        307.2 Summary Removal. The Director may cause any sign which is an immediate peril to persons or property to be removed summarily and without notice.

(Added by Ord. 02-12, 9/24/02)

Chapter 8.08 TENT CODE
8.08.001 Adoption of the Tent Code.
        The “Tent Code” is hereby adopted by the City Council of the City of Dana Point for the purpose of prescribing regulations for the erection, maintenance and control of tents.

        (a)    No person shall erect, operate or maintain a tent without a permit. Tents used exclusively for camping purposes shall be exempt from the above requirement. The Building Official may upon application made and approved as hereinafter provided, grant permission to erect a tent to remain for a period of not more than thirty (30) days subject to the following conditions:

        (1)    No goods, wares or merchandise shall be stored or held for sale in any tent, except in one occupied for the purpose of conducting and holding a circus, carnival, Wild West show, rodeo or other similar show or exhibition. Nor shall the provisions of this Section apply to cases where the sale or storage of such goods, wares or merchandise is merely incidental to the chief purpose for which such tent is erected or used.

        (2)    The owner or agent shall furnish an affidavit that all tents to be used which are covered by said permit have been treated by flameproofing solution so as to render them resistant to the action of fire.

        (3)    The Fire Chief or his duly authorized deputy may take samples of the proposed tent fabric for the purpose of making flame tests.

        (4)    The flameproofing solution or process shall be of a type approved and listed by the California State Fire Marshal.

        (5)    Exit requirements as required by the Fire Chief or his duly authorized deputy shall be provided and maintained in accordance with laws enforced by the City of Dana Point and the Orange County Fire Authority.

        (6)    Fire hose lines and the auxiliary fire equipment shall be maintained in such numbers sizes as may be required by the Fire Chief or his duly authorized deputy.

        (7)    All electric wiring must conform to the ordinances of the City of Dana Point and must be approved by the Building Official.

        (8)    No lighting shall be used except incandescent lamps.

        (9)    All heating or cooking appliances must be approved by the Fire Chief or his duly authorized deputy.

        (b)    Every application for permission to erect a tent in the City of Dana Point shall be in writing and in such form as may be required by the Building Official. In addition to any other information that the Building Official may require, such application shall state the approximate dimensions of the proposed tent, the location at which it is proposed to be erected, its distance from the nearest structure and the purpose for which it is to be used. Such application shall be signed both by the applicant and the owner of the property upon which it is proposed to erect such tent, or their duly authorized representatives. All applicable City ordinances shall be complied with.

        (c)    The application shall be filed with the Building Official. The Building Official and the Fire Chief or his duly authorized deputy shall thereupon make such investigation as may be required to determine whether the proposed tent will create an unreasonable hazard to life or property and whether the erection or maintenance thereof will injuriously affect adjacent or nearby property or the residents of the neighborhood. The Building Official and the Fire Chief or his duly authorized deputy shall each by appropriate endorsement upon such application and in accordance with their determination as aforesaid approve or disapprove such application.

        (d)    The fee for a tent permit shall be established by resolution by the City Council.

        (e)    The Building Official may revoke any permit granted for the erection and maintenance of a tent within the City at any time prior to the expiration of the thirty (30) day time limit for the violation of any condition upon which the permit is issued or when in its opinion, the health, welfare, safety and morals of the residents of the City or any portion thereof are adversely affected by the continued presence of such tent. Upon the revocation of any such permit, the person to whom the permit was granted shall, within the time specified by the Building Official, remove such tent. (Added by Ord. 02-12, 9/24/02)

Chapter 8.10 RELOCATED BUILDINGS CODE
8.10.001 Adoption of the Relocated Buildings Code.
        The “Relocated Buildings Code” is adopted by the City Council of the City of Dana Point for the purpose of prescribing regulations for the relocation of buildings and structures.

        (a)    General. Buildings or structures moved or relocated into or within the City shall comply with the provisions of this Code and all other applicable ordinances and enactments of the City of Dana Point.

        (b)    Permits Required. No building or structure shall be moved or relocated unless and until a permit to relocate the building or structure has been issued by the Building Official to the owner of the premises to which the building or structure is proposed to be moved. Such permit shall be designated a “relocation permit.”

        (c)    Definitions.

        (1)    “Bond” as used herein means a surety bond, cash bond, or similar instrument which in the opinion of the Building Official will comply with the intent of this Code and will indemnify the City against any cost which may result from the permittee’s failure to comply with all of the conditions attached to the granting of a relocation permit.

        (2)    “Building Official” as used herein means the Director of Community Development or his duly authorized representative.

        (d)    Relocation Permit Issuance and Enforcement.

        (1)    Application—Conditions.

        (A)   Every application for a relocation permit shall be in writing upon the forms furnished by the Building Official and shall set forth such information as that the Building Official may reasonably require in order to carry out the purpose of this Section.

        (B)   No permit shall be issued to relocate any building or structure which is so constructed or in such condition that it does not conform to or which cannot be repaired or reconstructed to conform to the requirements of the City Codes.

        (C)   If the unlawful, dangerous or defective condition of the building or structure proposed to be relocated is such that remedy or correction cannot practicably and effectively be made in the judgment of the Building Official, the permit shall be denied.

        (D)   The Building Official shall, in issuing any relocation permit, impose such terms and conditions as may be necessary to assure compliance with the requirements of all applicable City Codes. The terms and conditions upon which each permit is granted shall be specified in writing in the permit or attached thereto.

        (2)    Relocation Permit—Bond Required.

        (A)   No relocation permit shall be issued unless the applicant has posted with the Building Official a bond, executed by the owner of the premises where the building or structure is to be located, as principal and by a surety company or financial institution authorized to do business in this State, as surety.

        (B)   The bond, which shall be in form joint and several, shall name the City of Dana Point as obligee and shall be in an amount equal to the cost, plus twenty-five percent (25%), of the work required to be done in order to comply with all of the conditions of such relocation permit as estimated by the Building Official.

        In lieu of a surety bond, the applicant may post a bond executed by the owner, as principal, and which is secured by a cash deposit in the amount named above and is conditioned as required in the case of a surety bond. Such a bond is hereinafter called a "cash bond" for the purposes of this Section.

        (C)   No bond, however, needs to be posted in any case where the Building Official determines that the only relocation involved is that of moving a building temporarily to the regularly occupied business premises of a house mover or that of moving a building to adjacent property of the same owner. The exceptions shall not apply unless the Building Official finds that no such security is necessary in order to assure compliance with the requirements of this Section.

        (3)    Relocation Permit Bond—Conditions. Every bond posted pursuant to this Section shall be conditioned as follows:

        (A)   That each and all of the terms and conditions of the relocation permit shall be complied with to the satisfaction of the Building Official.

        (B)   That all of the work required to be done pursuant to the conditions of the relocation permit shall be fully performed and completed within the time specified in the relocation permit. If no time limit is specified, within one hundred twenty (120) days after the date of issuance of the permit.

        (C)   The time limit herein specified or the time limit specified in any permit may be extended for good and sufficient cause by the Building Official. No such extension of time shall be valid unless in writing and no such extension shall release any surety from any bond.

        (4)    Period and Termination of Bond.

        (A)   The term of each bond posted pursuant to this Section shall begin upon the date of the posting thereof and shall end upon the completion, to the satisfaction of the Building Official, of the performance of all the terms and conditions of the relocation permit. Such completion shall be evidenced by a statement signed by the Building Official, a copy of which shall be sent to the surety and to the principal.

        (B)   When a cash bond has been posted, the cash shall be returned to the depositor or to the depositor's successors or assigns upon the termination of the bond, except any portion thereof that may have been used or deducted as provided for elsewhere in this Section.

        (5)    Default in Performance of Conditions—Notice to be Given.

        (A)   Whenever the Building Official shall find that a default has occurred in the performance of any term or condition of any permit, written notice thereof shall be given to the principal and to the surety on the bond.

        (B)   Such notice shall specify the work to be done, the estimated cost thereof and the period of time deemed by the Building Official to be reasonably necessary for the completion of such work.

        (C)   After receipt of such notice, the surety or the principal of a bond must within the time specified cause the required work to be completed.

        (D)   Should the surety or the principal of a bond fail to cause the work, specified in the notice of de-fault, to be done within the time provided, the Building Official shall set the matter for an administrative hearing.

        (6)    Default Hearing and Procedures.

        (A)   Inspection. The Building Official shall examine every building or structure or portion thereof which is subject to the provisions of this section and the permit has been found to be in default.

        Said inspection shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of this Code, other applicable statute and the ordinances, rules and regulations of the City of Dana Point.

        (B)   Notice of Default Hearing. The Building Official shall give notice, setting forth work to be done and the estimated cost thereof to the surety, the owner, other responsible person or authorized representative, hereinafter referred to as "owner," of such building or structure. The notice shall set forth the right of the owner to be present at the hearing and to introduce such relevant evidence on the issues as the owner desires. The notice shall also set forth the requirements for commencement and completion of work and the effect of failure to do so as set forth in Subsections of this Section.

        The notice shall set forth the time and place of the hearing to be held before the Building Official. At the time and place so specified, evidence shall be submitted as to the facts of any such default as to reasonably determine whether the facts so established constitute a default of any of the terms or conditions of the permit.

        The notices required by this Section served as specified herein shall be deemed to be proper notice:

        (i)     By delivering a copy to the owner, as designated on papers, applications or permits on file with the Building Official, personally; or

        (ii)    By leaving a copy with a person of legal age and discretion at the owner's designated place of residence or business and sending a copy by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner's designated place of residence or business; or

        (iii)   If the owner's place of residence or business cannot be ascertained or a person of legal age or discretion cannot be found at either place, then by affixing a copy in a conspicuous place on the building or structure on the premises to which the building or structure has been relocated and also delivering a copy to the person in charge, if any; and also sending a copy by certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the owner at the place where the building or structure is situated, or to the owner's last known or designated address, or both.

        (C)   Administrative Order. At the hearing and upon the determination that there is a default, the Building Official shall determine if the building or structure can be reasonably completed in compliance with all applicable codes, State laws and regulations, and City ordinances or if the building or structure should be removed and shall order such completion or removal and shall specify the time within which the work is to be completed. The order shall also contain notice that should the owner fail, neglect, or refuse to comply with the order, then the Building Official shall cause the work to be done and the cost thereof to be levied against the bond as specified herein.

        The determination and order may be made orally at the hearing and shall be written and transmitted to the owner within a reasonable time; the determination and order shall become final within five (5) days, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, from the time it is first rendered or, in the event that the owner was not present at the hearing, within five (5) days of the mailing of the order to the last known address of the owner, whichever first occurs.

        (D)   Appeal. The owner shall, if the owner desires to do so, at any time prior to the determination and order becoming final as heretofore set forth, appeal the decision of the Building Official pursuant to Sections 2.04.100 to 2.04.130 of the Dana Point Municipal Code.

        (E)   Commencement of Work and Completion. The owner shall, upon the expiration of five (5) days, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, following the finality of the determination and order of the Building Official (or, if appealed, the determination and order on appeal), commence the work ordered, and such work will be completed within the time specified.

        (F)    Failure to Commence Work. If the owner neglects or fails to commence, within the time provided, the corrective work deemed necessary and as ordered, the owner shall pay over to the Building Official the estimated cost of doing the work as set forth in the notice, plus an additional sum equal to twenty-five percent (25%) of said estimated cost. Upon receipt of such moneys, the Building Official shall proceed by such mode as he deems convenient to cause the required work to he performed and completed, but no liability shall be incurred other than for the expenditure of the moneys received.

 

        If a cash bond has been posted and if the compliance is not obtained within the time specified, the Building Official shall proceed, without delay and without further notice of proceedings whatever, to use the cash deposit or any portion of such deposit to cause the required work to be done. The balance, if any, of such cash deposit shall, upon the completion of the work, be returned to the depositor or to the depositor’s successors or assigns, after deducting the cost of the work plus twenty-five percent (25%) thereof.

        (e)    Relocation Permit Fees. Before any application for a relocation permit is accepted for filing, the fees as established by resolution of the City Council shall be paid by the applicant to cover the cost to the City of the inspection of the condition of the building to be moved and the inspection of the proposed new location. The inspection fee shall be in addition to the building permit fee or any other fee or charge required by any other applicable City ordinance or resolution.

        (f)    Expiration. If a relocation permit has not been issued within one hundred twenty (120) days after the applicant has been notified of the result of the inspection, a new inspection fee shall be paid and the building shall he reinspected before a relocation permit may be issued. (Added by Ord. 02-12, 9/24/02)

Chapter 8.11 HOUSING AUTHORITY
8.11.010 Housing Authority Designated.
        The City Council shall hereinafter serve as the Housing Authority of the City of Dana Point and shall administer and enforce the provisions of this Code. (Added by Ord. 10-11, 11/8/10)

Chapter 8.12 UNIFORM HOUSING CODE
8.12.001 Adoption of the Uniform Housing Code.
        There is adopted by the City Council of the City of Dana Point, for the purpose of prescribing regulations for the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, maintenance, moving, improving, removal, conversion, demolition, and occupancy of all buildings or portions thereof used, or designed or intended to be used, for human habitation, that certain Code known as Uniform Housing Code, 1997 Edition, published by the International Conference of Building Officials, except Chapters 11, 12, 13, 14, 15 and 16, and the whole thereof, save and except such portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended, of which Code not less than one copy has been made and is now filed in the Office of the Clerk of the City Council; and the same is adopted and incorporated by reference as fully as if set forth at length herein. (Added by Ord. 02-12, 9/24/02)

 

8.12.010 Amendments, Additions and Deletions.
        1.     Subsection 104.1 of Section 104 of UHC is hereby amended to read in its entirety as follows:

 

        104.1 Additions, Alterations or Repairs. For additions, alterations or repairs, see Sections 3403, 3404 and 3405 of the CBC.

 

        2.     Subsection 104.2 of Section 104 of UHC is hereby amended to read in its entirety as follows:

 

        104.2        Relocation. Buildings or structures moved into or within the incorporated area of the City and City-owned buildings shall comply with the requirements of the Relocated Buildings Code.

 

        3.     Section 203 of UHC is hereby amended to read in its entirety as follows:

 

        SECTION 203—BOARD OF APPEALS

 

        In order to provide for final interpretation of the provisions of this Code, there shall be and is created a Board of Appeals as specified in Section 113 of the California Building Code as amended by the City of Dana Point.

 

        4.     Section 204 of UHC is hereby amended to read in its entirety as follows:

 

        SECTION 204—VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES

 

        It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert, or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure, or cause or permit the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of this Code.

        Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this Code shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor; and each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this Code is committed, continued or permitted; and upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment for not more than six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

 

        5.     Section 205 of UHC is hereby added to read in its entirety as follows:

 

        205—DANGEROUS BUILDINGS OR CONDITIONS

 

        205.1 Correction proceedings. Whenever the building official determines by inspection that any building or structure, or portion thereof, is dangerous as defined in Section 302 of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, he/she shall institute proceedings to correct such dangerous conditions.

 

        205.2 Inspection. The building official and his authorized representative(s) shall have the right of reasonable inspection of any building for the purpose of determining the condition thereof. No person shall refuse or interfere with such inspection by any such official.

 

        For the purpose of such inspection, the building official may order any structural member or portion of the structural frame of any building, whether such building is already erected, or is in course of construction, to be exposed whenever he has reasonable grounds for believing that such structural member or frame is in an unsafe condition or does not conform to the requirements of this chapter. No owner, reputed owner or person having custody, control or management or in charge of maintenance, occupancy or use of such building who is served with such order shall fail or refuse to forthwith fully uncover or expose the portion of the structural frame or structural member as required by such order.

 

        205.3 Abatement proceedings. All buildings or portions thereof which are determined to be dangerous as defined in Section 302 of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings are public nuisances and shall be abated under the procedures set forth in this chapter for abatement of nuisances.

 

        205.4 Summary abatement. Where necessary in the opinion of the building official to protect life or property from an acutely dangerous condition, the building official may take emergency action to abate the hazard by city forces as provided in this chapter or may order the building immediately vacated, posted unsafe, barricaded, utilities disconnected, or other appropriate protective remedy.

 

        205.5 Owner’s responsibility for enforcement costs. If the substandard/dangerous conditions have not been corrected or the nuisance abated by the owner as directed within the time frame established by the Building Official, or as said time frame may be modified, all incidental enforcement costs incurred by the City in connection therewith shall be charged to and become an indebtedness of the owner of such property and a lien on the property whether or not the work is later performed by the City, by the owner, or by others. “Incidental enforcement costs” include, but are not limited to, the actual expenses and costs of the City in investigating the nuisance, obtaining title information, preparing notices, and performing inspections.

 

        205.6 Posted buildings, structures, and properties. Posted buildings, structures, and properties shall not be occupied or accessed without prior written approval of the building official. Once posted, access requests shall be made to the building official in writing, 24 hours in advance, for each request per day with the following information:

•       Full name of each person to be on the property;

•       The full purpose of being on the property; and

•       The duration of time they are requesting and stating the start and finish time.

        Anyone accessing a posted property, building, or structure without the express approval of the building official is in violation of this code.

 

        6.     Section 401 of UHC is hereby amended to read in its entirety as follows:

 

        SECTION 401—DEFINITIONS

 

        For the purpose of this Code, certain abbreviations, terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall be construed as specified in either this chapter or as specified in the Building Code.

 

        Building Code shall mean the California Building Code published by the California Building Standards Commission as amended and adopted by the City of Dana Point.

 

        Building Official as used herein shall mean the Director of Community Development, or his duly authorized representative.

 

        Efficiency Living unit is a dwelling unit containing only one (1) habitable room and meeting the requirements of Section 503.2, Exception.

 

        Health Officer shall mean the Health Officer of the City of Dana Point.

 

        Hot water is hot water supplied to plumbing fixtures at a temperature of not less than 110°F (43.3°C).

 

        Mechanical Code shall mean the California Mechanical Code, published by the International Conference of Building Officials and the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, as amended and adopted by the City of Dana Point.

 

        Nuisance. The following shall be defined as nuisances:

        1.     Any public nuisance known at common law or in equity jurisprudence.

        2.     Any attractive nuisance which may prove detrimental to children, whether in a building, on the premises of a building, or upon an unoccupied lot. This includes any abandoned wells, shafts, basements, or excavations; abandoned refrigerators and motor vehicles; or any structurally unsound fences or structures; or any lumber, trash, fences, debris or vegetation which may prove a hazard for inquisitive minors.

        3.     Whatever is dangerous to human life or is detrimental to health, as determined by the Building Official.

        4.     Overcrowding a room with occupants.

        5.     Insufficient ventilation or illumination.

        6.     Inadequate or unsanitary sewage or plumbing facilities.

        7.     Uncleanliness, as determined by the Health Officer.

        8.     Whatever renders air, food, or drink unwholesome or detrimental to the health of human beings, as determined by the Health Officer.

 

        Plumbing Code shall mean the California Plumbing Code, published by the California Building Standards Commission, as amended and adopted by the City of Dana Point.

 

        7.     Subsection 1103.2 of Section 1103 of UHC is hereby added to read in its entirety as follows:

 

        1103.2 Notice to secure structure. When any unoccupied building or structure is not properly secured, locked or closed, and is accessible to juveniles, transients and undesirables, and is in such condition as to constitute an immediate health, fire or safety hazard and the Building Official determines that the hazard is such as to require immediate closure, he shall serve the record owner and the person having control of such building or structure with notice to secure or close the same forthwith so as to prevent unauthorized persons from gaining access thereto. Notice shall be served as provided in this Chapter and shall state that if the required work is not performed within forty-eight hours after service of the notice, the City will perform such work and all expenses incurred by the City including, but not limited to, incidental processing and enforcement costs shall become an indebtedness of the owner and a lien on the property.

 

        8.     Subsection 1103.3 of Section 1103 of UHC is hereby added to read in its entirety as follows:

 

        1103.3 Emergency hazard abatement. When any open building or structure constitutes such a threat to life, limb or property that it must be secured, closed, barricaded or demolished forthwith and compliance with other provisions of this Code become infeasible, as determined by a City officer charged with responsibility for enforcement of health and safety regulations, the City Manager or his duly authorized representative may summarily secure, close, barricade or demolish such building or structure without prior notice to the property owner. All costs incurred by the City in abating the hazard shall be borne by the property owner and shall become an indebtedness of the owner and a lien on the property. Failure to receive prior notice shall not affect or relieve the property owner’s obligation for payment of such costs.

 

(Added by Ord. 02-12, 9/24/02; amended by Ord. 10-11, 11/8/10; Ord. 16-08, 11/15/16; Ord. 19-05, 12/3/19)

Chapter 8.14 CALIFORNIA ELECTRICAL CODE
Note
*           Prior ordinance history: Ord. 99-06.

 

8.14.001 Adoption of the California Electrical Code.
        The City Council of the City of Dana Point hereby adopts by reference the California Code of Regulations Title 24, Part 3, known and designated as the California Electrical Code (CEC), 2019 Edition based on the National Electrical Code (NEC), 2017 Edition, as published by the National Fire Protection Association with the modifications set forth below for the purpose of prescribing regulations for the installation, arrangement, alteration, repairing, replacement, remodeling, or use and other operation of electrical wiring, connections, fixtures and other electrical appliances on premises within the City. The provisions of this Code shall constitute the electrical code regulations of the City. The California Electrical Code is on file for public examination in the office of the Building Official. (Added by Ord. 07-09, 12/4/07; amended by Ord. 16-08, 11/15/16; Ord. 19-05, 12/3/19)

 

8.14.010 Amendments, Additions and Deletions.
        1.     Section 89.108 of Article 89 of the California Electrical Code is hereby amended in accordance with the administrative and fee provisions contained in Chapter 1 Division II of the California Building Code and California Residential Code as amended by the City of Dana Point, where applicable.

        2.     A new Subdivision (C) of Section 90.8 of Article 90 of the California Electrical Code is hereby added to read in its entirety as follows:

 

(C)   Wiring to be in an Underground System. Supply wiring for or to accessory uses, accessory buildings, secondary units, yard lights and post signs shall be in an underground system.

 

        3.     A new section 225.28 of Article 225 of the California Electrical Code is hereby added to read in its entirety as follows:

 

225.28 Outdoor Installations. All yard wiring shall be installed underground except for festoon lighting, temporary lighting or wiring systems serviced by a public utility.

 

        4.     Subsection 230.2 of Article 230 of Chapter 3 of the California Electrical Code is hereby amended by amending the first sentence to read as follows:

 

A building, tenant space, or other structure served shall be supplied by only one service unless permitted in 230.2(A) through (D).

 

        5.     Subdivision 310.106(B) of Section 310.106 of Article 310 of Chapter 3 of the California Electrical Code is hereby amended to add a third and fourth paragraph to read as follows:

 

Copper wire shall be used for wiring No. 6 and smaller in all installations. Consideration for use of aluminum wiring can be made by the Building Official for feeder lines only on an individual basis where adequate safety measures can be ensured.

 

Aluminum wire may only be permitted on an individual case-by-case basis by the Building Official. Any such approval shall be based upon findings showing that all of the following conditions exist:

(a)    Wire size shall not be less than No. 6

(b)    Continuous inspection of each connection by a qualified inspector approved by the Building Official in advance.

(c)    Installation of antioxide compound/material at each connection.

(d)    Use of electrical equipment listed for aluminum wiring.

(e)    The installer shall notify the building owner in writing that aluminum wiring was used. The notification shall specify exact locations of wire and its purposes. Certificate of Occupancy will not be issued until a copy of the notification letter is submitted to the Building Official for a review and approval.

 

        6.     Table No. 310.106(A) of Section 310.106 of Article 310 of Chapter 3 of the California Electrical Code is hereby amended by adding a note at the bottom to read as follows:

 

Note.        Use of aluminum conductors requires prior approval from Building Official. See Section 310.106(B) Conductor Material.

 

        7.     Subsection 690.13 Building or Other Structures Supplied by a Photovoltaic System of Article 690 of Chapter 6 of the California Electrical Code is hereby amended by the addition to read as follows:

 

(A)   Location. The PV disconnecting means shall be installed at a readily accessible location either on the outside of a building or structure or inside nearest the point of entrance of the system conductors.

(Added by Ord. 07-09, 12/4/07; amended by Ord. 16-08, 11/15/16; Ord. 19-05, 12/3/19)

Chapter 8.16 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE
8.16.001 Adoption of the California Plumbing Code.
        The City Council of the City of Dana Point hereby adopts by reference the California Code of Regulations Title 24, Part 5, known and designated as the California Plumbing Code (CPC), 2019 Edition based on the 2018 Uniform Plumbing Code as published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials with the modifications set forth below for the purpose of prescribing regulations for the design, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of plumbing systems in the City including Appendices A, B, C, D, E, H, I, J, K, and L. The provisions of this Code shall constitute the plumbing code regulations of the City. The California Plumbing Code is on file for public examination in the office of the Building Official. (Added by Ord. 07-09, 12/4/07; amended by Ord. 16-08, 11/15/16; Ord. 19-05, 12/3/19)

 

8.16.010 Amendments, Additions and Deletions.
        1.     Chapter 1 Division II of the California Plumbing Code is hereby amended in accordance with the administrative and fee provisions contained in Chapter 1 Division II of the California Building Code and California Residential Code as amended by the City of Dana Point, where applicable.

        2.     Subsection 604.1 of Section 604.0 of the California Plumbing Code is hereby amended by adding a sentence to end of the second paragraph to read as follows:

 

Ferrous materials are prohibited for water pipe and fittings when installed in the ground unless a soils analysis is provided to show that soil conditions will not be damaging to the piping material. (Balance of the section to remain unchanged)

 

        3.     Subsection 609.3(2) of Section 609.0 of the California Plumbing Code is hereby amended by amending the first paragraph to read in its entirety as follows:

 

609.3(2) Copper water piping installed under concrete floor slabs within a building or structure shall be copper tube Type “K” and shall be installed without joints where possible. Where joints are permitted, they shall be brazed and fitting shall be wrought copper. Such copper tubing shall be placed in a sand bed a minimum of three inches (3″) in depth, and properly protected penetrates concrete and similar materials.

 

        4.     Subsection 610.8 of Section 610 of the California Plumbing Code is hereby amended by deleting the last paragraph and replacing it with the following:

 

No building supply pipe shall be less than one inch (1″) in diameter unless a design or calculations are submitted and approved by Administrative Authority. Each main building shall have a minimum of two three-quarter-inch (3/4″) hose bibs; one located readily accessible to the front yard and one to the back yard.

 

        5.     Subsection 1208.5 of Section 1208.0 of California Plumbing Code is hereby amended by adding the following sentences to the end of the paragraph:

 

Approved PE pipe and fittings shall be used in exterior buried gas piping systems. Ferrous gas piping is not permitted to be installed underground unless a soils analysis is provided to show that soil conditions will not be damaging to the piping material.

 

(Added by Ord. 07-09, 12/4/07; amended by Ord. 16-08, 11/15/16; Ord. 19-05, 12/3/19)

Chapter 8.18 UNIFORM SWIMMING POOL, SPA AND HOT TUB CODE
8.18.001 Adoption of Uniform Swimming Pool, Spa and Hot Tub Code.
        (a)    There is adopted by the City Council of the City of Dana Point, the Uniform Swimming Pool, Spa and Hot Tub Code, 2000 Edition, published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, save and except “Part I, Administration,” Sections 1.0 through 1.9 and 1.11 through 1.18 of which Code not less than one copy have been made and are now on file with the Clerk of the City Council and the same is adopted and incorporated by reference as if set forth at length herein.

        (b)    The fee schedules of charges for swimming pools shall be as established by resolution by the City Council of the City of Dana Point.

        (c)    The provisions contained in Sections 8.16.014 through 8.16.028 of the Dana Point Municipal Code shall apply to the Uniform Swimming Pool, Spa and Hot Tub Code, 1997 Edition. (Added by Ord. 02-12, 9/24/02)

 

8.18.010 Section 106.0 Amended.
        Section 106.0 of said California Swimming Pool, Spa and Hot Tub Code is amended to read as follows:

 

        106.0        Violations and Penalties. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy, or maintain any building or structure or cause or permit the same to be done in violation of this Code.

 

        Any person, firms, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this Code shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this Code is committed, continued, or permitted, and upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment for not more than six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. The issuance or granting of a permit or approval of plans and specifications shall not be deemed or construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of this Code. No permit presuming to give authority to violate or cancel this Code shall be valid, except insofar as the work or use which it authorized is lawful.

 

        The issuance or granting of a permit or approval of plans shall not prevent the Administrative Authority from thereafter requiring the correction of errors in said plans and specifications or from preventing construction of errors in said plans and specifications or from preventing construction operations being carried on thereunder when in violation of this Code or of any other ordinance or from revoking any certificate of approval when issued in error.

 

        Every permit issued by the Administrative Authority under the provisions of this Code shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the work authorized by such permit is not commenced within one hundred eighty (180) days from date of issuance of such permit, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days. Before such work can be recommenced, a new permit shall be first obtained, and the fee shall be one-half the amount required for a new permit for such work, provided no changes have been made, or will be made in the original plans and specifications for such work; and provided, further, that such suspension or abandonment has not exceeded one (1) year.

(Added by Ord. 02-12, 9/24/02)

 

8.18.014 Section 110.0 Amended.
        Section 110.0 of said California Swimming Pool, Spa and Hot Tub Code is amended to read as follows:

 

        110.0        Fees. Every applicant for a permit to install, alter, or repair a swimming pool, spa or hot tub system or part thereof, shall state in writing on the application form provided the work proposed to be done.

 

        The fees shall be as established by Resolution by the City Council of the City of Dana Point.

 

        Any person who shall commence any swimming pool, spa, or hot tub work for which a permit is required by this Code without having obtained a permit therefore shall, if subsequently permitted to obtain a permit, pay double the permit fee fixed by the section for such work, provided, however, that this provision shall not apply to emergency work when it shall be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Administrative Authority that such work was urgently necessary and that it was not practical to obtain a permit therefor, before the commencement of the work. In all such cases a permit must be obtained as soon as it is practical to do so, and if there be an unreasonable delay in obtaining such permit, a double fee as herein provided shall be charged.

(Added by Ord. 02-12, 9/24/02)

 

8.18.018 Section 118.0 Amended.
        Section 118.0 of said California Swimming Pool, Spa and Hot Tub Code is amended to read as follows:

 

        118.0        Board of Appeals.  In order to provide for final interpretation of the provisions of this Code, there shall be and is created a Board of Appeals as specified in Section 105 of the California Building Code as Amended herein.

(Added by Ord. 02-12, 9/24/02)

 

8.18.022 Amendment to Section 301 of the Swimming Pool Code.
        Section 301 of the Swimming Pool Code is amended by adding a Subsection 301.3, 301.4 and 301.5 as follows:

 

        SECTION 301.3  Waste water from any filter, scum filter, scum gutter, overflow, pool emptying line, or similar apparatus or appurtenance shall discharge into an approved type receptor and subsequently into a public sewer. The flood level rim of such receptors shall be at least six (6) inches above the flood level of the adjacent ground. Each such receptor when permitted to be connected to any part of a drainage system shall be provided with an approved trap with a minimum pipe size of three (3) inches.

 

        SECTION 301.4  Article 2.5. of the Swimming Pool Safety Act Health and Safety Code is adopted and repeated herein for convenience:

 

Article 2.5

 

THE SWIMMING POOL SAFETY ACT

        Sections:

 

        115920.    Short Title

        115921.    Definitions

        115922.    Construction permit; safety features

        115923.    Enclosure; required characteristics

        115924.    Agreements to build; notice of provisions

        115925.    Exempt facilities

        115926.    Application to facilities regulated by Department of Social Services

        115927.    Modification and interpretation of article

 

115920.    Short Title

        This act shall be known and may be cited as the Swimming Pool Safety Act.

 

115921.    Definitions

        As used in this article the following terms have the following meanings:

 

        (a)    “Swimming pool” or “pool” means any structure intended for swimming or recreational bathing that contains water over 18 inches deep. “Swimming pool” includes in-ground and aboveground structures and includes, but it not limited to, hot tubs, spas, portable spas, and nonportable wading pools.

 

        (b)    “Public swimming pool” means a swimming pool operated for the use of the general public with or without charge, or for the use of the members and guests of a private club. Public swimming pool does not include a swimming pool located on the grounds of a private single-family home.

 

        (c)    “Enclosure” means a fence, wall, or other barrier that isolates a swimming pool from access to the home.

 

        (d)    “Approved safety pool cover” means a manually or power-operated safety pool cover that meets all of the performance standards of the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM), in compliance with standard F1346-91.

 

        (e)    “Exit alarms” means devices that make audible, continuous alarm sounds when any door or window, that permits access from the residence to the pool area that is without any intervening enclosure, is opened or is left ajar. Exit alarms may be battery-operated or may be connected to the electrical wiring of the building.

 

115922.    Construction permit; safety features required

 

        Commencing January 1, 1998, except as provided in Section 115925, whenever a construction permit is issued for construction of a new swimming pool at a private, single-family home, it shall be equipped with at least once of the following safety features:

 

        (a)    The pool shall be isolated from access to a home by an enclosure that meets the requirements of Section 115923.

 

        (b)    The pool shall be equipped with an approved safety pool cover.

 

        (c)    The residence shall be equipped with exist alarms on those doors providing direct access to the pool.

 

        (d)    All doors providing direct access from the home to the swimming pool shall be equipped with a self-closing, self-latching device with a release mechanism placed no lower than 54 inches above the floor.

 

        (e)    Other means of protection, if the degree of protection afforded is equal to or greater than that afforded by any of the devices set forth in subdivisions (a) to (d), inclusive, as determined by the building official of the jurisdiction issuing the applicable building permit. Any ordinance governing child access to pools adopted by a political subdivision on or before January 1, 1997, is presumed to afford protection that is equal to or greater than that afforded by any of the devices set forth in subdivisions (a) to (d), inclusive.

 

115923.    Enclosure; required characteristics

 

        (a)    Any access gates through the enclosure open away from the swimming pool, and are self-closing with a self-latching device placed no lower than 60 inches above the ground.

 

        (b)    A minimum height of 60 inches.

 

        (c)    A maximum vertical clearance from the ground to the bottom of the enclosure of two inches.

 

        (d)    Gaps or voids, if any, do not allow passage of a sphere equal to or greater than four inches in diameter.

 

        (e)    An outside surface free of protrusions, cavities, or other physical characteristics that would serve as handholds or footholds that could enable a child below the age of five years to climb over.

 

115924.    Agreements to build; notice of provisions

 

        Any person entering into an agreement to build a swimming pool shall give the consumer notice of the requirements of this article.

 

115925.    Exempt facilities

 

        The requirements of this article shall not apply to any of the following:

 

        (a)    Public swimming pools.

 

        (b)    Hot tubs or spas with locking safety covers that comply with the American Society for Testing Materials-Emergency Performance Specifications (ASTM-ES 13-89).

 

        (c)    Any pool within the jurisdiction of any political subdivision that adopts an ordinance for swimming pool safety that includes requirements that are at least as stringent as this article.

 

        (d)    An apartment complex, or any residential setting other than a single-family home.

 

115926.    Application to facilities required by Department of Social Services

 

        This article does not apply to any facility regulated by the State Department of Social Services even if the facility is also used as the private residence of the operator. Pool safety in those facilities shall be regulated pursuant to regulations adopted therefore by the State Department of Social Services.

 

115927.    Modification and interpretation of article

        Notwithstanding any other provision of law, this article shall not be subject to further modification or interpretation by any regulatory agency of the State, this authority being reserved exclusively to local jurisdictions, as provided for in subdivision (3) of Section 115922 and subdivision (c) of Section 115924.

 

        SECTION 301.5        Water clarity

 

        All swimming pool and spa water shall be maintained in a clear condition, which is free of algae, insects, debris, and in a sanitary condition. The floor of the pool shall be clearly visible.

(Added by Ord. 02-12, 9/24/02; amended by Ord. 12-06, 5/1/12)

Chapter 8.20 CALIFORNIA MECHANICAL CODE
8.20.001 Adoption of California Mechanical Code.
        The City Council of the City of Dana Point hereby adopts by reference the California Code of Regulations Title 24, Part 4, known and designated as the California Mechanical Code (CMC), 2019 Edition based on the 2018 Uniform Mechanical Code as published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials with the modifications set forth below for the purpose of prescribing regulations for the design, construction, installation, quality of materials, location, operation and maintenance or use of heating, ventilating, cooling, refrigeration systems, incinerators and other heat-producing appliances in the City including Appendices A, B, C, D, E, F and G. The provisions of this Code shall constitute the mechanical code regulations of the City. The California Mechanical Code is on file for public examination in the office of the Building Official. (Added by Ord. 07-09, 12/4/07; amended by Ord. 16-08, 11/15/16; Ord. 19-05, 12/3/19)

 

8.20.010 Amendments, Additions and Deletions.
        1.     Chapter 1 Division II of the California Mechanical Code is hereby amended in accordance with the administrative and fee provisions contained in Chapter 1 Division II of the California Building Code and California Residential Code as amended by the City of Dana Point, where applicable.

        2.     Subsection 304.3.1.2 of Section 304 of the California Mechanical Code is hereby amended by amending the first paragraph to read as follows:

 

304.3.1.2 Permanent Ladders. Permanent ladders required by Section 304.3.1.1 and permanent ladders attached to the exterior of the building shall be constructed in accordance with the following:

 

        3.     The first paragraph of Subsection 504.3 of the Section 504 of the California Mechanical Code is hereby amended to read as follows:

 

504.3 Domestic Range Hoods and Vents. Kitchen Range Hoods shall be installed for cooking facilities with an approved forced-draft system of ventilation vented to the outside of the building. Ducts used for domestic kitchen range ventilation shall be of metal, or other approved material, and shall have smooth interior surfaces. Ducts for domestic range hoods shall only serve cooking appliances. (Balance of the subsection to remain unchanged.)

 

(Added by Ord. 07-09, 12/4/07; amended by Ord. 16-08, 11/15/16; Ord. 19-05, 12/3/19)

Chapter 8.22 UNIFORM SOLAR ENERGY CODE
8.22.001 Adoption of Uniform Solar Energy Code.
        There is adopted by the City Council of the City of Dana Point the Uniform Solar Energy Code, 2000 Edition, published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, of which Code not less than one copy have been made and are now on file with the Clerk of the City; and the same is adopted and incorporated as fully as if set forth at length herein. (Added by Ord. 02-12, 9/24/02)

 

8.22.010 Section 106.0 Amended.
        Section 106.0 of said Uniform Solar Energy Code is amended to read as follows:

 

        106.0—VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:

 

        It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy, or maintain any building or structure or cause or permit the same to be done in violation of this Code.

 

        Any person, firms, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this Code shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and each such person shall he deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this Code is committed, continued, or permitted, and upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment for not more than six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

 

        The issuance or granting of a permit or approval of plans and specifications shall not be deemed or construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of this Code. No permit presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this Code shall be valid, except insofar as the work or use which it authorized is lawful.

 

        The issuance or granting of a permit or approval of plans shall not prevent the Administrative Authority from thereafter requiring the correction of errors in said plans and specifications or from preventing construction operations being carried on thereunder when in violation of this Code or of any other ordinance or from revoking any certificate or approval when issued in error.

 

        Every permit issued by the Administrative Authority under the provisions of this Code shall expire by limitation and become null and void, if the work authorized by such permit is not commenced within one hundred eighty (180) days from date of issuance of such permit, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days. Before such work can be recommenced, a new permit shall be first obtained, and the fee shall be one-half the amount required for a new permit for such work, provided no changes have been made, or will be made in the original plans and specifications for such work; and provided, further, that such suspension or abandonment has not exceeded one (1) year.

(Added by Ord. 02-12, 9/24/02)

 

8.22.014 Section 109.0 Amended.
        Section 109.0 of said Uniform Solar Energy Code is amended to read as follows:

 

        109.0—COST OF PERMIT

 

        Every applicant of a permit to do work regulated by this Code, shall state in writing on the application form provided for that purpose, the character of work proposed to be done and the amount and kind in connection therewith, together with such information pertinent thereto, as may be required.

 

        Such applicant shall pay for each permit at the time of issuance. The fees shall be as established by resolution by the City Council of the City of Dana Point.

 

        Any person who shall commence any work for which a permit is required by this Code without first having obtained a permit therefor shall, if subsequently permitted to obtain a permit, pay double the permit fee fixed by this section for such work, provided, however, that this provision shall not apply to emergency work when it shall be proved to the satisfaction of the Administrative Authority that such work was urgently necessary and that it was not practical to obtain a permit therefor before the commencement of the work. In all such cases, a permit must be obtained as soon as it is practical to do so, and if there be an unreasonable delay in obtaining such permit, a double fee as herein provided shall be charged.

(Added by Ord. 02-12, 9/24/02)

 

8.22.018 Section 116.0 Amended.
        Section 116.0 of said Uniform Solar Energy Code is amended to read as follows:

 

        116.0—BOARD OF APPEALS

 

        In order to provide for final interpretation of the provisions of this Code, there shall be and is created a Board of Appeals as specified in Section 105 of the California Building Code as amended herein.

(Added by Ord. 02-12, 9/24/02)

 

8.22.019 Expediting Permitting Processing for Residential Rooftop Solar Photovoltaic Installations.
        Residential photovoltaic systems shall be permitted by a permitting process that substantially conforms with that process laid out in Parts 3 and 4 of the California Solar Guidebook. Modifications to the guidebook are made to conform to Dana Point’s permitting system and inspection processes.

        (a)    Expedited Review Process. Consistent with Government Code Section 65850.5(g)(1), the Building Official shall implement an expedited administrative permit review process for small rooftop solar PV systems, and adopt a checklist of all requirements with which those systems shall comply with in order to be eligible for expedited review.

        (b)    Electronic Submittals. The Building Official shall allow for electronic submittal of permit applications covered by this Section and associated supporting documentations. In accepting such permit applications, the Building Official shall also accept electronic signatures on all forms, applications, and other documentation in lieu of a wet signature by any applicant. (Added by Ord. 18-04, 9/4/18)

Chapter 8.24 CALIFORNIA FIRE CODE
8.24.001 Adoption of the California Fire Code.
        The City Council of the City of Dana Point hereby adopts by reference the California Code of Regulations Title 24, Part 9, known and designated as the 2016 California Fire Code (CFC), based on the International Fire Code, 2015 Edition, with errata, published by International Code Council (ICC), and the whole thereof, including Division II in Chapter 1, Appendix A, Appendix B, Appendix BB, Appendix C, Appendix CC, and the Orange County Fire Authority Guidelines with the modifications set forth below for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to the life and property from fire or explosion. The provisions of this Code shall constitute the fire code regulations of the City. The California Fire Code is on file for public examination in the office of the City Clerk. (Added by Ord. 07-09, 12/4/07; amended by Ord. 16-08, 11/15/16)

 

8.24.010 Amendments, Additions and Deletions.
        1.     Subsection [A] 102.10 of Section 102 of Division II of Chapter 1 of CFC is hereby amended to read in its entirety as follows:

 

[A] 102.10 Conflicting Provisions. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the fire code official shall decide which requirement meets the general intent of this code.

 

        2.     A new Subsection [A] 103.5 is hereby added to Section 103 of Division II of Chapter 1 of CFC to read in its entirety as follows.

 

[A] 103.5 Enforcement and Inspections. The California Fire Code and the International Fire Code with amendments shall be enforced by the Orange County Fire Authority, which shall be operated under the Fire Chief of the Orange County Fire Authority. The Fire Chief of the Orange County Fire Authority may detail such members of the fire authority as inspectors as shall be necessary from time to time.

 

        3.     Subsection [A] 110.4 of Division II of Chapter 1 of CFC is hereby amended and by adding new Subsections 110.4.2 as follows:

 

[A] 110.4 Violation Penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or shall fail to comply with any issued orders or notices or who shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the fire code official, or of a permit or certificate used under provisions of this code, shall be subject to penalties assessed as prescribed in the OCFA Prevention Field Services adopted fee schedule. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.

 

110.4.2 Infraction and Misdemeanor. Persons operating or maintaining any occupancy, premises or vehicle subject to this code that shall permit any fire or life safety hazard to exist on premises under their control shall be guilty of an infraction. Persons who fail to take immediate action to abate a fire or life safety hazard when ordered or notified to do so by the chief or a duly authorized representative are guilty of a misdemeanor.

 

        4.     Section 202 of CFC is hereby amended and by adding/revising the following definitions:

 

ALTERATION. Any construction or renovation to an existing structure other than a repair or addition. Alterations include but are not limited to the addition or elimination of walls within the existing building envelope. Alteration also includes modifications to the structure which involve 50% or more removal and replacement of wall board within any room.

 

FLOOR AREA, FIRE SPRINKLERS. For the purpose of calculating square footage for application of fire sprinkler requirements, the floor area shall be determined to include the entire square footage of a room or designated area where any work or modifications are being made or proposed.

 

HAZARDOUS FIRE AREA. Includes all areas identified within Section 4906.2 and other areas as determined by the Fire Code Official due to the presence of combustible vegetation, or the proximity of the property to an area that contains combustible vegetation.

 

OCFA. Orange County Fire Authority, fire authority having jurisdiction.

 

SPARK ARRESTER. A listed device constructed of noncombustible material specifically for the purpose of meeting one of the following conditions:

 

1.     Removing and retaining carbon and other flammable particles/debris from the exhaust flow of an internal combustion engine in accordance with California Vehicle Code Section 38366.

2.     Fireplaces that burn solid fuel in accordance with California Building Code Chapter 28.

 

Chapter 3 General Requirements is adopted in its entirety, with the exception of Sections 308.1.4,

311.5 through 311.5.5, 318 and 319, and with the following amendments:

 

        5.     Subsection 304.1.2 is hereby amended to read as follows:

 

304.1.2 Vegetation. Weeds, grass, vines or other growth that is capable of being ignited and endangering property, shall be cut down and removed by the owner or occupant of the premises. Vegetation clearance requirement in urban-wildland interface areas shall be in accordance with Chapter 49. Type, amount, arrangement, and maintenance of vegetation in a fuel modification area, interior slope, or similarly hazardous area shall be in accordance with OCFA Guideline C-05 “Vegetation Management Guideline—Technical Design for New Construction, Fuel Modification Plans, and Maintenance Program.”

 

        6.     A new Subsection 305.6 is hereby added to Section 305 of CFC to read in its entirety as follows:

 

305.6 Hazardous Conditions. Outdoor fires burning wood or other solid fuel are not allowed when any of the following conditions applies:

 

1.     When predicted sustained winds exceed 8 MPH and relative humidity is less than 25%, or a red flag condition has been declared

2.     When an official sign was caused to be posted by the fire code official, or a public announcement is made

 

No outdoor fires using any fuel type are permitted when predicted sustained winds exceed 20 MPH or when such fires present a hazard as determined by the fire code official.

 

        7.     A new Subsection 305.7 is hereby added to Section 305 of CFC to read in its entirety as follows:

 

305.7 Disposal of Rubbish. Rubbish, trash or combustible waste material shall be burned only within an approved incinerator and in accordance with Section 307.2.1.

 

        8.     A new Subsection 307.6 is hereby added to Section 307 of CFC and the title of 307 is amended to read as follows:

        Section 307 Open Burning, Recreational Fires and Portable Outdoor Fireplaces is hereby revised as follows:

 

307.6 Outdoor Fireplaces, Fire Pits, Fire Rings, or Similar Devices Used at Group R Occupancies. Outdoor fireplaces, fire pits, fire rings, or similar exterior devices used at Group R occupancies shall comply with this section.

 

Exception: Barbeques, grills, and other portable devices intended solely for cooking.

 

A new Subsection 307.6.1 is hereby added to Section 307 of CFC to read in its entirety as follows:

 

307.6.1 Gas-Fueled Devices. Outdoor fireplaces, fire pits and similar devices fueled by natural gas or liquefied-petroleum gas are allowed when approved by the Building Department and the device is designed to only burn a gas flame and not wood or other solid fuel. At R-3 occupancies, combustible construction and vegetation shall not be located within three feet of an atmospheric column that extends vertically from the perimeter of the device. At other R occupancies, the minimum distance shall be ten feet. Where a permanent Building Department approved hood and vent is installed, combustible construction may encroach upon this column between the bottom of the hood and the vent opening. Where chimneys or vents are installed, they shall have a spark arrester as defined in Section 202.

 

A new Subsection 307.6.2 is hereby added to Section 307 of CFC to read in its entirety as follows:

 

307.6.2 Devices Using Wood or Fuels Other Than Natural Gas or Liquefied-Petroleum Gas. Permanent outdoor fireplaces burning wood or other solid fuel shall be constructed in accordance with the California Building Code with clearance from combustible construction and building openings as required therein. Fires in a fireplace shall be contained within a firebox with an attached chimney. The opening in the face of the firebox shall have an installed and maintained method of arresting sparks.

 

The burning of wood or other solid fuel in a device is not allowed within 25 feet of combustible structures unless within an approved permanent fireplace, Conditions which could cause a fire to spread within 25 feet of a structure or to vegetation shall be eliminated prior to ignition. Fires in devices burning wood or solid fuel shall be in accordance with Sections 305, 307, and 308.

 

Exceptions:

1.     Portable fireplaces and fire rings/pits equipped with a device to arrest sparks shall be located at least 3′ from combustible construction at R-3 occupancies,

2.     Portable fireplaces, and fire pits/rings equipped with a device to arrest sparks, shall be located at least 15 feet from combustible structures at other R occupancies.

 

A new Subsection 307.6.2.1 is hereby added to Section 307 of CFC to read in its entirety as follows:

 

307.6.2.1 Where Prohibited. The burning of wood and other solid fuels shall not be conducted within a fuel modification zone, Wildfire Risk Area (WRA), Wildland-Urban Interface Area (WUI), or in locations where conditions could cause the spread of fire to the WRA or WUI.

 

Exceptions:

1.     Permanent fireplaces that are not located in a fuel modification zone. Where determined by the Fire Code Official that the location or design of the device should reasonably prevent the start of a wildfire.

2.     Where determined by the Fire Code Official that the location or design of the device should reasonably prevent the start of a wildfire.

 

        9.     Subsection 308.1.6.3 of Section 308 of the CFC is hereby amended to read in its entirety as follows:

 

308.1.6.3 Sky Lanterns. A person shall not ignite, release, or cause to be released a sky lantern.

 

        10.   A new Section 321 is hereby added to Chapter 3 of the CFC to read in its entirety as follows:

 

321 Fuel Modification Requirements for New Construction. All new structures and facilities adjoining land containing hazardous combustible vegetation shall be approved and in accordance with the requirements of OCFA Guideline C-05 “Vegetation Management Guideline – Technical Design for New Construction Fuel Modification Plans and Maintenance Program.”

 

        11.   A new Section 322 is hereby added to Chapter 3 of the CFC to read in its entirety as follows:

 

322 Clearance of Brush or Vegetation Growth from Roadways. The fire code official is authorized to cause areas within 10 feet (3,048 mm) on each side of portions of highways and private streets which are improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic, to be cleared of flammable vegetation and other combustible growth. Measurement shall be from the flow-line or the end of the improved edge of the roadway surfaces.

 

Exception: Single specimens of trees, ornamental shrubbery or cultivated ground cover such as green grass, ivy, succulents or similar plants used as ground covers, provided that they do not form a means of readily transmitting fire.

 

        12.   A new Section 323 is hereby added to Chapter 3 of the CFC to read in its entirety as follows:

 

323 Unusual Circumstances. The fire code official may suspend enforcement of the vegetation management requirements and require reasonable alternative measures designed to advance the purpose of this code if determined that in any specific case that any of the following conditions exist:

1.     Difficult terrain.

2.     Danger of erosion.

3.     Presence of plants included in any state and federal resources agencies, California Native Plant Society and county-approved list of wildlife, plants, rare, endangered and/or threatened species.

4.     Stands or groves of trees or heritage trees.

5.     Other unusual circumstances that make strict compliance with the clearance of vegetation provisions undesirable or impractical.

 

        13.   A new Section 324 is hereby added to Chapter 3 of the CFC to read in its entirety as follows:

 

324 Use of Equipment. Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person shall use, operate, or cause to be operated in, upon or adjoining any hazardous fire area any internal combustion engine which uses hydrocarbon fuels, unless the engine is equipped with a spark arrester as defined in Section 202 maintained in effective working order, or the engine is constructed, equipped and maintained for the prevention of fire.

 

Exceptions:

1.     Engines used to provide motor power for trucks, truck tractors, buses, and passenger vehicles, except motorcycles, are not subject to this section if the exhaust system is equipped with a muffler as defined in the Vehicle Code of the State of California.

2.     Turbocharged engines are not subject to this section if all exhausted gases pass through the rotating turbine wheel, there is no exhaust bypass to the atmosphere, and the turbocharger is in good mechanical condition

 

A new Subsection 324.1 is hereby added to Section 324 of CFC to read in its entirety as follows:

 

324.1 Equipment and Devices Generating Heat, Sparks or Open Flames. During any time of the year within Wildfire Risk Areas, within or immediately adjacent to any forest- or brush-covered land or non-irrigated grass-covered land, no person shall use or operate any welding equipment, cutting torches, tar pots, grinding devices, or other tools or equipment that may produce a spark, fire, or flame that could result in a wildfire without doing the following:

1.     First clearing away all flammable material, including snags, from the area around such operation for a distance of 30 feet or other approved method to reduce fire spread into the wildlands. If 30-foot clearing cannot be achieved, then an alternate method shall be approved by the AHJ prior to work starting.

2.     Maintain one serviceable round point shovel with an overall length of not less than forty-six (46) inches and one backpack pump water-type fire extinguisher fully equipped and ready for use at the immediate area during the operation.

3.     Stop work when winds are 8 MPH or greater during periods when relative humidity is less than 25%, or a red flag condition has been declared or public announcement is made, when an official sign was caused to be posted by the fire code official, or when such fires present a hazard as determined by the fire code official.

4.     Keep a cell phone nearby and call 911 immediate in case of fire.

 

        14.   A new Subsection 324.2 is hereby added to Section 324 of CFC to read in its entirety as follows:

       

324.2 Spark Arresters. Spark arresters shall comply with Section 202, and when affixed to the exhaust system of engines or vehicles subject to Section 324 shall not be placed or mounted in such a manner as to allow flames or heat from the exhaust system to ignite any flammable material.

 

        15.   Chapter 4 only Sections/Subsections 401, 402, 403.2, 403.5 – 403.5.4, 403.10.2.1.1, 403.13 – 103.13.3, 404.5 – 404.6.6 and 407 of the CFC is hereby adopted and all other sections/subsections are deleted without replacements.

Subsection 407.5 of Section 407 of the CFC is hereby amended to read in its entirety as follows:

 

407.5 Hazardous Materials Inventory Statement. Where required by the fire code official, each application for a permit shall include OCFA’s Chemical Classification Packet in accordance with Section 5001.5.2.

 

        16.   Chapter 5 Fire Service Features is adopted in its entirety with the following amendments:

Section 501.1 of the CFC is hereby amended to read in its entirety as follows:

 

501.1 Scope. Fire service features for buildings, structures and premises shall comply with this chapter and, where required by the fire code official, with OCFA Guideline B-09, “Fire Master Plan for Commercial & Residential Development.” Fire service features for buildings, structures and premises located in State Responsibility Areas, and Local Responsibility Areas designated as Very High Hazard Fire Severity Zone shall also comply with OCFA Guideline B-09a, “Fire Safe Development in State Responsibility Areas, and Local Responsibility Areas designated as Very High Hazard Fire Severity Zone”.

 

        17.   Subsection 503.1.1 of Section 503 of the CFC is hereby amended by adding exception 3 as follows:

 

3.     For Group R-3 and Group U occupancies equipped throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2, or 903.3.1.3 the fire apparatus access road shall comply with the requirements of this section and shall extend to within 300 feet (91 m) of the main entry door to the building.

 

        18.   A new Subsection 505.1.1 is hereby added to Section 505 of CFC to read as follows:

 

Multi-family dwellings and non-residential buildings that have access from an alley or thoroughfare shall have an additional set of address number installed that is visible from said alley or thoroughfare.

 

        19.   Section 510.1 of the CFC is hereby revised to read in its entirety as follows:

 

510.1 Emergency Responder Radio Coverage in New Buildings. All new buildings shall have approved radio coverage for emergency responders within the building based upon the existing coverage levels of the public safety communication systems utilized by the jurisdiction, measured at the exterior of the building. This section shall not require improvement of the existing public safety communication systems. The Emergency Responder Radio Coverage System shall comply with the Orange County Sheriff’s Department, Communications and Technology Division guidelines and specifications and, where the functionality or performance requirements in the California Fire Code are more stringent, this code.

 

Exceptions:

1.     In buildings or structures where it is determined by the fire code official that the radio coverage system is not needed, including but not limited to the following:

a.     Existing buildings or structures, unless required by the Building Official and OCFA for buildings and structures undergoing extensive remodel and/or expansion.

b.     Elevators.

c.     Structures that meet all of the following:

i.      Three stories or less, and

ii.     Do not have subterranean storage or parking, and

iii.    Do not exceed 50,000 square feet on any single story.

d.     Structures that meet all of the following:

i.      Residential structures four stories or less, and

ii.     Constructed of wood, and

iii.    Do not have subterranean storage or parking, and

iv.    Are not built integral to an above ground multi-story parking structure.

 

Should a structure that is three stories or less and 50,000 square feet or smaller on any single story include subterranean storage or parking, then this ordinance shall apply only to the subterranean areas.

 

2.     In facilities where emergency responder radio coverage is required and such systems, components or equipment required could have a negative impact on the normal operations of the facility, the fire code official shall have the authority to accept an automatically activated emergency radio coverage system.

 

Subsection 510.2 Emergency responder radio coverage in existing buildings is deleted without replacement:

Subsection 510.3 Permit required is deleted without replacement.

 

        20.   Chapter 9 Fire Protection and Life Safety Systems is adopted in its entirety with the following amendments:

Subsection 903.2 of section 903 of the CFC is hereby amended to read in its entirety as follows:

 

903.2 Where Required. Approved automatic sprinkler systems in new buildings and structures shall be provided in the locations described in this section and in Section 903.2 of the California Fire Code as amended by the City of Dana Point as follows:

 

1.     New Buildings: In addition to the requirements of section 903.2.1 through 903.2.13, approved automatic sprinkler systems in new buildings and structures shall be provided as follows:

 

1.1   Throughout all Groups A, I, E, and H Occupancies.

1.2   Throughout all Group B, F, M, and S Occupancies exceeding 1,000 square feet.

1.3   Throughout all Group U Occupancies exceeding 6,000 square feet.

 

Exception: Group R Detached one- two-family dwellings and townhouses as required by section 903.2.8

 

For the purposes of this section, fire walls shall not define separate buildings.

 

2.     Existing Building

 

1.     Alteration: When the floor area of the Alteration within any two-year period exceeds 75% of area of the existing structure and the alteration includes structural modifications other than seismic upgrade.

 

2.     Addition: Sprinkler protection shall be provided throughout the entire building when:

1.     Existing building less than 5,000 ft2: where 20% or more is added and the gross floor area exceeds 5,000 square feet.

2.     Existing building equal or greater than 5,000 ft2: where more than 1,000 ft2 is added.

3.     The existing building has fire sprinklers installed.

 

        21.   Subsection 903.2.8 Group R of section 903 of the CFC is hereby amended to read in its entirety as follows:

 

903.2.8 Group R. An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with section 903.3 shall be provided throughout all buildings with a Group R fire area as follows:

 

1.     New Buildings: An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout all new buildings.

2.     Existing R-3 Buildings: An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout when one of the following conditions exists:

1.     When the floor area of alterations within any two year period exceeds 50 percent of gross floor area of the existing structure and the building gross floor area exceeds 5,500 square feet; or:

2.     When an existing Group R Occupancy is being substantially renovated, and where the scope of the renovation is such that the Building Code Official determines that the complexity of installing a sprinkler system would be similar as in a new building.

 

Exceptions:

1.     Existing Group R-3 occupancies converted to Group R-3.1 occupancies and not housing bedridden clients, not housing non-ambulatory clients above the first floor, and not housing clients above the second floor.

2.     Existing Group R-3 occupancies converted to Group R-3.1 occupancies housing only one bedridden client and complying with Section 435.8.3.3 of the California Building Code.

3.     Pursuant to Health and Safety Code, Section 13113, occupancies housing ambulatory children only, none of whom are mentally ill or developmentally disabled, and the buildings or portions thereof in which such children are housed are not more than two stories in height, and building or portions thereof housing such children have an automatic fire alarm system activated by approved smoke detectors.

4.     Pursuant to Health and Safety Code, Section 13143.6, occupancies licensed for protective social care which house ambulatory clients only, none of whom is a child (under the age of 18 years), or who is elderly (65 years of age or over).

 

When not used in accordance with Section 504.2 or 506.3 of the California Building Code, an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.2 shall be allowed in Group R-2.1 occupancies.

 

An automatic sprinkler system designed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.3 shall not be utilized in Group R-2.1 or R-4 occupancies.

 

        22.   Subsection 903.3.5.3 of Section 903 of the CFC is hereby added to read in its entirety as follows:

 

903.3.5.3 Hydraulically Calculated Systems. The design of hydraulically calculated fire sprinkler systems shall not exceed 90% of the water supply capacity.

 

Exception: When static pressure exceeds 100 psi, and when required by the fire code official, the fire sprinkler system shall not exceed the water supply capacity specified by Table 903.3.5.3..



        23.   Chapter 11 only Sections/Subsections 1103.7, 1103.7.3, 1103.7.3.1, 1103.7.8 – 1103.7.8.2, 1103.7.9 – 1103.7.9.10, 1103.8 – 1103.8.5.3, 1103.9.1, 1107, 1113, 1114, 1115, and 1116 of the CFC is hereby adopted and all other sections/subsections are deleted without replacements.

        24.   Chapter 12 Energy Systems is adopted in its entirety with the following amendment added:

 

1201.1.1 Other Systems. Where required by the fire code official, other systems and operations including but not limited to battery systems assembly, battery reconditioning and storage, research and development of battery storage systems, electric vehicle manufacturing and testing, and battery charging systems for cars and carts inside of buildings or structures, shall comply with this chapter.

 

Exception: When approved by the fire code official, charging stations for electric vehicles located in open parking garages of Type I or II construction.

 

        25.   Subsection 2801.2 of Section 2801 Lumber Yards and Agro-Industrial, Solid Biomass and Woodworking Facilities of CFC is hereby amended to read in its entirety as follows:

 

2801.2 Permit. Permits shall be required as set forth in Section 105.6 and 105.6.29.

 

        26.   Subsection 2808.2 of Section 2808 of CFC is hereby amended to read in its entirety as follows:

 

2808.2 Storage Site. Storage sites shall be level and on solid ground, elevated soil lifts or other all-weather surface. Sites shall be thoroughly cleaned and approval obtained from the fire code official before transferring products to the site.

 

        27.   Subsection 2808.3 of Section 2808 of CFC is hereby amended to read as follows:

 

2808.3 Size of Piles. Piles shall not exceed 15 feet in height, 50 feet in width and 100 feet in length.

 

Exception: The fire code official is authorized to allow the pile size to be increased where a fire protection plan is provided for approval that includes, but is not limited to, the following:

1.     Storage yard areas and materials-handling equipment selection, design and arrangement shall be based upon sound fire prevention and protection principles.

2.     Factor that lead to spontaneous heating shall be identified in the plan, and control of the various factors shall be identified and implemented, including provisions for monitoring the internal condition of the pile.

3.     The plan shall include means for early fire detection and reporting to the public fire department; and facilities needed by the fire department for fire extinguishment including a water supply and fire hydrants.

4.     Fire apparatus access roads around the piles and access roads to the top of the piles shall be established, identified and maintained.

5.     Regular yard inspections by trained personnel shall be included as part of an effective fire prevention maintenance program.

 

Additional fire protection called for in the plan shall be provided and shall be installed in accordance with this code. The increase of the pile size shall be based upon the capabilities of the installed fire protection system and features.

 

        28.   Subsection 2808.4 of Section 2808 of CFC is hereby amended to read as follows:

 

2808.4. Pile Separation. Piles shall be separated from adjacent piles by minimum distance of 20 feet. Additionally, piles shall have a minimum separation of 100 feet from combustible vegetation.

 

        29.   Subsection 2808.7 of Section 2808 of CFC is hereby amended to read as follows:

 

2808.7 Pile Fire Protection. Automatic sprinkler protection shall be provided in conveyor tunnels and combustible enclosures that pass under a pile. Combustible conveyor systems and enclosed conveyor systems shall be equipped with an approved automatic sprinkler system. Oscillating sprinklers with a sufficient projectile reach are required to maintain a 40% to 60% moisture content and wet down burning/smoldering areas.

 

        30.   Subsection 2808.9 of Section 2808 of CFC is hereby amended to read as follows:

 

2808.9 Material-Handling Equipment. All material-handling equipment operated by an internal combustion engine shall be provided and maintained with an approved spark arrester. Approved material-handling equipment shall be available for moving wood chips, hogged material, wood fines and raw product during fire-fighting operations.

 

        31.   A new Subsection 2808.11 is hereby added to Chapter 28 of CFC to read in its entirety as follows:

 

2808.11 Temperature Control. The temperature shall be monitored and maintained as specified in Sections 2808.11.1 and 2808.11.2.

 

        32.   A new Subsection 2808.11.1 is hereby added to Chapter 28 of CFC to read in its entirety as follows:

 

2808.11.1 Pile Temperature Control. Piles shall be rotated when internal temperature readings are in excess of 165 degrees Fahrenheit.

 

        33.   A new Subsection 2808.11.2 is hereby added to Chapter 28 of CFC to read in its entirety as follows:

 

2808.11.2 New Material Temperature Control. New loads delivered to the facility shall be inspected and tested at the facility entry prior to taking delivery. Material with temperature exceeding 165 degrees Fahrenheit shall not be accepted on the site. New loads shall comply with the requirements of this chapter and be monitored to verify that the temperature remains stable.

 

        34.   A new Subsection 2808.12 of Section 2808 of CFC is hereby added to read in its entirety as follows:

 

2808.12 Water Availability. Facilities with over 2,500 cubic feet shall provide a water supply. The minimum fire flow shall be no less than 500 GPM @ 20 psi for a minimum of 1 hour duration for pile heights up to 6 feet and 2 hour duration for pile heights over 6 feet. If there is no water purveyor, an alternate water supply with storage tank(s) shall be provided for fire suppression. The water supply tank(s) shall provide a minimum capacity of 2,500 gallons per pile (maximum 30,000 gallons) for piles not exceeding 6 feet in height and 5,000 gallons per pile (maximum 60,000) for piles exceeding 6 feet in height. Water tank(s) shall not be used for any other purpose unless the required fire flow is left in reserve within the tank at all times. An approved method shall be provided to maintain the required amount of water within the tank(s).

 

        35.   A new Subsection 2808.13 of Section 2808 of CFC is hereby added to read in its entirety as follows:

 

2808.13 Tipping Areas shall comply with the following:

1.     Tipping areas shall not exceed a maximum area of 50 feet by 50 feet.

2.     Material within a tipping area shall not exceed 5 feet in height at any time.

3.     Tipping areas shall be separated from all piles by a 20 foot wide fire access lane.

4.     A fire hydrant or approved fire water supply outlet shall be located within 150 feet of all points along the perimeter of the tipping area.

5.     All material within a tipping area shall be processed within 5 days of receipt.

 

        36.   A new Subsection 2808.14 of Section 2808 of CFC is hereby added to read in its entirety as follows:

 

2808.14 Emergency Contact. The contact information of a responsible person or persons shall be provided to the Fire Department and shall be posted at the entrance to the facility for responding units. The responsible party should be available to respond to the business in emergency situation.

 

        37.   Subsection 4906.3 of Section 4906 of CFC is hereby amended to read as follows:

 

4906.3 Requirements. Hazardous vegetation and fuels around all applicable buildings and structure shall be maintained in accordance with the following laws and regulations:

1.     Public Resources Code, Section 4291.

2.     California Code of Regulations, Title 14, Division 1.5, Chapter 7, Subchapter 3, Section 1299 (see guidance for implementation “General Guideline to Create Defensible Space”).

3.     California Government Code, Section 51182.

4.     California Code of Regulations, Title 19, Division 1, Chapter 7, Subchapter 1, Section 3.07.

5. OCFA Guideline C-05 “Vegetation Management Guideline – Technical Design for New Construction Fuel Modification Plans and Maintenance Program.”

 

        38.   A new Section 4908 Fuel Modification Requirements for new construction of Chapter 49 of CFC is hereby added to read in its entirety as follows:

 

4908 Fuel Modification Requirements for New Construction. All new buildings to be built or installed in a Wildfire Risk Area shall comply with the following:

 

1.     Preliminary fuel modification plans shall be submitted to and approved by the fire code official prior to or concurrently with the approval of any tentative map.

2.     Final fuel modification plans shall be submitted to and approved by the fire code official prior to the issuance of a grading permit.

3.     The fuel modification plans shall meet the criteria set forth in the Fuel Modification Section of OCFA Guideline C-05 “Vegetation Management Guideline – Technical Design for New Construction Fuel Modification Plans and Maintenance Program.”

1.1   The fuel modification plan shall include provisions for the maintenance of the fuel modification in perpetuity.

4.     The fuel modification plan may be altered if conditions change. Any alterations to the fuel modification areas shall have prior approval from the fire code official.

5.     All elements of the fuel modification plan shall be maintained in accordance with the approved plan and are subject to the enforcement process outlined in the Fire Code.

 

        39.   Chapter 50 Hazardous Materials – General Provisions is adopted in its entirety with the following amendments.

        Subsection 5001.5.2 of Section 5001 of CFC is hereby amended to read as follows:

 

5001.5.2 Hazardous Materials Inventory Statement (HMIS). Where required by the fire code official, an application for a permit shall include. Orange County Fire Authority’s Chemical Classification Packet, which shall be completed and approved prior to approval of plans, and/or the storage, use or handling of chemicals on the premises. The Chemical Classification Packet shall include the following information:

1.     Product Name.

2.     Component.

3.     Chemical Abstract Service (CAS) number.

4.     Location where stored or used.

5.     Container size.

6.     Hazard classification.

7.     Amount in storage.

8.     Amount in use-closed systems.

9.     Amount in use-open systems.

 

        40.   Subsection 5003.1.1 of Section 5003 of CFC is hereby amended by adding a new subsection as follows:

 

5003.1.1.1 Extremely Hazardous Substances. No person shall use or store any amount of extremely hazardous substances (EHS) in excess of the disclosable amounts (see Health and Safety Code Section 25500 et al) in a residential zoned or any residentially developed property.

 

        41.   Section 56 Explosives and Fireworks is adopted in its entirety with the following amendments:

        A new Subsection 5608.2 of Section 5608 of CFC is hereby added to read in its entirety as follows:

 

5608.2 Firing. All fireworks displays, regardless of mortar, device, or shell size, shall be electrically fired.

 

        42.   A new Subsection 5608.3 of Section 5608 of CFC is hereby added to read in its entirety as follows:

 

Section 5608.3 Application for Permit. A diagram of the grounds on which the display is to be held showing the point at which the fireworks are to be discharged, the fallout area based on 100 feet per inch of shell size, the location of all buildings, roads, and other means of transportation, the lines behind which the audience will be restrained, the location of all nearby trees, telegraph or telephone line, or other overhead obstructions shall be provided to OCFA.

 

        43.   Chapter 57 Flammable and Combustible Liquids. Adopt Chapter 57, with the exception of Section 5707, in its entirety and with the following amendment:

        A new Subsection 5701.1.1 Mobile fueling of Section 5701.1 of CFC is hereby added to read in its entirety as follows:

 

Section 5701.1.1 Mobile Fueling. On-demand mobile fueling of Class I, II, and III liquids into the fuel tanks of vehicles is prohibited.

 

        44.   Chapter 58 Flammable Gases and Flammable Cryogenic Fluids. Adopt Chapter 58, with the exception of Section 5809, in its entirety and with the following amendment:

        Subsection 5801.1 of Section 5801 of CFC is hereby amended to read as follows:

 

Section 5801.1 Scope. The storage and use of flammable gases and flammable cryogenic fluids shall be in accordance with this chapter, NFPA 2 and NFPA 55. Compressed gases shall also comply with Chapter 53 and cryogenic fluids shall also comply with Chapter 55. Flammable cryogenic fluids shall comply with Section 5806. Hydrogen motor fuel-dispensing stations and repair garages and their associated above-ground hydrogen storage systems shall also be designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with Chapter 23. Mobile fueling of gaseous and liquid hydrogen, compressed natural gas (CNG), and liquefied natural gas (LNG) into the fuel tanks of vehicles is prohibited.

 

Exceptions:

1.     Gases used as refrigerants in refrigeration systems (see Section 605).

2.     Liquefied petroleum gases and natural gases regulated by Chapter 61.

3.     Fuel-gas systems and appliances regulated under the California Mechanical Code and the California Plumbing Code other than gaseous hydrogen systems and appliances.

4.     Pyrophoric gases in accordance with Chapter 64.

 

        45.   Chapter 80 Referenced Standards of CFC is hereby adopted in its entirety with the following amendments:

NFPA 13, 2016 Edition, Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems is hereby amended as follows:

Section 6.7.3 is hereby revised as follows:

 

6.7.3 Fire department connections (FDC) shall be of an approved type. The location shall be approved and be no more than 150 feet from a public hydrant. The FDC may be located within 150 feet of a private fire hydrant when approved by the fire code official. The size of piping and the number of 2½″ inlets shall be approved by the fire code official. If acceptable to the water authority, it may be installed on the backflow assembly. Fire department inlet connections shall be painted OSHA safety red or as approved. When the fire sprinkler density design requires more than 500 gpm (including inside hose stream demand), or a standpipe system is included, four 2½″ inlets shall be provided.

 

Section 8.3.3.1 is hereby revised as follows:

 

8.3.3.1 When fire sprinkler systems are installed in shell buildings of undetermined use (Spec Buildings) other than warehouses (S occupancies), fire sprinklers of the quick-response type shall be used. Use is considered undetermined if a specific tenant/occupant is not identified at the time the fire sprinkler plan is submitted. Sprinklers in light hazard occupancies shall be one of the following:

 

1.     Quick-response type as defined in 3.6.4.8

2.     Residential sprinklers in accordance with the requirements of 8.4.5

3.     Quick response CMSA sprinklers

4.     ESFR sprinklers

5.     Standard-response sprinklers used for modifications or additions to existing light hazard systems equipped with standard-response sprinklers

6.     Standard-response sprinklers used where individual standard-response sprinklers are replaced in existing light hazard systems

 

Section 8.15.1.2.7 is hereby revised as follows:

 

8.15.1.2.7 Concealed spaces filled with noncombustible insulation shall not require sprinkler protection when approved by the fire code official.

 

Section 11.1.1.1 is hereby added as follows:

 

11.1.1.1 When fire sprinkler systems are required in buildings of undetermined use other than warehouses, they shall be designed and installed to have a fire sprinkler density of not less than that required for an Ordinary Hazard Group 2 use, with no reduction(s) in density or design area. Warehouse fire sprinkler systems shall be designed to Figure 16.2.1.3.2 (d) curve “G”. Use is considered undetermined if a specific tenant/occupant is not identified at the time the sprinkler plan is submitted. Where a subsequent use or occupancy requires a system with greater capability, it shall be the responsibility of the occupant to upgrade the system to the required density for the new use or occupancy.

 

Section 11.2.3.1.1.1 is hereby added as follows:

 

11.2.3.1.1.1 The available water supply for fire sprinkler system design shall be determined by one of the following methods, as approved by the fire code official:

1.     Subtract the project site elevation from the low water level for the appropriate pressure zone and multiply the result by 0.433;

2.     Use a maximum of 40 psi, if available;

3.     Utilize the OCFA water-flow test form/directions to document a flow test conducted by the local water agency or an approved third party licensed in the State of California.

 

NFPA 13D 2016 Edition, Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems in One- and Two-Family Dwellings and Manufactured Homes is hereby amended as follows:

Section 7.1.2 is hereby revised as follows:

 

7.1.2 The sprinkler system piping shall not have separate control valves installed unless supervised by a central station, proprietary, or remote station alarm service.

 

NFPA 14, 2013 Edition, Installation of Standpipe and Hose Systems is hereby amended as follows:

Section 7.3.1.1 is hereby is deleted in its entirety and replaced as follows:

 

7.3.1.1 Class I and III Standpipe hose connections shall be unobstructed and shall be located not less than 18 inches or more than 24 inches above the finished floor. Class II Standpipe hose connections shall be unobstructed and shall be located not less than 3 feet or more than 5 feet above the finished floor.

 

NFPA 24, 2016 Edition, Standard for the Installation of Private Fire Service Mains and Their Appurtenances is hereby amended as follows:

Section 6.2.8.1 is hereby added as follows:

 

6.2.8.1 All indicating valves controlling fire suppression water supplies shall be painted OSHA red.

 

Exceptions:

1.     Brass or bronze valves on sprinkler risers mounted to the exterior of the building may be left unpainted.

2.     Where OS&Y valves on the detector check assembly are the only control valves, at least one OS&Y valve shall be painted red.

 

Section 6.2.9 is hereby amended as follows:

 

All connections to private fire service mains for fire protection systems shall be arranged in accordance with one of the following so that they can be isolated:

(1)    A post indicator valve installed not less than 40 ft. (12 m) from the building

(a) For buildings less than 40 ft. (12 m) in height, a post indicator valve shall be permitted to be installed closer than 40 ft. (12 m) but at least as far from the building as the height of the wall facing the post indicator valve.

(2)    A wall post indicator valve

(3)    An indicating valve in a pit, installed in accordance with Section 6.4

(4)    A backflow preventer with at least one indicating valve not less than 40 ft. (12 m) from the building

(a)    For buildings less than 40 ft. (12 m) in height, a backflow preventer with at least one indicating valve shall be permitted to be installed closer than 40 ft. (12 m) but at least as far from the building as the height of the wall facing the backflow preventer.

(5)    Control valves installed in a fire-rated room accessible from the exterior

(6)    Control valves in a fire-rated stair enclosure accessible from the exterior

 

Section 10.1.5 is hereby added as follows:

 

10.1.5 All ferrous pipe and joints shall be polyethylene encased per AWWA C150, Method A, B, or C. All fittings shall be protected with a loose 8-mil polyethylene tube or sheet. The ends of the tube or sheet shall extend past the joint by a minimum of 12 inches and be sealed with 2-inch wide tape approved for underground use. Galvanizing does not meet the requirements of this section.

 

Exception: 304 or 316 Stainless Steel pipe and fittings

 

Section 10.4.1.1 is hereby revised as follows:

 

10.4.1.1 All bolted joint accessories shall be cleaned and thoroughly coated with asphalt or other corrosion-retarding material after installation.

 

Exception: Bolted joint accessories made from 304 or 316 stainless steel.

 

Section 10.4.1.1.1 is hereby added as follows:

 

10.4.1.1.1 All bolts used in pipe-joint assembly shall be 316 stainless steel.

 

Section 10.4.3.2 is hereby deleted and replaced as follows:

 

10.4.3. Where fire service mains enter the building adjacent to the foundation, the pipe may run under a building to a maximum of 24 inches, as measured from the interior face of the exterior wall to the center of the vertical pipe. The pipe under the building or building foundation shall be 304 or 316 stainless steel and shall not contain mechanical joints or it shall comply with 10.4.3.2.1 through 10.4.3.2.4.

(Added by Ord. 07-09, 12/4/07; amended by Ord. 16-08, 11/15/16; Ord. 19-05, 12/3/19)

Chapter 8.26 CALIFORNIA ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS CODE
8.26.001 Adoption of the California Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings.
        (a)    There is adopted by the City Council of the City of Dana Point, for the purpose of prescribing regulations for remedying dangerous buildings, the California Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1997 Edition, published by the International Conference of Building Officials.

        (b)    Save and except such portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended, of which Code not less than one copy has been made and is now filed in the Office of the Clerk of the City Council; and the same is adopted and incorporated by reference as fully as if set forth at length herein. (Added by Ord. 02-12, 9/24/02)

 

8.26.010 Amendments, Additions and Deletions.
        1.     Section 103 of Chapter 1 of the California Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings is hereby amended to read in its entirety as follows:

 

        103 Additions, Alterations and Repairs. For additions, alterations and repairs for all buildings and structures subject to the provisions of this code, see Sections 3403, 3404 and 3405 of the CBC.

 

        2.     Section 201 of the California Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings is hereby amended to read in its entirety as follows:

 

        201.1 Administration. The Building Official is authorized and directed to administer and enforce all of the provisions of this Code. For such purposes, he or she shall have the powers of a law enforcement officer. He or she is empowered to adopt and enforce rules and regulations to clarify and expand the provisions of this Code in conformity with the spirit and intent of its stated purpose.

 

        201.2 Inspections. The Health Officer, the Fire Marshal, and the Building Official are authorized and directed to make such inspections and take such actions as may be required to enforce the provisions of this Code.

 

        The Building Official and his or her authorized representative(s) shall have the right of reasonable inspection of any building for the purpose of determining the condition thereof. No person shall refuse or interfere with such inspection by any such official.

 

        For the purpose of such inspection, the Building Official may order any structural member or portion of the structural frame of any building, whether such building is already erected, or is in course of construction, to be exposed whenever he has reasonable grounds for believing that such structural member or frame is in an unsafe condition or does not conform to the requirements of this chapter. No owner, reputed owner or person having custody, control or management or in charge of maintenance, occupancy or use of such building who is served with such order shall fail or refuse to forthwith fully uncover or expose the portion of the structural frame or structural member as required by such order.

 

        201.3 Right of Entry. Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this Code, or whenever the Building Official or his/her authorized representative has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises, any condition or Code violation which makes such building or premises unsafe, dangerous, hazardous or substandard, as defined in Section 202 of the UHC or Section 302 of this Code, the Building Official or his/her authorized representative may enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the Building Official by this Code; provided that if such building or premises be occupied, he or she shall first present proper credentials and request entry; and if such building or premises be unoccupied, he or she shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner and other persons having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry. If such entry is refused, the Building Official or his/her authorized representative shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry.

 

        3.     Section 202 of Chapter 2 of the California Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings is hereby amended to read in its entirety as follows:

 

        SECTION 202 – ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS

 

        202.1 Abatement proceedings. All buildings or portions thereof which are determined after inspection by the building official to be dangerous as defined in this code are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal in accordance with the procedure specified in Section 401 of this code.

 

        202.2 Summary abatement. Where necessary in the opinion of the building official to protect life or property from an acutely dangerous condition, the building official may take emergency action to abate the hazard by city forces as provided in this chapter or may order the building immediately vacated, posted unsafe, barricaded, utilities disconnected, or other appropriate protective remedy.

 

        202.3 Owner’s responsibility for enforcement costs. If the substandard/dangerous conditions have not been corrected or the nuisance abated by the owner as directed within the time frame established by the Building Official, or as said time frame may be modified, all incidental enforcement costs incurred by the City in connection therewith shall be charged to and become an indebtedness of the owner of such property and a lien on the property whether or not the work is later performed by the City, by the owner, or by others. “Incidental enforcement costs” include, but are not limited to, the actual expenses and costs of the City in investigating the nuisance, obtaining title information, preparing notices, and performing inspections.

 

        4.     Section 203 of the California Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings is hereby amended to read in its entirety as follows:

 

        Section 203—Violations and Penalties. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert, or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure, or cause or permit the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of this Code.

 

        Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this Code shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor; and each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this Code is committed, continued or permitted; and upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand ($1,000.00) dollars or by imprisonment for not more than six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

 

        5.     Section 205 of the California Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings is hereby amended to read in its entirety as follows:

 

        Section 205. Board of Appeals. In order to provide for final interpretation of the provisions of this Code, there shall be and is created a Board of Appeals as specified in Section 113 of the California Building Code as amended herein.

 

        6.     Subsection 403.2 of Section 403 of California Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings is hereby added to read in its entirety as follows:

 

        403.2 Notice to secure structure. When any unoccupied building or structure is not properly secured, locked or closed, and is accessible to juveniles, transients and undesirables, and is in such condition as to constitute an immediate health, fire or safety hazard and the Building Official determines that the hazard is such as to require immediate closure, he or she shall serve the record owner and the person having control of such building or structure with notice to secure or close the same forthwith so as to prevent unauthorized persons from gaining access thereto. Notice shall be served as provided in this Chapter and shall state that if the required work is not performed within forty-eight hours after service of the notice, the City will perform such work and all expenses incurred by the City including, but not limited to, incidental processing and enforcement costs shall become an indebtedness of the owner and a lien on the property.

 

        7.     Subsection 403.3 of Section 403 of California Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings is hereby added to read in its entirety as follows:

 

        403.3 Emergency hazard abatement. When any open building or structure constitutes such a threat to life, limb or property that it must be secured, closed, barricaded or demolished forthwith and compliance with other provisions of this Code become infeasible, as determined by a City officer charged with responsibility for enforcement of health and safety regulations, the City Manager or his/her duly authorized representative may summarily secure, close, barricade or demolish such building or structure without prior notice to the property owner. All costs incurred by the City in abating the hazard shall be borne by the property owner and shall become an indebtedness of the owner and a lien on the property. Failure to receive prior notice shall not affect or relieve the property owner’s obligation for payment of such costs.

 

 

        8.     Subsection 404.2 of Section 404 of the California Code for Abatement of Dangerous Buildings Code is hereby added to read as follows:

 

404.2 Posted buildings, structures, and properties. Posted buildings, structures, and properties shall not be occupied or accessed without prior written approval of the building official. Once posted, access requests shall be made to the building official in writing, 24 hours in advance, for each request per day with the following information:

•       Full name of each person to be on the property;

•       The full purpose of being on the property; and

•       The duration of time they are requesting and stating the start and finish time.

        Anyone accessing a posted property, building, or structure without the express approval of the building official is in violation of this code.

 

(Added by Ord. 02-12, 9/24/02; amended by Ord. 10-11, 11/8/10; Ord. 16-08, 11/15/16; Ord. 19-05, 12/3/19)

Chapter 8.28 CALIFORNIA ADMINISTRATIVE CODE
8.28.001 Adoption of the California Administrative Code.
        The City Council of the City of Dana Point hereby adopts by reference the California Code of Regulations Title 24, Part 1, known and designated as the California Administrative Code, 2019 Edition. The California Administrative Code is on file for public examination in the office of the Building Official. (Added by Ord. 07-09, 12/4/07; amended by Ord. 16-08, 11/15/16; Ord. 19-05, 12/3/19)

Chapter 8.30 CALIFORNIA ENERGY CODE
8.30.001 Adoption of the California Energy Code.
        The City Council of the City of Dana Point hereby adopts by reference the California Code of Regulations Title 24, Part 6, known and designated as the California Energy Code, 2019 Edition. The California Energy Code is on file for public examination in the office of the Building Official. (Added by Ord. 07-09, 12/4/07; amended by Ord. 16-08, 11/15/16; Ord. 19-05, 12/3/19)

Chapter 8.32 CALIFORNIA GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE
8.32.001 Adoption of the California Green Building Standards Code.
        The City Council of the City of Dana Point hereby adopts by reference the California Code of Regulations Title 24, Part 11, known and designated as the California Green Building Standards Code, 2019 Edition. The California Green Building Standards Code is on file for public examination in the office of the Building Official. (Added by Ord. 07-09, 12/4/07; amended by Ord. 16-08, 11/15/16; Ord. 19-05, 12/3/19)

 

8.32.010 Amendments, Additions and Deletions.
        1.     Subsection 301.1 of Section 301 is hereby amended to read as follows:

 

301.1 Scope. Buildings shall be designed to include the green building measures specified as mandatory in this code. Voluntary green building measures are also included in this code the application checklists and may be included in the design and construction of structures covered by this code, but are not required unless they are adopted by a city or county as specified in Section 101.7.

 

Section 301.1.1 Additions and Alterations. [HCD] The mandatory provisions of Chapter 4 shall be applied to additions or alterations of existing residential buildings. Code sections relevant to additions and alterations shall only apply to the portions of the building being added or altered within the scope of the permitted work.

 

Note: On and after January 1, 2014, residential buildings undergoing permitted alterations, additions or improvements shall replace noncompliant plumbing fixtures with water-conserving plumbing fixtures. Plumbing fixture replacement is required prior to issuance of a certificate of final completion, certificate of occupancy or final permit approval by the local building department. See Civil Code Section 1101.1, et seq., for the definition of a noncompliant plumbing fixture, types of residential buildings affected and other important enactment dates.

 

(Added by Ord. 16-08, 11/15/16; Ord. 19-05, 12/3/19)

Chapter 8.33 EXPEDITED ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATION PERMITTING
8.33.010 Expedited Review Process.
        (a)    Consistent with Government Code Section 65850.7, the Building Official shall implement an expedited administrative permit review process for electric vehicle charging stations, and adopt a checklist of all requirements with which electric vehicle charging stations shall comply in order to be eligible for expedited review. Electric vehicle charging stations which qualify for expedited permit processing, pursuant to Government Code Section 65850.7, shall be subject to the administrative permitting procedures set forth in the City’s Electric Vehicle Charging Station Permit Expediting Ordinance.

        (b)    The expedited administrative permit review process and checklist may refer to the recommendations in the checklist prescribed by the most current version of the “Plug-In Electric Vehicle Infrastructure Permitting Checklist” of the “Zero-Emission Vehicles in California: Community Readiness Guidebook” published by the Governor’s Office of Planning and Research. The City’s adopted checklist shall be published on the City’s website. (Added by Ord. 18-04, 9/4/18)

 

8.33.020 Electronic Submittals.
        Consistent with Government Code Section 65850.7, the Building Official shall allow for electronic submittal of permit applications covered by this Chapter and associated supporting documentations. In accepting such permit applications, the Building Official shall also accept electronic signatures on all forms, applications, and other documentation in lieu of a wet signature by any applicant. (Added by Ord. 18-04, 9/4/18)

 

8.33.030 No Association Approval.
        Consistent with Government Code Section 65850.7, the Building Official shall not condition the approval for any electric vehicle charging station permit on the approval of such a system by an association, as that term is defined by Civil Code Section 4080. (Added by Ord. 18-04, 9/4/18)

 

8.33.040 Permit Application Processing.
        A permit application that satisfies the information requirements in the City’s adopted checklist shall be deemed complete and be promptly processed. Upon confirmation by the Building Official that the permit application and supporting documents meet the requirements of the City adopted checklist, and is consistent with all applicable laws, the Building Official shall, consistent with Government Code Section 65850.7, approve the application and issue all necessary permits. Such approval does not authorize an applicant to energize or utilize the electric vehicle charging station until approval is granted by the City. If the Building Official determines that the permit application is incomplete a written correction notice shall be returned to the applicant, detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance. (Added by Ord. 18-04, 9/4/18)

 

8.33.050 Technical Review.
        It is the intent of this Chapter to encourage the installation of electric vehicle charging stations by removing obstacles to permitting for charging stations so long as the action does not supersede the Building Official’s authority to address higher priority life-safety situations. If the Building Official makes a finding based on substantial evidence that the electric vehicle charging station could have a specific adverse impact upon the public health or safety, as defined in Government Code 65850.7, the City may require the applicant to apply for a use permit. (Added by Ord. 18-04, 9/4/18)

Chapter 8.34 CALIFORNIA HISTORICAL BUILDING CODE
8.34.001 Adoption of the California Historical Building Code.
        The City Council of the City of Dana Point hereby adopts by reference the California Code of Regulations Title 24, Part 8, known and designated as the California Historical Building Code, 2019 Edition. The California Historical Building Code is on file for public examination in the office of the Building Official. (Added by Ord. 07-09, 12/4/07; amended by Ord. 16-08, 11/15/16 ; Ord. 19-05, 12/3/19)

Chapter 8.36 CALIFORNIA EXISTING BUILDING CODE
8.36.001 Adoption of the California Existing Building Code.
        The City Council of the City of Dana Point hereby adopts by reference the California Code of Regulations Title 24, Part 10, known and designated as the California Existing Building Code, 2019 Edition. The California Existing Building Code is on file for public examination in the office of the Building Official. (Added by Ord. 07-09, 12/4/07; amended by Ord. 16-08, 11/15/16; Ord. 19-05, 12/3/19)

Chapter 8.38 CALIFORNIA REFERENCED STANDARDS CODE
8.38.001 Adoption of California Referenced Standards Code.
        The City Council of the City of Dana Point hereby adopts by reference the California Code of Regulations Title 24, Part 12, known and designated as the California Referenced Standards Code, 2019 Edition. The California Referenced Standards Code is on file for public examination in the office of the Building Official. (Added by Ord. 07-09, 12/4/07; amended by Ord. 16-08, 11/15/16; Ord. 19-05, 12/3/19)

Chapter 8.40 REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION
8.40.010 Purpose.
        It is the policy of the City, pursuant to the Federal Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988, to provide people with disabilities reasonable accommodation in rules, policies, practices and procedures that may be necessary to ensure equal access to housing. The purpose of this chapter is to provide a process for individuals with disabilities to make requests for reasonable accommodation in regard to relief from the various land use, zoning, or building laws, rules, policies, practices and/or procedures of the City. (Added by Ord. 07-09, 12/4/07)

 

8.40.020 Definitions.
        A.    Act. The Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988.

        B.     Applicant. An individual making a request for reasonable accommodation to this Division.

        C.     Code. The Dana Point Municipal Code.

        D.    Department. The Department of Community Development of the City of Dana Point.

        E.     Disabled Person. Any person who has a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more major: life activities; anyone who is regarded as having such impairment; or anyone who has a record of such impairment. People who are currently using illegal substances are not covered under the Act or this chapter unless they have a separate disability. (Added by Ord. 07-09, 12/4/07)

 

8.40.030 Notice to the Public of Availability of Accommodation Process.
        The Department of Community Development shall prominently display in the Development Services Center a notice advising those with disabilities or their representatives that they may request a reasonable accommodation hearing in accordance with the procedures established in this chapter. (Added by Ord. 07-09, 12/4/07)

 

8.40.040 Requesting Reasonable Accommodation.
        A.    In order to make specific housing available to an individual with a disability, a disabled person or representative may request reasonable accommodation relating to the various land use, zoning, or building laws, rules, policies, practices and/or procedures of the City.

        B.     If an individual needs assistance in making the request for reasonable accommodation, or appealing a determination regarding reasonable accommodation, the Department will endeavor to provide the as-

sistance necessary to ensure that the process is accessible to the applicant or representative. The applicant shall be entitled to be represented at all stages of the proceeding by a person designated by the applicant.

        C.     A request for reasonable accommodation in laws, rules, policies, practices and/or procedures may be filed on an application form provided by the Department at any time that the accommodation may be necessary to ensure equal access to housing. (Added by Ord. 07-09, 12/4/07)

 

8.40.050 Jurisdiction.
        A.    Director of Community Development/Building Official. The Director of Community Development or Building Official, as appropriate, shall have the authority to consider and act on requests for reasonable accommodation. When a request for reasonable accommodation is filed with the Department, it will be referred to the Director of Community Development or Building Official for review and consideration. The Director of Community Development or Building Official shall issue a written determination within thirty (30) days of the date of receipt of a completed application and may (1) grant the accommodation request, (2) grant the accommodation request subject to specified nondiscriminatory conditions, or (3) deny the request. All written determinations shall give notice of the right to appeal and the right to request reasonable accommodation on the appeals process, if necessary. The notice of determination shall be sent to the applicant by certified mail, return receipt requested.

        B.     If necessary to reach a determination on the request for reasonable accommodation, the Director of Community Development or Building Official may request further information from the applicant consistent with this Division, specifying in detail what information is required. In the event a request for further information is made, the thirty (30) day period to issue a written determination shall be stayed until the applicant responds to the request. (Added by Ord. 07-09, 12/4/07)

 

8.40.060 Required Findings.
        The following findings must be analyzed, made and adopted before any action is taken to approve or deny a request for reasonable accommodation and must be incorporated into the record of the proceeding relating to such approval or denial:

        A.    The housing, which is the subject of the request for reasonable accommodation, will be used by an individual protected under the Act.

        B.     The request for reasonable accommodation is necessary to make specific housing available to an individual protected under the Act.

        C.     The requested reasonable accommodation will not impose an undue financial or administrative burden on the City.

        D.    The requested accommodation will not require a fundamental alteration of the zoning or building laws, policies and/or procedures of the City.

        E.     For housing located in the coastal zone, a request for reasonable accommodation under this Section shall be approved by the City if it is consistent with the certified Local Coastal Program. Where a request for reasonable accommodation is not consistent with the certified Local Coastal Program, the City may waive compliance with an otherwise applicable provision of the Local Coastal Program and approve the request for reasonable accommodation if the City finds:

        1.     The requested reasonable accommodation is consistent, to the maximum extent feasible, with the certified Local Coastal Program; and

        2.     There are no feasible alternative means for providing an accommodation at the property that would provide greater consistency with the certified Local Coastal Program. (Added by Ord. 07-09, 12/4/07)

 

8.40.070 Appeals.
        A.    Within fifteen (15) days of the date the Director of Community Development or Building Official issues a written determination, the applicant requesting the accommodation may appeal an adverse determination or any conditions or limitations imposed in the written determination.

        B.     All appeals shall contain a statement of the grounds for the appeal.

        C.     Appeals shall be to the Planning Commission who shall hear the matter and render a determination as soon as reasonably practicable, but in no event later than sixty (60) days after an appeal has been filed. All determinations on appeal shall address and be based upon the same findings required to be made in the original determination from which the appeal is taken.

        D.    An applicant may request reasonable accommodation in the procedure by which an appeal will be conducted.

        E.     Notice of hearing pursuant to this section shall be provided not less than ten (10) calendar days prior to the hearing and shall be mailed or delivered to all owners of real property as shown on the latest equalized assessment roll within three hundred (300) feet of the real property that is the subject of the hearing. In all cases under this section, the applicant shall bear the cost of the radius mailing.

        F.     The Director of Community Development or Planning Commission acting pursuant to this section, shall (1) grant the accommodation request, (2) grant the accommodation request subject to specified nondiscriminatory conditions, including, but not limited to, a condition requiring the applicant to show proof of any required State license for the activity or occupancy contemplated, or (3) deny the request.

        G.    The Director of Community Development or Planning Commission, as appropriate, shall explain, in writing, the basis of the determination including the Director of Community Development’s or Planning Commissioner’s findings on the criteria set forth in Section 8.40.060. All written determinations shall give notice of the right to appeal and the right to request reasonable accommodation on the appeals process, if necessary. The notice of the determination shall be sent to the applicant by certified mail, return receipt requested.

        H.    Within fifteen (15) days of the issuance of a written determination on the hearing conducted pursuant to this section, any aggrieved party within the meaning of this Code, may file an appeal from the determination of the Director of Community Development or Planning Commission. Appeals from a determination of the Director of Community Development shall be to the Planning Commission, appeals from a determination of the Planning Commission shall be to the City Council. All appeals shall contain a statement of the grounds for the appeal.

        I.      Appeals to the Planning Commission or City Council pursuant to this section shall be heard as soon as reasonably practicable, but in no event later than sixty (60) days after an appeal has been filed. All determinations on appeal shall address and be based upon the same findings required to be made in the original determination from which the appeal is taken. (Added by Ord. 07-09, 12/4/07)

 

8.40.080 Fee.
        There shall be no fee imposed in connection with a request for reasonable accommodation under the provisions of this chapter. (Added by Ord. 07-09, 12/4/07)

Chapter 8.42 VERY HIGH FIRE HAZARD SEVERITY AND EMBER ZONES
8.42.010 Designation of Very High Fire Hazard Severity and Ember Zones.
        The City Council designates those areas identified on the City’s Very High Fire Hazard Severity and Ember Zones map which is attached as Exhibit “A” to Ordinance 12-06 adopted by the City Council of the City of Dana Point on May 1, 2012, as Very High Fire Severity and Ember Zones in accordance with Section 51179(a) of the California Government Code. (Added by Ord. 12-06, 5/1/12)

Title 9 ZONING *
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 18-01, 18-07 and 19-01. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


Note
Chapter 9.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 9.03 ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Chapter 9.05 GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Chapter 9.07 SPECIAL USE STANDARDS
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Chapter 9.09 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Chapter 9.11 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Chapter 9.13 MIXED USE DISTRICTS
Chapter 9.15 PROFESSIONAL/ADMINISTRATIVE DISTRICT
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Chapter 9.17 INDUSTRIAL/BUSINESS DISTRICT
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Chapter 9.19 COMMUNITY FACILITIES DISTRICT
Chapter 9.21 RECREATION, OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION DISTRICTS
Chapter 9.23 TRANSPORTATION CORRIDOR DISTRICT
Chapter 9.25 DANA POINT HARBOR DISTRICT
Chapter 9.26 TOWN CENTER DISTRICT
Chapter 9.27 COASTAL OVERLAY DISTRICT
Chapter 9.29 PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY DISTRICT
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Chapter 9.31 FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY DISTRICT
Chapter 9.33 SPECIFIC PLAN DISTRICT
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Chapter 9.35 ACCESS, PARKING AND LOADING
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Chapter 9.37 SIGNS AND ADVERTISING DEVICES
Chapter 9.39 TEMPORARY USES AND STRUCTURES
Chapter 9.41 HAZARDOUS WASTE FACILITIES
Chapter 9.43 TRANSPORTATION DEMAND MANAGEMENT
Chapter 9.45 COVENANTS FOR EASEMENTS
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Chapter 9.55 WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPE STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Chapter 9.61 ADMINISTRATION OF ZONING
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Chapter 9.63 NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Chapter 9.65 CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS
Chapter 9.67 VARIANCES
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Chapter 9.69 COASTAL DEVELOPMENT PERMIT
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Chapter 9.71 SITE DEVELOPMENT PERMITS
Chapter 9.73 DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Chapter 9.75 DEFINITIONS AND ILLUSTRATIONS OF TERMS
Chapter 9.77 ON-SHORE SUPPORT FACILITIES FOR OFF-SHORE OIL DRILLING — APPROVALS REQUIRED
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. APPENDIX A MASTER LAND USE MATRIX
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. APPENDIX B PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
APPENDIX C DANA POINT HARBOR REVITALIZATION PLAN AND DISTRICT REGULATIONS
APPENDIX D MONARCH BEACH RESORT SPECIFIC PLAN
APPENDIX E DANA POINT TOWN CENTER PLAN
APPENDIX F CHRONOLOGY OF ZONE TEXT AMENDMENTS AND ZONE CHANGES

Note
*       Prior ordinance history: Ords. 89-12, 91-05, 91-09 and 93-18.

Chapter 9.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
9.01.010 Authority for this Code.
        This Code is adopted pursuant to Article XI, Section 7, of the Constitution of the State of California and in compliance with the requirements of Title 7 of the Government Code, Planning and Zoning Law, for the purpose of promoting the health, safety and general welfare, and is also adopted in compliance with Division 20 of the Public Resources Code, for the purpose of implementing the Local Coastal Program. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.01.020 Short Title.
        This Code shall be known as the “Dana Point Zoning Code.” (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.01.030 Purpose.
        The purposes of this Code are:

(a)    To implement and enhance the General Plan and Local Coastal Program;

(b)    To classify, segregate, restrict, designate, regulate, and encourage the best type, location, and use of buildings, structures, and land;

(c)    To limit the intensity, height, number of stories, and size of buildings and other structures hereafter designed, erected or altered;

(d)    To regulate and determine the size of yards and other open spaces;

(e)    To regulate and limit the density of population;

(f)    To regulate and limit the intensity of development;

(g)    To facilitate adequate provisions for community facilities, such as transportation, water, sewage, schools, and parks;

(h)    To regulate and determine adequate provisions for vehicular access and parking;

(i)     To regulate the incorporation of landscaping in the design of development projects;

(j)     To promote health, safety, welfare, and general prosperity with the aim of preserving a wholesome, serviceable, and attractive community in accordance with the General Plan and Local Coastal Program for the City.

(k)    To provide the economic and social advantages resulting from an orderly use of land and its resources.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.01.040 Relationship and Consistency with the General Plan.
        This Code is intended to provide the legislative framework enhancing and implementing the goals, policies, plans, principles and standards of the Dana Point General Plan. The following Table illustrates the consistency between General Plan land use designations and the corresponding zoning districts.

 

SECTION 9.01.040

GENERAL PLAN LAND USE/ZONING CONSISTENCY

 

General Plan Land Use Designations

Applicable Zoning Districts

Zoning District Abbreviations

 

Residential:

 

 

Residential 0-3.5 DU/AC

Residential Single Family 2

RSF 2

 

Residential Single Family 3

RSF 3

 

Residential 3.5-7 DU/AC

 

Residential Single Family 4

 

RSF 4

 

Residential Single Family 7

RSF 7

 

Residential 7-14 DU/AC

 

Residential Multiple Family 7

 

RMF 7

 

Residential Single Family 8

RSF 8

 

Residential Single Family 12

RSF 12

 

Residential Beach Road 12

RBR 12

 

Residential Multiple Family 12

RMF 12

 

Residential Duplex 14

RD 14

 

Residential Single Family 14

RSF 14

 

Residential 14-22 DU/AC

 

Residential Multiple Family 14

 

RMF 14

 

Residential Beach Road Duplex 18

RBRD 18

 

 

Residential Single Family 22

 

RSF 22

 

Residential 22-30 DU/AC

Residential Multiple Family 22

RMF 22

 

Residential Multiple Family 30

 

RMF 30

 

SECTION 9.01.040

GENERAL PLAN LAND USE/ZONING CONSISTENCY

(continued)

 

General Plan Land Use Designations

Applicable Zoning Districts

Zoning District Abbreviations

Commercial:

 

 

Neighborhood Commercial

Neighborhood Commercial

NC

Community Commercial

Community Commercial/Pedestrian

CC/P

 

Community Commercial/Vehicular

CC/V

Visitor/Recreation Commercial

Visitor/Recreation Commercial

V/RC

 

Visitor/Recreation Commercial/Timeshare

V/RC/T

Mixed Use:

 

 

Commercial/Residential

Commercial/Residential1

C/R

 

Professional/Residential

P/R

Office:

 

 

Professional/Administrative

Professional/Administrative

P/A

Industrial:

 

 

Industrial/Business Park

Industrial/Business Park

I/B

Community and Other:

 

 

Community Facility

Community Facility

CF

Recreation/Open Space

Recreation

REC

 

Open Space

OS

 

Conservation

CONS

Transportation Corridor

Transportation Corridor

TC

Harbor:

 

 

Harbor Marine Land

Harbor Marine Water

Visitor/Recreation Commercial

Recreation/Open Space

Community Facility

Dana Point Harbor Revitalization Plan and District Regulations

DPHRP

 

1 Existing residential development is consistent with the Commercial/Residential designation.

 

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 10-02, 2/22/10; Ord. 10-08, 9/27/10)

 

9.01.050 Relationship to the California Coastal Act.
        The provisions of this Code are intended to address the requirements of Articles 1 and 2 of Chapter 6 of the California Coastal Act (commencing with Section 30500) and Chapter 8 of Title 14 of the California Code of Regulations (commencing with Section 13500). The provisions of this Code are to be the Implementation part of the City’s Local Coastal Program. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 97-05, 9/9/97)

 

9.01.060 Relationship to the California Environmental Quality Act.
        When projects are determined to be subject to the provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) applications shall be reviewed in accordance with the provisions of this Code, the California Environmental Quality Act, the CEQA Guidelines, and the Environmental Guidelines adopted by the City of Dana Point. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.01.070 Relationship to Other Regulations.
(a)    The provisions of this Code shall not be interpreted to repeal, amend, modify, alter, or change any other Code that is not specifically repealed, amended, modified, altered, or changed.

(b)    Nothing in this Code shall be interpreted to authorize the use of a lot or parcel in any way that is in violation of any other applicable statute, Code, or regulation.

(c)    When provisions of various adopted Codes are different, the more restrictive provisions shall apply, except as may be superseded by resolution or ordinance.

(d)    The rights granted by any permit, license, or other approval under any ordinance repealed by this Code shall be continued, but in the future, to the extent permitted by law, such rights shall be exercised in accordance with the provisions of this Code.

(e)    Any illegal non-conforming use in existence prior to the adoption date of this Code shall continue to be a violation unless the standard it violated has been modified and the use conforms to the standard as modified.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.01.080 Relationship to Existing Specific Plans, Planned Communities and Local Coastal Programs.
(a)    The provisions of this Code shall supersede and replace the development regulations portions of the plans listed below as they apply to areas within the City of Dana Point:

 

 

SECTION 9.01.080(a)

RELATIONSHIP TO EXISTING PLAN REGULATIONS

 

Description of Pre-Existing Regulation

Date of Adoption(s)

Orange County Code No.

Dana Point Code No. and Date of Adoption

Capistrano Beach Specific Plan

Development Regulations and Local Coastal Program (LCP) Implementation Program

12/2/87

3675

90-97

6/12/91

Laguna Niguel Planned Community

Planning Areas A through G and I through U

(5th Revision to the 1st Comprehensive Revision)

2/11/87

3623

90-07

6/12/91

Bear Brand Planned Community Development Plan and
District Regulations

5/4/88

3712

90-07

6/12/91

Bear Brand Hill Planned Community Development Plan and
District Regulations

Planning Areas 1 through 7 (4th Revision)

5/4/88

3712

90-07

6/12/91

South Laguna Specific Plan

Development Regulations and Local Coastal Program

(LCP) Implementation Program

4/6/83

11/4/87

(last amendment 11/19/87)

3377

3673

90-07

6/12/91

Orange County Zoning Code

(Sections 7-9)

12/15/87

3678

90-07

6/12/91

Dana Point Harbor Revitalization Plan and District Regulations

7/22/89

2331

90-07

6/12/91

 

Footnote for Section 9.01.080(a) Table: The Dana Point Specific Plan/Local Coastal Program remains in effect for the purpose of issuing coastal development permits in the area covered by the Dana Point Specific Plan/Local Coastal Program. The Land Use, Urban Design, and Conservation/Open Space Elements of the General Plan shall become the Land Use Plan portion of the City’s local coastal program for all certified areas of the City not governed by the Dana Point Specific Plan/Local Coastal Program. This Zoning Code shall become the Implementing Actions of the City’s local coastal program for all certified areas of the City not governed by the Dana Point Specific Plan/Local Coastal Program.

 

 

(b)    The following Index Map illustrates the areas regulated by the above Specific Plans, Planned Communities, and Local Coastal Programs.

 

SECTION 9.01.080(b)

EXISTING SPECIFIC PLANS, PLANNED COMMUNITIES,

AND LOCAL COASTAL PROGRAM INDEX MAP

 



 

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 97-05, 9/9/97; Ord. 99-05, 4/27/99; Ord. 10-02, 2/22/10; Ord. 10-08, 9/27/10)

 

 

9.01.090 Effect of Code.
        No person shall use any premises except as specifically permitted by and subject to the regulations and conditions of this Code. Except as otherwise provided herein, wherever this Code prohibits the use of premises for a particular purpose, those premises and any improvements on those premises shall not be used for that purpose, and no structure or improvement shall be constructed, altered, or moved onto the premises which is designed, arranged, or intended to be occupied or used for that purpose. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.01.100 Terminology Used in the Zoning Code.
(a)    The following rules shall apply to the interpretation of terms used in this Code:

(1)    References in the masculine and feminine genders are interchangeable.

(2)    Unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary, words in the present and the future tense are interchangeable, and words in the singular and plural are interchangeable.

(3)    Unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary the following conjunctions shall be interpreted as follows:

(A)   “And” indicates that all connected items or provisions apply.

(B)   “Or” indicates that the connected items or provisions may apply singularly or in any combination.

(C)   “Either..or” indicates that the connected items or provisions shall apply singularly but not in combination.

(4)    Unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary, other words and phrases shall be construed as set forth in this Chapter.

(b)    For the purposes of carrying out the intent of this Code, and unless the context clearly indicates another meaning, the following words, phrases, and terms shall have the meaning ascribed to them as follows:

(1)    The word “City” shall mean the City of Dana Point.

(2)    The words “Coastal Commission” shall mean the California Coastal Commission established pursuant to the California Coastal Act (Division 20 of the Public Resources Code).

(3)    The word “Council” shall mean the City of Dana Point City Council, the governing body of the City.

(4)    The word “County” shall mean the County of Orange.

(5)    The word “Director” shall mean the Director of Community Development of the City of Dana Point.

(6)    The words “Planning Commission” shall mean the City of Dana Point Planning Commission.

(7)    The word “shall” is mandatory and not discretionary. The word “may” is permissive and discretionary.

(8)    The word “State” shall mean the State of California.

(9)    The word “use” shall include arrange, design, construct, alter, convert, rent, lease, occupy, or intend to utilize.

(10)  The words “Zoning Code” or “Code” refer to Title 9 of the Municipal Code of the City of Dana Point.

(c)    Exhibits Used in the Zoning Code:

        The exhibits provided in this Code are intended as illustrative examples of the application of minimum or maximum development standards contained in the accompanying text. These exhibits should not be construed to represent the absolute or definitive method of implementing development standards. Creativity in design is encouraged as long as minimum standards are satisfied and maximum standards are not exceeded.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.01.110 Requirements of this Code.
        The provisions of this Code shall be interpreted and applied as the minimum requirements and the maximum potential limits for the protection of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, morals, and general welfare. It is recognized that each site and situation is unique and different and as such may require either exceeding the minimum acceptable requirements or achieving less than the maximum potential limits of this Code. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.01.120 Reference to Provisions of this Code.
        Wherever reference is made to any provision of this Code, or to any other law or ordinance, the reference shall apply to that law or ordinance and any amendments or additions made thereto. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.01.130 Severability of any Portion of this Code.
        If any provision (or portion of any provision) of this Code or its application to any person or circumstance are held to be invalid, the remainder of the Code and the application of that provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

Chapter 9.03 ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS
9.03.010 Zoning Districts Established.
        The zoning districts listed in the table below are established in order to carry out the purpose of this Code.

 

SECTION 9.03.010

ZONING DISTRICTS

 

Zoning District Identification

District Abbreviation

Code Chapter

Residential

 

 

Residential Single Family 2

RSF 2

9.09

Residential Single Family 3

RSF 3

9.09

Residential Single Family 4

RSF 4

9.09

Residential Single Family 7

RSF 7

9.09

Residential Single Family 8

RSF 8

9.09

Residential Single Family 12

RSF 12

9.09

Residential Beach Road 12

RBR 12

9.09

Residential Beach Road Duplex 18

RBRD 18

9.09

Residential Single Family 14

RSF 14

9.09

Residential Single Family 22

RSF 22

9.09

 

 

 

Residential Duplex 14

RD 14

9.09

 

 

 

Residential Multiple Family 7

RMF 7

9.09

Residential Multiple Family 12

RMF 12

9.09

Residential Multiple Family 14

RMF 14

9.09

Residential Multiple Family 22

RMF 22

9.09

Residential Multiple Family 30

RMF 30

9.09

 

 

 

Commercial

 

 

Neighborhood Commercial

NC

9.11

Community Commercial/Pedestrian

CC/P

9.11

Community Commercial/Vehicular

CC/V

9.11

Visitor/Recreation Commercial

V/RC

9.11

Visitor/Recreation Commercial/Timeshares

V/RC/T

9.11

 

 

 

SECTION 9.03.010

ZONING DISTRICTS

(continued)

 

Zoning District Identification

District Abbreviation

Code Chapter

Mixed Use

 

 

Commercial/Residential

C/R

9.13

Professional/Residential

P/R

9.13

 

 

 

Office

 

 

Professional/Administrative

P/A

9.15

 

 

 

Industrial

 

 

Industrial/Business

I/B

9.17

 

 

 

Community and Other

 

 

Community Facility

CF

9.19

 

 

 

Recreation

REC

9.21

Open Space

OS

9.21

Conservation

CONS

9.21

 

 

 

Transportation Corridor

TC

9.23

 

 

 

Harbor

 

 

Dana Point Harbor Revitalization Plan and District Regulations

DPHRP

9.25

 

 

 

Overlay Districts

 

 

Coastal Resource Overlay

CRO

9.27

 

 

 

Planned Residential Development Overlay

PRDO

9.29

 

 

 

Floodplain Overlay

FPO

9.31

 

 

 

Specific Plan Overlay

SPO

9.33

 

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 10-02, 2/22/10; Ord. 10-08, 9/27/10)

 

9.03.020 Adoption of Zoning Map.
        The Zoning Map of the City of Dana Point dated November 23, 1993, or as subsequently amended, and on file with the City Clerk, is herein adopted by reference and shall hereafter exist pursuant to and as an integral part of this Zoning Code. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

 

9.03.030 Uncertainty of Boundaries.
        Where uncertainty exists as to zone boundaries of any Zone District shown upon the Zoning Map, or any part thereof, the following provisions shall apply:

(a)    Where Zone Boundaries are shown as approximately following lot lines or the right-of-way lines of highways, streets, or alleys, such lines shall be construed to be the Zone Boundaries. In other cases the Zone Boundary of a Zoning District shall extend to the center line of the street.

(b)    In the case of unsubdivided property where a Zone Boundary divides a lot, the location of the Zone Boundary, unless said Zone Boundary is indicated by dimensions of legal description, shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on the Zoning Map.

(c)    Where a public highway, street, or alley, or any portion thereof, is officially vacated or abandoned, the area comprising such vacated highway, street or alley shall acquire the zone classification of the property to which it reverts. General Plan Circulation Element roadways should be considered for recreational/open space land use.

(d)    Unless otherwise determined by a rezoning, any submerged lands which may be reclaimed by natural accretion shall immediately be subject to the same regulations of this Code as those specified for the most restrictive abutting district, provided the zoning conforms to the principles and policies stated in the Local Coastal Program of the General Plan. The Zoning Map shall be adjusted by a notation indicating the classification without further procedure. If the most restrictive zoning of the activity and/or property is not consistent with the principles and policies of the General Plan and Local Coastal Program, no development may occur until the property is rezoned to be in conformance with the General Plan and Local Coastal Program.

(e)    Any submerged lands to be reclaimed by fill for use as a land area shall be prezoned prior to City approval of the fill. The prezone shall be consistent with the General Plan and Local Coastal Program. Permitted fill activities required in an emergency for the protection of public health or safety shall be exempt from this requirement.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

Chapter 9.05 GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 18-01 and 18-07. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


9.05.010 Intent and Purpose.
        The development standards included in this Code are general in nature and apply to all zoning districts unless otherwise indicated. The regulations in this Code are provided as minimum or maximum standards and may be modified by more stringent standards in particular districts, and/or due to specific site conditions. The primary intent of this Code, and this Chapter, is to establish generally acceptable standards for development in the City. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-21, 12/13/94)

 

9.05.020 Maintenance of Properties.
        All properties within the City, shall be kept and maintained in a clean, neat, orderly, operable, and usable condition. This Section applies to buildings, paving, fences, walls, landscaping, water, earth, and any other structures or natural features. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-21, 12/13/94)

 

9.05.030 Nuisances.
        Neither the provisions of this Code nor the granting of any permit provided for in this Code shall authorize or legalize the creation or maintenance of any public or private nuisance. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.05.040 Identification of Front Lot Lines.
        It is the intent of this section to promote compatibility and enhance relationships with respect to access to property, and to promote the safest access to properties based on roadway characteristics and any physical constraints to access. Occasionally, a lot is adjacent to more than one street. In such cases, the following requirements shall be observed in identifying the front lot line. The following figure provides graphic illustration to the following provisions.

(a)    When a lot exists between two developed lots which both abut the same street, the front lot line shall be on the same street as the existing developed lots on either side.

(b)    When a lot is adjacent to vacant lots or developed lots which abut either street, the following criteria shall apply:

(1)    Where one street is of a higher classification than the other, the lot line fronting the street with the lower classification shall be the front lot line.

(2)    If the lot in question is a corner lot and both streets are of the same classification, the narrower of the two frontages shall be designated the front lot line.

(3)    The Director of Community Development shall make the determination when the above criteria cannot be clearly applied to the particular situation as a result of topography or other factors.

(c)    The front lot line for a corner lot or a reverse corner lot is the lot line which fronts the street with the lower classification. If both streets are of the same classification, the narrower of the two frontages shall be designated the front lot line, except in those cases where the subdivision or parcel map specifies another line as the front lot line.

 For example, as shown on the corner lot in Exhibit 9.05.040(c), line (a) is the proposed front lot line because line (a) fronts a street with a lower classification, and because line (a) is shorter than line (b).

(d)    The front lot line for a flag lot is the shorter of the two perpendicular lot lines that radiate from the end of the pole portion of the lot. For example, as shown on the flag lot in Exhibit 9.05.040 (c)/(d), line (c) is the front lot line because it is shorter than line (d).

        When the two lot lines radiating from the end of the pole portion of a flag lot are at an obtuse or acute angle, as shown in Exhibit 9.05.040(d), then the front lot line is a midpoint located at the end of the pole portion. The front yard for such a lot is formed by plotting an imaginary arch starting at the midpoint and extending for a distance equal to the minimum front yard setback for the zoning district in which the lot is located.

(e)    The front lot line for a cul-de-sac lot is that lot line which abuts the edge of the public right-of-way or private access easement way from which primary lot access occurs.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 96-10, 8/13/96)

 

SECTION 9.05.040

IDENTIFICATION OF FRONT LOT LINES





Section 9.05.040(a)

Sections 9.05.040 (c) and (d)





Section 9.05.040(b)

Section 9.05.040(e)

 

–—> = Existing Front Lot Line

– –> = Proposed Front Lot Line

 

9.05.050 Adjustments for Front Yard Setbacks.
        The depth of the required front yard setback shall be adjusted as indicated under the following conditions:

(a)    Through Lots. Both frontages of a through lot shall have a setback from both streets of twenty (20) feet minimum, unless the provisions of this Code allow for reduced non-garage and rear setbacks for shallow lots.

(b)    Key Lots. The depth of the required front yard of a key lot shall not be less than the average depth of the required street-abutting yards of the adjoining interior and reversed corner lots. The garage portion of the primary structure shall require a minimum front yard setback of not less than twenty (20) feet.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

SECTION 9.05.050

ADJUSTMENTS FOR FRONT YARD SETBACKS



 

9.05.060 Yard Requirements Modified by Previous Regulations.
        When the yard setbacks on a lot have been established by previous regulations and all existing development on the same block and street conform to those yard setbacks, new development may also use those previously established setback standards. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.05.070 Required Lot Standards Reduced by Public Use.
(a)    Area. If a portion of a lot or parcel of land is acquired by any means including dedication, purchase, or condemnation, or for any public use including recreation, services, or utilities, that lot or parcel shall be considered conforming as long as the area is reduced to no less than ninety (90) percent of the minimum required area for the zoning district in which the lot or parcel is located.

        The Planning Commission shall have the authority to reduce the lot size below the ninety (90) percent minimum pursuant to all the conditions and procedures relating to Variances found in Chapter 9.67 of this Code.

(b)    Width. If a portion of a lot or parcel is acquired by any means, including dedication, purchase, or condemnation, or for any public use which may include recreation, services, or utilities, that lot or parcel shall be considered conforming as long as the width is not reduced by more than thirty (30) percent. In no case, however, shall a lot reduced to less than thirty-five (35) feet in width be considered conforming unless a narrower lot is permitted by the base zoning district or a PRD.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 9.05.080 Maximum Projections into Required Yard Areas.
        Except for the Residential Beach Road 12 (RBR 12), and the Residential Beach Road Duplex 18 (RBRD 18) zoning districts, the items indicated in the following Table may be placed in required yards or extend beyond maximum height limits subject to the conditions placed upon those items by the table, except that for blufftop lots in the Coastal Overlay District, the limitations on development in the blufftop setback described in the blufftop setback requirements of Chapter 9.27 (Coastal Overlay District) shall supersede the provisions of the following Table.

        See Section 9.09.040(a) for the standards for maximum projection into yards for properties in the Residential Beach Road 12 (RBR 12) and Residential Beach Road Duplex (RBRD 18) zoning districts.

 

SECTION 9.05.080

MAXIMUM PROJECTIONS INTO REQUIRED YARD AREAS

 

Item

Front

Rear

Side

Minimum Distance From Property Lines (B)

Maximum Projection Above Height Limit

Other Limitations

Maximum Projection Into Front Yard Area

Maximum Projection Into Rear Yard Area

Maximum Projection Into Side Yard Area (A)

(a)   Antennas

Not Permitted

8′0″ height limit

Not Permitted

1′0″

Not
Permitted (C)

2 max. (D)

(b)  Arch. Projections:
(i.e., Cornices, Eaves and Roof Overhangs)

2′6″

2′6″

2′6″

2′0″

Not
Permitted

None

(c)   Awnings

4′0″ (no vertical supports)

3′0″

2′6″

2′0″

Not
Permitted

None

(d)  Balconies

2′6″

2′6″

2′6″

5′0″

Not
Permitted

(E)

(e)   Basement
(Below Grade)

Not
Permitted

Not
Permitted

Not
Permitted

N/A

N/A

None

(f)   Bay Windows

2′6″

2′6″

2′6″

3′0″

N/A

(E)

 

SECTION 9.05.080

MAXIMUM PROJECTIONS INTO REQUIRED YARD AREAS

(Continued)

 

Item

Front

Rear

Side

Minimum Distance From Property Lines (B)

Maximum Projection Above Height Limit

Other Limitations

Maximum Projection Into Front Yard Area

Maximum Projection Into Rear Yard Area

Maximum Projection Into Side Yard Area (A)

(g)   Chimneys
(Maximum 7′ Width)

2′0″

2′0″

2′0″

3′0″

3′0″

(E)(F)(G)

(h)  Decks/Patios Less Than
30″ Above Grade

To PL (H)

To PL (H)

To PL (H)

N/A

N/A

(I)

(i)   Decks/Patios 30″+ Above Grade (Not To Exceed First Story Or 7′6″)

Not
Permitted

6′0″

2′6″

3′0″

N/A

(I)(J)

(j)   Detached Accessory Structures

Not
Permitted

To PL (K)

To PL (K)

None (K)

Not
Permitted

(L)(H)

(k)  Flagpoles

15′0″

5′0″

2′6″

5′0″

15′0″

(M)

(l)   HV AC/mech. equip. and window mounted air conditioners

Not permitted

3′0″

2′6″

2′0″

Not permitted

(N)

(m) Patio Covers/Porch

6′0″

15′0″

2′6″

Front - 15′0″

Not permitted

(P)(O)

Side - 3′0″

Rear - 10′0″

(n)  Planter Boxes

2′0″

2′0″

2′6″

10′0″

N/A

(P)(Q)

(o)  Pool Equipment

Not permitted

N/A

N/A

5′0″ (N)

N/A

(N)

(p)  Porte Cochere

Permitted by Site Development Permit only

Not permitted

None

(q)  Exterior Stairways and Stairway Landings

2′6″

2′6″

2′6″

2′6″ (R)

Not permitted

(E)

(r)   Swimming Pools and Spas

Not permitted

N/A

N/A

3′0″ (S)

N/A

None

 

Footnotes for Section 9.05.080:

(A)     On a corner lot, projections permitted in a front yard setback also apply to a street side yard.

(B)     In any instance where there is a conflict between the allowable maximum projection and the minimum distance from property line standard, the minimum distance from property line standard shall rule.

(C)     This provision shall not apply to television and radio antennas used to receive UHF, VHF, FM and AM signals. Such antennas may exceed the district height limit by ten (10) feet. FCC licensed amateur ham radio operators may apply for a Conditional Use Permit for a radio antenna tower greater than the maximum height limit but not exceeding seventy (70) feet.

(D)     For radio antennas only, see Section 9.07.020 for satellite dish antennas.

(E)     The total horizontal length of all projections (marked by this footnote) on a given building elevation shall not exceed the maximum percentage of building elevation length as specified below (building elevation length is measured at the first floor and not adjusted for multiple storied buildings):

 

BUILDING ELEVATION:

Front

Side

Rear

MAXIMUM PERCENTAGE OF BUILDING ELEVATION LENGTH:

60%

40%

80%

 

          The above stated maximum percentages have been established as a measure to control the overuse or abuse of the projection provisions in this Table. The maximum percentages will help prevent aesthetically inappropriate architectural facades or features that would pose a detriment to adjacent properties. At the discretion of the Director of Community Development, the total length of all projections on a given elevation may be reduced to below the indicated maximums in order to implement this intent.

(F)      A maximum of two chimneys may project into required yards or above the height limit.

(G)     Maximum horizontal dimension of three (3) feet when above the height limit.

(H)     Provided district landscape requirements are met.

(I)      No deck may be constructed so as to extend beyond the top of slope with a grade of more than fifteen (15) percent, except as may be permitted through a minor Site Development Permit subject to the provisions of Section 9.05.270.

(J)      Including deck railings or deck structures.

(K)     Subject to the applicable provisions of the Uniform Building Code and Uniform Fire Code.

(L)     The maximum height of detached accessory structures is twelve (12) feet except as otherwise permitted in Section 9.05.260. Accessory structures shall be located in the rear half of the parcel, with the exception of entry features (i.e., arbors, porticos and trellises) and garages. Other exceptions for locating structures in the front half of the parcel require approval of a minor Site Development Permit.

(M)    Flagpoles may not exceed fifty (50) feet in height in non-residential districts and forty (40) feet in residential districts. Requests to exceed these limits may be permitted by approval of a minor Conditional Use Permit.

(N)     Pool equipment may be placed adjacent to the rear or side property line subject to a minor Site Development Permit which shall include, but not be limited to, an acoustics report demonstrating compliance with the City’s Noise Ordinance.

(O)     Maximum coverage: Thirty (30) percent of rear yard setback area.

(P)      Including vertical supports and overhangs.

(Q)     Only allowed on the 2nd floor as an extension of second floor framing; and may not exceed three (3) feet in height.

(R)     Only if the sideyard setback is at a minimum five (5) feet wide.

(S)      As measured from the edge of the water within the swimming pool or spa.

 

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94; Ord. 96-13, 11/26/96; Ord. 97-12, 11/12/97; Ord. 97-13, 11/25/97; Ord. 99-04, 3/9/99; Ord. 99-05, 4/27/99; Ord. 08-04, 3/18/08)

 

9.05.090 Sight Visibility Area.
(a)    In all zones, a sight visibility area shall be provided at the intersection of all streets, as shown in the Exhibit below. The sight visibility area shall be reserved for the purpose of maintaining adequate sight distance.

(b)    No vegetation shall be planted or allowed to grow, nor shall any structure be placed in the sight visibility area in a manner which obstructs visibility or threatens vehicular or pedestrian safety as determined by the Director of Public Works or the Director of Community Development.

(c)    Traffic control devices, traffic signs, utility poles, transformers, or pedestals or other traffic control devices or street furniture in excess of thirty (30) inches in height may be located within the sight visibility area.

(d)    Due to roadway geometrics and traffic characteristics, a greater sight visibility area may be required to minimize visual obstruction to motorist and pedestrians as determined by the Director of Public Works or the Director of Community Development.

(e)    A line of sight shall be shown at intersections on all landscaping plans, grading plans and tentative tract maps where safe sight distance is questionable. In cases where an intersection is located on a vertical curve, a profile of the line of sight may be required.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94)

 

SECTION 9.05.090(a)

SIGHT VISIBILITY AREA

 



 

9.05.100 Right-of-Way Dedication.
(a)    Dedication and Improvement.

(1)    No building permit shall be issued for any building or structure until all required dedications of public right-of-way have been made to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works. A Certificate of Use and Occupancy shall not be issued for any site, building, or structure until all improvements abutting rights-of-way for said site, building, or structure have been made to the ultimate right-of-way shown in the General Plan and as determined by the Director of Public Works. Improvements include, but are not limited to curbs, gutters, sidewalks, paving, street trees, traffic improvements, undergrounding of existing and/or proposed utilities, and drainage. All improvements shall be constructed to the specifications and in a manner prescribed by the Director of Public Works.

(2)    In lieu of dedication, the City Council may accept an irrevocable offer to dedicate and improve. Such agreement shall be signed by all persons having any right, title, interest, or lien in the property, or any portion thereof, to be dedicated. The signatures on such offer shall be acknowledged, and the agreement shall be recorded in the office of the Orange County Recorder prior to certificate of use and occupancy.

(b)    Exceptions. In cases where the strict application of this Code fails to meet community objectives as identified in the General Plan, modifications to right-of-way dedication and improvement requirements may be authorized by the City Council.

(c)    Dedication Standards. Highways, streets, and alleys shall be dedicated to the standards established by the Director of Public Works.

(d)    Agreement to Improve.

(1)    In lieu of the required improvements and if in the best interest of the City, the City Council may accept from any responsible party an agreement to make the specified improvements within a specified time period.

(2)    Such agreements shall be accompanied by surety deposits which may include cash, negotiable bonds, or savings and loan certificates. The surety deposit shall equal the cost of the agreed upon improvements. Where savings and loan certificates or deposits are deposited, the owners thereof shall assign the certificates to the City and administration adjusted for inflation as determined by the Director of Public Works. Such deposit and assignment shall be subject to and in compliance with the provisions and conditions of the Municipal Code of the City.

(3)    If the estimated cost of the improvements equals or exceeds one thousand dollars, the applicant may file a corporate surety bond with the City in lieu of the deposit. Such corporate surety bond shall guarantee the adequate completion of all of the improvements in an amount equal to the estimated cost of said improvements.

(4)    In cases where the stipulated time within which improvements were to be made expires, the City Council may grant additional time as it considers appropriate. Granting of additional time shall include recalculation of improvement costs and security deposits.

(5)    Should the responsible person fail to complete any improvement within the agreed upon time, the City Council may determine that the agreed upon improvement is incomplete and may cause a portion of the deposit or surety bond to be forfeited to the City. Such forfeiture shall not exceed the amount required to complete the agreed upon work and expenses incurred by the City as a result of the default. Not less than ten days prior to such a determination, the City shall serve the person with written notice. If the written notice is delivered by mail, it must be registered and shall be served not less than twenty days prior to the determination.

(e)    Adequate Rights-of-Way. The City Council may grant a modification to the provisions of this section, Right-of-Way Dedication, thereby relieving the applicant from compliance with all or a portion of the provisions thereof, subject to the following findings:

(1)    That relieving or partially relieving the applicant’s development from providing the required dedications and improvements is consistent with the General Plan and the best interest of the City of Dana Point; and

(2)    The required improvements are included in a budgeted City project which will be complete prior to the start of applicant’s development or within an approved assessment district and the improvement can be more effectively provided by the City; or

(3)    The required construction would create a temporary drainage or traffic problem that can be avoided by delaying the improvement to a later date as part of comprehensive improvements to the area; or

(4)    The Director of Public Works determines current improvements to be satisfactory.

        All requests for modifications shall be made in the form of a Variance application, as specified in Chapter 9.67, Variances.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 9.05.110 Measurement of Building Height.
(a)    Residential Building Height.

(1)    The maximum building height for residential buildings is described in Chapter 9.09 for each of the individual zoning districts.

(2)    For residential structures, building height is defined as the vertical distance, by which the uppermost portion of the roof of a structure extends above the existing grade, finished pad elevation, (excluding the basement finished pad elevation), ceiling of a maximum ten (10) foot, zero (0) inch high basement, or eighteen (18) inches above the flood protection level, whichever is lower, as measured from the lowest portion of the structure. In no case may this vertical distance exceed the maximum height limit specified in Section 9.05.110(a)(6). For residential structures on Beach Road, building heights shall be measured at eighteen (18) inches above the FP-3 elevation, or the elevation of Beach Road, whichever is higher. For residential structures on lots with hillside conditions, in cases where the garage is the lowest floor level, the building height is measured from the garage floor or existing grade, whichever is lower.

 

 

SECTION 9.05.110 (a)(2)

MEASUREMENT OF BUILDING HEIGHT



 

(3)    Subject to the approval of a minor Site Development Permit, non-residential or residential building height may be measured from the top of not more than thirty (30) inches of fill. Approval of such a minor Site Development Permit, by the Director of Community Development, may only be granted if the applicant can demonstrate compliance with the following criteria:

(A)   That the proposed fill is required only for the purpose of creating positive drainage flow (via gravity) to the street or to otherwise correct an existing drainage problem; and

(B)   That the proposed fill is necessary to create a minimum percentage grade for drainage flow consistent with a gravity flow drainage pattern as verified by the Director of Public Works; and

(C)   That the amount of fill proposed is the minimum amount necessary to create the desired drainage pattern.

                Should the proposed fill be deemed by the Director of Community Development to be proposed for any purpose other than providing the drainage pattern promoted by this Section, the application shall be denied. Structures shall only be granted credit for enough height to achieve positive (gravity) drainage flow.

        Should additional (more than thirty (30) inches) fill be required to create the desired drainage pattern, it may be allowed through the approval of the minor Site Development Permit, however the height of the structure cannot be measured from any point higher than thirty (30) inches above existing grade.

 

SECTION 9.05.110(a)(3)

MEASUREMENT OF BUILDING HEIGHT
ATOP THIRTY (30) INCHES MAXIMUM FILL

 



Building Height Measured from Top
of Not More than Thirty (30) Inches of Fill

 

(4)    Subject to the approval of a Site Development Permit, a residential structure proposed in a hillside condition may be allowed to have three (3) stories in accordance with the following provisions:

(A)   For purposes of this Section, a hillside condition shall mean a lot with a topographic slope percentage, as defined in Section 9.75.190 of this Title, either front to rear or side to side, of twenty (20) percent or greater. The topographic slope percentage shall be calculated by determining the vertical differential between the highest elevation point of the property at the front or rear property line (whichever is higher) and the lowest elevation point along the opposing rear or front property line (whichever is lower) or between the highest elevation point along the higher side property line to the lowest elevation point along the opposing, lower side property line and dividing that vertical differential by the horizontal distance between the two (2) points.

(B)   Three (3) story structures shall be designed so that the second story has an average, additional yard setback area of five (5) feet times the total width of the structure at the street elevation and the third story, an average additional yard setback area of ten (10) feet times the total width of the structure at the street elevation. This additional setback area shall occur on the portions of the structure having three (3) stories exposed above grade. Maximum allowed projections into the additional setback areas are as specified in Section 9.05.080 (Projections into Required Yard Areas) of this Chapter.

(C)   Residential structures having three (3) stories shall be limited to a maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR) of .75 the area of the lot, excluding garage area. The amount of garage area in excess of that required for minimum compliance with parking standards, as specified in Section 9.35.070 of this Title, shall be considered part of the floor area when calculating the FAR.

(D)   Building height shall be measured as specified in Subsection (a)(2) of this Section, and in no case may the overall height of the structure exceed thirty-three (33) feet or as specified in Subsection (a)(7) of this Section.

(E)   The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed design will result in a reduction in grading and the disruption to existing topography that would be incurred with a standard two (2) story design on the subject site, pursuant to Subsection (a)(2) of this Section, to the satisfaction of the Director of Community Development.

(F)    The height of the third story shall not exceed a height of fourteen (14) feet above the upper property line or upper street curb elevation, as measured perpendicular to any point along said line or curb.

(G)   Applications for Site Development Permits to allow three (3) story developments on hillside properties shall include story pole staking as described in the City’s application requirements for a Site Development Permit.

 

 

SECTION 9.05.110(a)(4)

MEASUREMENT OF BUILDING HEIGHT
IN HILLSIDE CONDITIONS



 

(5)    Building height and height of fences and walls for new residential subdivisions shall be measured from finished grade, subject to approval by the Planning Commission.

(6)    Additional criteria in determining maximum building height in residential districts are as follows:

 

Criteria

Height Limit

Roof pitch of 6/12 or greater

28 feet

Roof pitch of 3/12 or greater but less than 6/12

26 feet

Roof pitch of less than 3/12

24 feet

 

(7)    Building height for hillside lots in residential districts is as follows:

 

Criteria (Lots with 20% or greater slope per Subsection (a)(4) of this Section)

Height Limit

Roof pitch of 6/12 or greater

33 feet

Roof pitch of 3/12 or greater but less than 6/12

31 feet

Roof pitch of less than 3/12

29 feet

 

(b)    Non-Residential Building Height Criteria.

(1)    The maximum building height for non-residential buildings is described in Chapters 9.11 through 9.25 for each of the individual zoning districts.

(2)    For non-residential structures, building height is defined as the vertical distance by which the uppermost portion of a building extends above the existing grade, finished grade, finished pad elevation (excluding subterranean parking structure finished pad elevation), ceiling of uppermost level of subterranean parking structure, or eighteen (18) inches above the flood protection level, whichever is lower, to the top of the roof.

 

SECTION 9.05.110(b)(2)

MEASUREMENT OF NON-RESIDENTIAL BUILDING HEIGHT



Building Height Measured from Ceiling of
Subterranean Parking Structure

 

(3)    Subject to approval of a Site Development Permit, in order to correct existing site drainage problems, a provision to permit non-residential and residential building height to be measured from the top of not more than thirty (30) inches of fill, will be granted in all zones, provided that the fill will contribute to positive site drainage flow (via gravity) to the street, at a minimum percentage grade as verified by the Director of Public Works and Director of Community Development. (See Section 9.05.110(a)(3) for Exhibit).

(4)    Additional criteria in determining maximum building height in non-residential districts are as follows:

 

CRITERIA

HEIGHT LIMIT

Structures which have sloped roof elements (pitched at 4/12 or greater) that comprise a substantial proportion of the roof plan and which utilize high-quality, aesthetic roofing materials. (Examples include architectural grade shingles, various metals, wood, wood type, tile, slate, etc.)

35 feet

Structures which have sloped roof elements (pitched at less than 4/12) that comprise a substantial portion of the roof plan or any pitched roof with lower quality aesthetic materials than those specified above, or any other roof with a parapet of 18″ or greater

33 feet

Structures which have sloped elements but with a roof plan that is predominantly flat or any roof not otherwise specified under the above standards

31 feet

 

(c)    Permitted Encroachments into the Required Height Limit.

(1)    Permitted Encroachments.

(A)   Screened mechanical or electrical towers, chimneys, cupolas, weather vanes or other decorative architectural elements that are not used for sleeping or eating quarters, occupying no greater than five (5) percent of the horizontal roof area, may extend above the maximum building height by a maximum of three (3) feet.

(B)   In non-residential buildings, accessways such as stairwells or elevators to roof decks occupying no greater than ten (10) percent of the horizontal roof area, may extend above the maximum building height up to a maximum of five (5) feet.

(2)    The Director of Community Development may choose to require the applicant to obtain approval of a Site Development Permit, pursuant to Chapter 9.71, if the proposed encroachment creates conditions which may be incompatible, objectionable or detrimental to the surrounding land uses.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94; Ord. 94-21, 12/13/94; Ord. 96-13, 11/26/96; Ord. 03-07, 4/9/03; Ord. 06-02, 4/12/06; Ord. 08-06, 6/3/08)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 9.05.120 Fences, Walls, and Hedges.
(a)    Maximum Height Within the Required Side and Rear Yards.

(1)    The maximum height of any fence, wall or hedge within the required side and rear yard which faces an adjacent property shall be six (6) feet as measured from the finished grade at the base of the fence, wall or hedge to the top of the fence, wall or hedge. The maximum height of any fence, wall or hedge within the required side or rear yard which faces the subject property shall be eight (8) feet as measured from the finished grade at the base of the fence, wall or hedge to the top of the fence, wall or hedge.

 

SECTION 9.05.120(a)

SPECIAL WALL HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS

 



 

(2)    For those uses or facilities that are required by the City to be screened, screen walls/hedges in excess of eight (8) feet may be permitted as necessary to provide adequate screening subject to determination by the Director of Community Development.

(b)    Maximum Height Within the Required Front Yards.

(1)    Fences, walls and hedges shall not exceed forty-two (42) inches in height except as provided in Subsection (b)(2) below.

(2)    Pilaster and wrought iron fences may exceed forty-two (42) inches if designed to conform to the following requirements:

(A)   Pilasters may not exceed eighteen (18) inches in width and may not exceed thirty-six (36) inches in height. Pilasters must be spaced at a minimum of eight (8) feet on center.

(B)   Wrought iron inserts may be designed to a maximum height of forty-eight (48) inches as measured from finished grade.

(3)    Open face fence material, whether wood, wrought iron, or other material shall not exceed two (2) inches in width nor be spaced less than six (6) inches apart, edge to edge.

 

 

SECTION 9.05.120(b)(2) AND (3)

WALLS AND FENCES IN THE FRONT YARD

 



 

(4)    The maximum height of retaining walls in the required front yard shall be thirty (30) inches. The total wall height, including the retaining wall shall not exceed forty-two (42) inches.

(5)    The sight visibility area requirements in Section 9.05.090 shall apply to the placement and height of fences, walls, and hedges.

(6)    Reasonable temporary security fencing for vacant lots or construction sites shall be exempt from this Section and may be placed in the required front yard to a maximum height of six (6) feet subject to determination by the Director of Community Development.

(c)    Alternatives to the height limits for fences, walls and hedges specified in sections (a) and (b) above, and provisions for the placement of arbors, porticos, trellises or other entry features within required yards may be granted subject to the approval of a Minor Site Development Permit pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 9.65.

(d)    Retaining Walls. The height of any portion of a wall which retains earth or water, in all locations except the required front yard, shall be as follows:

(1)    Retaining Walls Under Thirty (30) Inches in Height. Retaining walls that are less than thirty (30) inches in height from the top of the retaining wall to finished grade on either side are permitted.

(2)    Retaining Walls Thirty (30) Inches or Greater in Height. Except where the subject wall was shown on an approved preliminary or precise grading plan, retaining walls that are greater than thirty (30) inches from the top of the wall to finished grade may be permitted subject to the approval of a Minor Site Development Permit, as described in Chapter 9.71. Approval of retaining walls higher than thirty (30) inches in height shall be considered when the wall is landscaped and does not create conditions or situations that may be detrimental or incompatible with other permitted uses or improvements in the vicinity.

(3)    Retaining walls greater than thirty (30) inches but less than seventy-two (72) inches in height which will not result in a grading fill condition and will not be visible from a public right-of-way, are permitted without a Site Development Permit, provided the wall does not create conditions or situations that may be detrimental or incompatible with other permitted uses or improvements in the vicinity as determined by the Director of Community Development.

(4)    Alternative to Height Limits of Retaining Walls. Stepping of retaining walls is also permitted for a maximum height of seventy-two (72) inches, provided the height of any individual wall does not exceed thirty (30) inches. Stepping is allowed provided that the minimum horizontal distance between the top of the downslope retaining wall and the bottom of the up slope retaining wall shall be greater than two (2) times the vertical distance of the downslope retaining wall. Approval shall be considered when the retaining wall is landscaped and does not create conditions or situations that may be detrimental, or incompatible with other permitted uses or improvements in the vicinity. The top of walls may require guardrails as necessary for safety purposes as determined by the Director of Community Development.

 

SECTION 9.05.120(c)(4)

HEIGHT LIMIT FOR RETAINING WALLS



 

(5)    Retaining walls greater than thirty (30) inches in height which face a public street or other public area shall be provided with a landscaped strip along the base of the wall which is of an adequate width (two (2) foot minimum) to accommodate plants which will mature to visually screen the wall.

(e)    Fences or walls shall include a gate or other suitable opening no less than thirty (30) inches in width to provide access to primary or accessory structures.

(f)    Fences constructed under permit, but made nonconforming as a result of the adoption of the Zoning Code, are exempt from amortization.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94; Ord. 96-10, 8/13/96; Ord. 03-07, 4/9/03; Ord. 08-04, 3/18/08)

 

9.05.130 General Design Compatibility and Enhancement.
        Any new building or structure, any addition to an existing building or structure, and the installation or construction of any site improvements shall be designed to create a unified functional and comprehensive site plan with an integrated architectural theme that is compatible with and will compliment and enhance the subject and surrounding properties, as determined by the Director of Community Development.

        The factors used to evaluate design compatibility and enhancement shall include, but not be limited to:

(a)    Architectural style and detailing;

(b)    Massing and bulk;

(c)    Color and materials; and

(d)    Scale and proportion.

        The design of all development projects including, but not limited to, architecture, and landscaping should consider the applicable direction provided by the Urban Design Guidelines. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94; Ord. 94-21, 12/13/94)

 

9.05.140 Roof Mounted Appurtenances.
        All roof mounted appurtenances including, but not limited to air conditioning units, and mechanical equipment shall be shielded and architecturally screened from view from on-site parking areas, adjacent public streets and adjacent residentially zoned property. The screening material must be compatible with and integrated into the architectural design of the structure. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.05.150 Wetland Buffer.
        To protect and maintain the City’s wetlands resources, a 100-foot buffer area around all identified wetlands located outside the coastal zone shall be provided, unless consultation with the California Department of Fish and Game and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service indicates that a lesser buffer will provided adequate protection. The standards for wetland buffers around wetlands within the coastal zone are contained in Section 9.27.030(b)(3). (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 97-05, 9/9/97)

 

9.05.160 Cultural and Natural Resources.
        For those projects where the City’s environmental review process indicates the potential for significant impacts to cultural and natural resources (such as archaeological, paleontological, or historical resources and biological resources), site-specific studies shall be performed to identify the significance of such resources, and identified mitigation measures designed to reduce those impacts will be incorporated into project design. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.05.170 Coastal Views from Public Areas.
        To protect the coastal scenic overlooks from public lands identified in the General Plan Urban Design and Conservation/Open Space Elements, a detailed view impact study which includes recommendations to avoid impacts to coastal views from public lands shall be prepared and incorporated into projects where the proposed development impacts such views. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.05.180 Steep Hillsides.
        A detailed geotechnical report which includes recommendations to avoid geologic impacts of the proposed development shall be prepared and incorporated into all projects or development proposals on slopes exceeding twenty-five (25) percent or 4:1. Proposed development shall take into consideration the provisions of the Urban Design Guidelines for hillside development, subject to the satisfaction of the Director of Community Development. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 9.05.190 Building Setbacks on Shallow/Narrow Building Sites.
        The following provisions for shallow and narrow lots will maintain consistency in older areas of the community, by allowing new construction of single family or multiple family projects to develop with reduced setbacks if the said parcel is not consistent with the width and depth standards of the zoning district as follows:

(a)    When a building site has an average depth of one hundred (100) feet or less but more than seventy-five (75) feet, any required front and rear building setbacks need not be more than twenty (20) percent of such average depth; and when a building site has an average depth of seventy-five (75) feet or less, any required front and rear building line setbacks need not be more than fifteen (15) percent of such average depth, but in no event shall any required front or rear building line setback be less than five (5) feet.

(b)    When a building site has an average width of less than fifty (50) feet, any required building setback from the interior side property lines need not be more than ten (10) percent of such average width but in no event less than three (3) feet.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 03-07, 4/9/03)

 

9.05.200 Increase in Maximum Stories.
(a)    In non-residential districts, primary structures shall not exceed two stories. A third story, in accordance with the height limitations specified in Section 9.05.110(b)(4), may be permitted in the commercial, mixed use, professional/administrative, industrial/business and community facilities districts subject to the approval of a Site Development Permit pursuant to Chapter 9.71.

(b)    In no circumstance may the third story of a building be set back less than: (1) twenty (20) feet from the minimum required yard adjacent to a street or alley; (2) twenty (20) feet from the minimum yard adjacent to a residential district; and (3) five (5) feet from the interior side yard. A third story must be set back from a street or alley at least ten (10) feet greater than both the first and second stories as shown in the following diagram.

 

 

 

SECTION 9.05.200(b)

THIRD STORY SETBACK REQUIREMENTS

 



 

(c)    In order to approve a request for an increase in maximum stories, the Planning Commission must make the following findings:

(1)    That the proposed third story has been designed in accordance with the provisions of Section 9.05.200(b); and

(2)    That the proposed third story demonstrates exceptional design quality; and

(3)    That the proposed third story allows the project to incorporate public spaces at the ground level.

        Benefits, amenities or design qualities used to warrant an increase in maximum stories may not be used to justify any increase in floor area ratio as provided in Section 9.05.210. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94; Ord. 94-21, 12/13/94)

 

9.05.210 Increase in Floor Area Ratio.
(a)    The standard floor area ratio (FAR) for commercial, mixed use, professional/administrative, industrial/business, community facilities, recreation/open space/conservation, and transportation corridor zoning districts is specified in Chapters 9.11 through 9.23. An increase in the standard FAR may be permitted subject to the approval of a Site Development Permit pursuant to Chapter 9.71. In no event shall the increased FAR approved by the Planning Commission exceed the maximum floor area ratios as specified below:

 

District

Maximum FAR

Neighborhood Commercial

1.75:1

Community Commercial/Pedestrian

1.75:1

Community Commercial/Vehicular

1.75:1

Visitor/Recreation Commercial

1.75:1

Commercial/Residential

1.50:1

Professional/Residential

1.50:1

Professional/Administrative

1.10:1

Industrial/Business

.75:1

Community Facilities

1.00:1

Recreation/Open Space/Construction

.20:1

Transportation Corridor

.20:1

 

(b)    In order to approve a request for an increase in floor area ratio above the standard floor area ratio, the Planning Commission must make the following findings:

(1)    That the requested increase will not significantly contribute to the temporary or cumulative demand for public facilities or services; and

(2)    That the proposed project warrants increased intensity because it demonstrates exceptional design quality exceeding minimum City standards; and

(3)    That the proposed project provides significant or exceptional public amenities, improvements or benefits, in excess of the minimum standards applicable to the project, which promote the goals and objectives of the General Plan.

        The benefits, amenities or design qualities used to warrant an increase in floor area ratio may not be used to justify any increase in maximum stories as provided in Section 9.05.200. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94; Ord. 94-21, 12/13/94; Ord. 96-10, 8/13/96)

 

9.05.220 Lighting.
        Exterior lighting shall be energy-efficient and shielded or recessed so that direct glare and reflections are contained within the boundaries of the parcel, and shall be directed downward and away from adjoining properties and public rights-of-way. No lighting shall blink, flash, or be of unusually high intensity or brightness. All lighting fixtures shall be appropriate in scale, intensity, and height to the use it is serving. Security lighting shall be provided at all entrances/exits. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.05.230 Roof Decks.
        Roof decks are permitted, subject to approval of a Minor Site Development Permit, in any zoning district provided that they meet the following development standards:

(a)    In residential districts, the permitted area of all roof decks per dwelling unit may not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the roof area of the story directly below the deck or three hundred (300) square feet, whichever is less.

(b)    In residential districts, the guardrail and other objects, whether permanent or temporary, which rest upon the roof deck such as patio furniture, landscaping, and storage, may not exceed the district’s required height limit as specified in Section 9.05.110(a) of this Chapter.

(c)    The roof deck shall be architecturally compatible with the existing exterior materials and colors of the existing structure, and appear as an integral part of the roof system.

(d)    The roof deck area shall be appropriately designed so as not to be visible from all sides of the structure or from the grade below. Appropriate screening shall be architecturally compatible with and integrated into the existing structure as determined by the Director of Community Development. The solid screening may include roofing, solid parapet walls, or other methods architecturally compatible with the design of the structure.

(e)    The deck shall be compatible with the color of the existing roof material or structure, yet it shall not be of a color that would reflect glare onto surrounding properties at a higher elevation.

(f)    In residential districts, exterior stairways and other access features such as stairwells or elevators for access to roof decks shall not exceed the residential zoning district’s height limit and shall be architecturally integrated into the design of the structure.

(g)    All furniture and accessories located on a roof deck shall be secured as necessary to prevent wind damage or dislocation.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 96-10, 8/13/96; Ord. 03-07, 4/9/03; amended by Ord. 06-02, 4/12/06)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 9.05.240 “Art in Public Places” Program.
(a)    Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to enhance the cultural and aesthetic environment of the City of Dana Point, and to encourage creativity, education, and an appreciation of the arts and our cultural heritage. The program also serves to implement a number of goals and policies of the Dana Point General Plan Urban Design Element and the Dana Point Community Cultural Plan.

(b)    Definitions. The following definitions shall apply to the language contained in this Section:

(1)    “Art in Public Places” shall mean public art installed, either on- or off-site, as a part of a new development project in conformance with the standards set forth in this Chapter.

(2)    “Community Services Commission” shall mean the Dana Point Community Services Commission as established by City Council Resolution No. 94-07-26-4 on July 26, 1994; and any successor commission, agency, board, committee or other body empowered by the City Council with the same duties and responsibilities.

(3)    “New Development” shall mean the construction of new residential, commercial, mixed use, office, industrial, institutional and recreational projects, and the remodeling or renovation of such projects in excess of fifty (50) percent of the value of the entire development project.

(4)    “Other discretionary review” shall mean any coastal development permit, site development permit, conditional use permit, variance, tentative map, zone change, zone text amendment, general plan amendment or local coastal program amendment as reviewed by the Dana Point Planning Commission, Dana Point City Council or California Coastal Commission.

(5)    “Public art” shall include, but not be limited to, sculpture, paintings, graphic arts, mosaics, photographs, fountains, decorative arts, film and video, and preservation of features or resources of historical, archaeological or paleontological significance, located in or on a site open and accessible to the public. Public art may be either representational or non-representational (i.e., abstract).

(6)    “Public art component” shall mean the piece of public art and any accompanying landscape, hardscape, lighting, public performance space, public art display space, and plaques, signs or narrative materials.

(7)    “Total construction costs” shall mean the valuation of the proposed structures or improvements, as calculated based on the most recent building valuation data from the Uniform Building Code (UBC).

(c)    General Requirements.

(1)    Applicability. The provisions of this Section shall apply to all new development within the residential (Chapter 9.09), commercial (Chapter 9.11), mixed use (Chapter 9.13), office (Chapter 9.15), industrial (Chapter 9.17), institutional (Chapter 9.19) and recreational (Chapter 9.21) districts as defined in the Dana Point Zoning Code.

        The “Art-in-Public-Places” Program described in this section is a mandatory program and the standards specified are minimum standards for compliance. Participation in the program by itself does not qualify project applicants for consideration of increased project density/intensity as discussed in the Land Use Plan of the Dana Point General Plan.

(2)    General Guidelines/Content and Appropriateness. There are no mandated themes for the public art component of a project. Both representational and non-representational artworks are encouraged. Possible thematic content areas for public art may include, but should not be limited to:

(A)   The coastal/marine lifestyle;

(B)   The history of the City of Dana Point;

(C)   The archaeology and paleontology of the natural environment of the area; or

(D)   The cultures of indigenous peoples of the area. These themes are listed for general guidance only and are not intended to mandate a particular theme type or style of artwork.

(3)    Media. The media used in the public art component of a new development project may include any of the features or element described in subsection (b)(5) above. The media employed should be appropriate to the artwork and the immediate physical surroundings. The media chosen should also incorporate non-visual elements (i.e., texture, sound, etc.) wherever possible for the benefit of the visually impaired.

(4)    Location. The public art component should be prominently placed within the development project and oriented toward the pedestrian experience of the site. Particular consideration should be given to making the public art accessible to the physically handicapped. Site design should “showcase” the public art and provide viewing opportunities from many angles. Site landscaping and lighting design should complement and enhance the work.

        If there is no appropriate on-site location for the public art component, the applicant may propose an alternate location off-site.

(5)    Cost. The minimum value requirement for the public art component of a development project is one-half (0.50) percent of the total construction costs of the subject project. The provisions of this Section may be satisfied by either:

(A)   The on- or off-site placement of public art as a component of the development project.

(B)   A contribution to a public art in-lieu fund in an amount equal to the minimum value for the public art component.

(d)    Exemptions. The following types of development projects shall be exempt from the provisions of this Section:

(1)    Individual single family residences and individual multiple family structures of four (4) or fewer units on existing, legal building sites (Chapter 9.09);

(2)    Projects subject to regulation under the Dana Point Harbor Revitalization Plan and District Regulations (Chapter 9.25); or

(3)    Projects with total construction costs of less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) as defined under Subsection (b)(7) above.

(e)    Review Procedures.

(1)    Projects Requiring Other Discretionary Review. The review of the public art component of development projects shall be carried out by the Dana Point Community Services Commission concurrent with the initial discretionary review of the entire new development project by the Dana Point Planning Commission or the Dana Point City Council.

(2)    Application Processing.

(A)   Placement of Public Art. The public art component of a development project shall be submitted as a part of the application for the entire project. The project plans, including the public art component will be provided to the Community Services Commission for their review during the initial thirty (30) day review period for the project. During the thirty (30) day review period, the Community Services Commission will evaluate the public art component of the project, seeking, as necessary, responsible voluntary public and professional opinions and input in its deliberations, and submit recommendations for approval of denial to the Planning Department.

                If necessary, the project may be resubmitted to the Community Services Commission for review during subsequent resubmittals of the project. Comments from the Community Services Commission will be compiled by the Planning Department along with the comments of other departments, agencies and/or interested parties. These comments will be forwarded to the applicant as appropriate and used to determine the completeness of the project as a whole. If, however, the Community Services Commission cannot provide a recommendation before the project is deemed complete, the review of the project will proceed and be undertaken by the Planning Commission.

                Once the application has been deemed complete (pursuant with State law), the environmental review for the entire project will be completed and the project will be scheduled for public hearing before the Planning Commission. A public hearing notice will be provided to the Community Services Commission and the Community Services Commission’s Planning Department Liaison will have the opportunity to attend the public hearing and provide additional input on the project.

                If the Community Services Commission is not able to provide a recommendation on the public art component prior to the Planning Commission hearing on the entire project, the Planning Commission shall have authority to review and give final approval for the public art component. The project may be granted a preliminary review and approval and be conditioned to permit the issuance of ministerial permits (i.e., building, grading) while the public art component is being reviewed. The public art component shall receive final approval from the Planning Commission, and shall be in place prior to issuance of Certificates of Use and Occupancy for the project.

(3)    Projects Not Requiring Other Discretionary Review. The review process for projects which do not require other discretionary review is similar to that described under subsection (e)(2) above, with the exception that the recommendation of the Community Services Commission will be made to the Director of Community Development. Final approval of the public art component of a development project will still be made by the Planning Commission, except in cases where the in-lieu contribution is chosen.

(4)    Public Art Component Application Requirements. The application for the public art component of a development project shall include the following:

(A)   A rendering or model of the proposed work;

(B)   A colors and materials board;

(C)   Site, landscaping and lighting plans;

(D)   A statement from the artist applicant, detailing how the proposed work fulfills the purpose of this Section as described in Subsection (a) above;

(E)   A copy of the text of any plaque(s) or narrative material(s) accompanying the proposed work;

(F)    An estimate of the total construction cost of the development project as defined under Subsection (b)(7) above and the value of the proposed public art; and

(G)   Any other materials or information necessary to determine compliance with this Section as required by the Director of Community Development.

(5)    Findings. In approving the public art component of a development project, the Planning Commission must make the following findings in the form of an adopted resolution:

(A)   That the work fulfills the purpose of this Section; and

(B)   That the work is an enhancement to the site, surrounding neighborhood, and the City as a whole.

(6)    Conditions of Approval. The following standard conditions of approval shall apply to all development projects participating in the “Art-In Public-Places” program:

(A)   Prior to the issuance of Certificates of Use and Occupancy, the applicant must obtain approval of the public art component of the project from the Dana Point Planning Commission.

(B)   Prior to the issuance of Certificates of Use and Occupancy, the public art component of the project shall be installed in accordance with the approved plans and in a manner meeting with the approval of the Director of Community Development. If the public art component cannot be installed prior to the issuance of Certificates of Use and Occupancy, the applicant shall deposit surety with the City in an amount equal to the value of the required public art component to ensure installation within thirty (30) days of the issuance of Certificates of Use and Occupancy.

(C)   On-Site Placement. The maintenance of the public art component for the project shall be the responsibility of the applicant and the applicant’s assigns and successors-in-interest.

OR

Off-Site Placement. The maintenance of the public art component for the project shall be the responsibility of the applicant and the applicant’s assigns and successors-in-interest. The applicant shall provide evidence, to the satisfaction of the Director of Community Development, that the public art component will be placed off-site with the approval of the owner of the property upon which the artwork will be located.

(D)   In-Lieu Contribution. Prior to the issuance of Certificates of Use and Occupancy, the applicant shall deposit an amount equal to the required value of the public art component into a public art in-lieu fund.

(Added by Ord. 94-13, 8/23/94; amended by Ord. 10-02, 2/22/10; Ord. 10-08, 9/27/10)

 

9.05.250 Internal Access to Separate Living Quarters.
        Single-family residences with living quarters having no internal access to the primary residence may be permitted subject to review and approval by the Director of Community Development. In such cases, the Director may require the property owner to record a document against the title of the subject property that indicates that said living quarters cannot be used as a second dwelling unit. (Added by Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94)

 

 

9.05.260 Increased Height for Detached Garages.
        The standard maximum height of detached accessory structures is twelve (12) feet when located in the setback area pursuant to Section 9.05.080(L). The maximum height of a detached garage may be increased up to a maximum of eighteen (18) feet subject to the following standards:

(a)    The added height provides nonhabitable space for storage uses only;

(b)    No stairway access is permitted and the storage space may only be entered by an internal ladder access; and

(c)    The roof of the detached garage is fully sloped in either a hip or gable configuration.

(Added by Ord. 94-21, 12/13/94; amended by Ord. 03-07, 4/9/03)

 

9.05.270 Decks Extension Over Slope Areas.
        Where a deck is proposed to extend over a slope area, the following regulations shall apply, except that for slope areas on blufftop lots in the Coastal Overlay District, decks shall not project past the bluff edge, and the limitations on development in the blufftop setback described in the blufftop setback requirements of Chapter 9.27 (Coastal Overlay District) shall supersede the following regulations.

(a)    For purposes of this section only, areas with less than a five (5) percent grade shall not be considered a slope area and decks may be extended pursuant to the applicable setback requirements.

(b)    If the slope has a grade of more than five (5) percent but less than fifteen (15) percent, the deck may be extended to a maximum of eight (8) feet beyond the top of the slope.

(c)    If the slope has a grade of fifteen (15) percent or greater, at-grade or above-grade decks are not permitted to extend beyond the top of any slope, except as may be permitted by a minor Site Development Permit subject to the approval of the Director of Community Development and pursuant to the applicable provisions of Chapter 9.71. Such extension shall be subject to the required yard setbacks and to the following requirements:

(1)    The applicant shall submit a site plan detailing the location of the top of the subject slope.

(2)    The applicant shall submit evidence which details the gradient of the slope.

(3)    The applicant shall submit a soils report substantiating the ability of the slope geology to support the proposed deck extension.

(4)    The applicant shall provide a letter detailing how the proposed deck extension would not pose any detrimental aesthetic impact to any surrounding properties or to any public views or vistas.

(5)    In no case may the minor Site Development Permit allow an extension of the deck beyond four (4) feet from the top of the slope.

(Added by Ord. 96-13, 11/26/96; amended by Ord. 99-05, 4/27/99)

Chapter 9.07 SPECIAL USE STANDARDS*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 18-01 and 18-07. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


9.07.010 Intent and Purpose.
        Certain uses, although permitted in specific districts, require additional development standards beyond those specified for the applicable zone. Additional standards are required to ensure that such uses are operated in a manner that do not adversely impact surrounding uses. The purpose of this Chapter is to provide additional development standards and conditions for certain uses to ensure their compatibility with surrounding uses. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.07.020 Antennas.
(a)    Exempt Antennas. The following types of antennas are exempt from the requirements of this Section, unless otherwise noted:

(1)    Common skeletal residential type radio and television antennas used to receive UHF, VHF, AM, and FM signals of off-air broadcasts from radio and television stations.

(b)    Commercial Wireless Telecommunication Antenna Facilities.

 

(1)    Purpose. The purpose of these requirements is to regulate the location and design of “Commercial Wireless Telecommunication Antenna Facilities” as defined herein to protect the scenic ocean and coastal public views; public safety; and the quality of residential neighborhoods in the City of Dana Point. The Dana Point City Council has determined that these requirements are intended to create reasonable regulations in conformance with the provisions of the Telecommunication Act of 1996. These requirements also apply to non-commercial wireless telecommunication antenna facilities that are associated with local businesses, public agencies, utility services and emergency services. These requirements do not apply to “exempt antennas” under Section 9.07.020 (a) or “antennas and satellite dish antennas in residential districts” under Section 9.07.020 (c).

(2)    Antenna Use Permits.

(A)   All commercial wireless telecommunication service antenna facilities and public/private local telecommunication system antenna facilities shall require an Antenna Use Permit. A proposed antenna facility may require either a Major or Minor Antenna Use Permit (AUP) depending upon the proposed location with respect to residential districts, classrooms and scenic highways, as well as the type and design of the proposed antenna facility, as described herein. Appeals of a decision on an AUP are subject to the provisions contained in Section 9.61.110.

(B)   Under certain location and design conditions as described herein, a proposed antenna facility may be subject to the Exceptional Case Approval procedure in addition to a Major AUP. Exceptional Case Approvals shall be reviewed at a public hearing by both the Planning Commission and the City Council. In addition to the required submittal material for a Major Antenna Use Permit, the applicant must submit documents which would conclusively demonstrate that the carrier is technically unable to satisfy system coverage objectives by any other means that would be consistent with the regulations contained herein. Said documents shall be submitted to the City for review by a third party wireless telecommunication consultant. Any and all costs associated with the third party consultant review shall be paid by the applicant through a deposit fee set by the City Council. If the Exceptional Case Approval proposes to deviate from the established setbacks contained herein, a Variance application shall also be included with the submittal.

(C)   Antenna Use Permit Procedure.

1.     Prior to the formal submittal for any Antenna Use Permit, the Community Development Department staff shall determine if a Minor Antenna Use Permit, Major Antenna Use Permit and, if applicable, Exceptional Case Approval would be needed for a given antenna facility proposal.

2.     Once a determination has been made by Community Development Department staff as to which permitting procedure is appropriate, the following application materials shall be submitted to the City for consideration of the proposed antenna facility:

a.     Application form for Minor Antenna Use Permit, Major Antenna Use Permit and, if applicable, Exceptional Case Approval.

b.     Site Plans and Elevations drawn to scale in compliance with the City’s accepted format.

c.     A radiofrequency (RF) report prepared by a qualified RF engineer acceptable to the City to demonstrate that the proposed facility, as well as any co-located facilities, complies with current Federal RF emission standards.

d.     Computerized Visual Assessments showing the before and after visual effects of the proposed facility.

e.     Technical report with signal strength exhibits stating the need for the proposed antenna facility (for commercial wireless telecommunication antenna facilities only; not required of non-commercial wireless telecommunication antenna facilities).

f.      For Minor AUP applications, a written statement must be submitted which discusses how the proposed antenna facility complies with the stealth design criteria set forth in these regulations.

g.     For Major AUP applications, a written statement must be submitted which discusses why the proposed antenna facility cannot comply with all of the stealth design criteria set forth in these regulations.

h.     For Exceptional Case Approval applications, a written statement must be submitted which discusses among other things why the proposed antenna facility cannot comply with all of the stealth design criteria and, if a Variance for setbacks is required, as to why the antenna facility setbacks set forth in these regulations can not be met.

3.     After the Antenna Use Permit application is deemed complete by the Community Development Department, it shall be considered at a meeting of the Planning Commission. Minor Antenna Use Permits would be scheduled for the consent calendar and Major Antenna Use Permits would be scheduled for public hearing in accordance with Chapter 9.61 of the Zoning Code. The decision of the Planning Commission may be appealed to the City Council within 15 days of the decision.

4.     Exceptional Case Approval application materials shall first be reviewed by a third party wireless telecommunication consultant chosen by the City, paid for by the applicant through a deposit fee set by the City Council. After the review is completed and the application is deemed complete by City Staff, the Exceptional Case Approval in conjunction with the Major AUP would be scheduled for public hearing in accordance with Chapter 9.61 of the Zoning Code before the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall render a recommendation that shall be considered by the City Council at a public hearing held in accordance with Chapter 9.61 of the Zoning Code. The City Council shall render a final decision on the matter. If the Exceptional Case Approval also includes another discretionary action, that action shall also be considered by the City Council.

5.     Antenna Use Permits are subject to review by the City’s Planning Commission every two (2) years to determine if technology has changed to the point where an installation can be reduced in size or redesigned in a “stealth” manner and to evaluate RF emissions. A technology upgrade report and RF emissions testing report would be required to be submitted by the applicant. The City’s third party consultant would review the reports and any changes would be incorporated into the approval of the review by the Commission.

6.     An RF (radio-frequency) testing report shall be required of all proposed facilities after the initial installation and once the site is operable to demonstrate that they are in compliance with government safety standards prior to final sign off of permits.

7.     The City may require modification or removal of wireless antenna facilities for various reasons such as, but not limited to, changes in technology, safety hazards, and new environmental concerns, etc. All costs of installation, modification to and removal of wireless antenna facilities and related equipment shall be borne by the Carrier, as defined herein, whether required by the City or otherwise.

(4)    Location Criteria. The following applies to both commercial wireless telecommunication antenna facilities and private/public local wireless telecommunication antenna facilities:

(A)   Antenna facilities under these regulations are prohibited in residential districts. With the exception of the criteria set forth in these regulations.

(B)   Antenna facilities are encouraged to be located on and/or inside of existing structures, such as buildings, light standards, traffic control standards or existing freestanding telecommunication facilities.

(C)   Antenna facilities are encouraged to be located where existing topography, vegetation, buildings or other structures provide the greatest amount of visual screening.

(D)   Antenna facilities shall be co-located with other antenna facilities in accordance with this subsection wherever possible and technically feasible.

(E)   Freestanding antenna facilities shall not be located within five hundred (500) feet from another freestanding antenna facility, unless co-located on the same supporting structure.

(F)    Roof-mounted antennas, wall-mounted antennas and other antenna facilities on private property shall not be allowed within one hundred (100) feet of residential districts, even as an Exceptional Case Approval.

(G)   Antenna facilities under these regulations are prohibited in the Conservation District.

(H)   Stealth antenna facilities in the Community Facilities District shall require the approval of a Major AUP, and non-stealth or water tank mounts require the approval of an Exceptional Case Approval.

(I)    Wireless antenna facilities shall not be located so as to create a hazard to persons or property within the “Fall Zone” as defined herein.

(J)    Setbacks from Residential Districts and classrooms shall be subject to the procedures set forth for each of the applicable permit types shown in the table below:

 

Setback from Residential Property Line & Classrooms

Light Standard ROW Installation

Stealth & Non-Freestanding

Non-Stealth and Non-Freestanding

Freestanding
Installation

0 to 100 Feet

Major AUP

Prohibited

Prohibited

Prohibited

100 to 150 Feet

Minor AUP

Major AUP

Prohibited

Major AUP (Stealth Only)

150 to 300 Feet

Minor AUP

Minor AUP

Major AUP

Major AUP (Stealth Only)

Over 300 Feet

Minor AUP

Minor AUP

Major AUP

Major AUP (Stealth Only) Major AUP & ECA (Non-Stealth)

 

AUP = Antenna Use Permit

ECA = Exceptional Case Approval

 

(K)   Setbacks from centerline of scenic highways shall be subject to the procedures set forth for each of the applicable permit types shown in the table below:

 

Setback from Centerline

Light Standard ROW Installation

Stealth & Non-Freestanding

Non-Stealth and Non-Freestanding

Freestanding
Installation

0 to 150 Feet

Major AUP

Major AUP

Major AUP and ECA

Major AUP (Stealth Only)

150 to 300 Feet

N/A

Minor AUP

Major AUP

Major AUP (Stealth Only)

Over 300 Feet

N/A

Minor AUP

Major AUP

Major AUP (Stealth Only) Major AUP & ECA (Non-Stealth)

 

AUP = Antenna Use Permit

ECA = Exceptional Case Approval

 

(L)   The provisions of Section 9.07.020 (d)(6) do not apply to Commercial Wireless Telecommunication Antenna Facilities.

(5)    Design Criteria. The following stealth criteria apply to both commercial wireless telecommunication antenna facilities and public/private local telecommunication antenna facilities:

(A)   Light standard-mounted or traffic control standard-mounted antenna facilities shall be designed to be unobtrusive, in the opinion of the City, and shall locate equipment cables within the light standard or traffic control standard; place related electronic equipment in underground vaults (except for environmental air conditioning units needing above-ground access); and paint or finish the antennas to match the supporting standard.

(B)   Roof-mounted, wall-mounted and other non-freestanding antenna facilities are acceptable if they are screened or designed in such a way to be unobtrusive, in the opinion of the City, and does not block significant public or residential views.

(C)   Roof-mounted antenna facilities (except for omni-directional whip antennas) shall be completely screened from public view in a manner that is consistent with the building’s existing architectural style, color and materials, including, if necessary, screening to avoid adverse impacts to public views from higher elevations.

(D)   Wall-mounted antenna facilities shall utilize flush-mounted antennas painted or finish to match the building with concealed cables.

(E)   The height of antenna facilities shall not exceed the maximum building height allowed for the subject property’s zoning district, unless exceeding the height limit is approved under a Major Antenna Use Permit and a Variance as per Chapter 9.67 of the Dana Point Zoning Code.

(F)    Rooftop-mounted antenna facilities placed on existing non-conforming buildings that exceed a given height limit shall not exceed the building’s height.

(G)   Co-location of commercial antenna facilities is desirable, however, there shall be no more than three commercial providers per co-location facility unless it can be shown to be aesthetically feasible, in the opinion of the City, and within current government safety standards.

(H)   If a building of suitable height is not available, commercial antennas could be hidden in a new architectural feature that matches an existing building’s design (clock tower, cupola, etc.) or a freestanding architectural feature (entry monument, etc.). Any such improvements shall be appropriate for and compatible with the site and surrounding area and shall not exceed the site’s height limit except in association with a Variance as per Chapter 9.67 of the Dana Point Zoning Code.

(I)    Colors and designs for freestanding antenna facilities shall be integrated with the surrounding visual background including buildings, landscape and/or uses in the area or those likely to exist in the area, and should prevent the facility from visually dominating the surrounding area.

(J)    Freestanding antenna facilities shall avoid being a visually dominant intrusion into a given viewshed by locating the facilities near other vertical elements such as existing structures or trees.

(K)   Freestanding antenna facilities shall be architecturally compatible with the surrounding land uses, buildings, structures, landscaping and other improvements by blending with the existing characteristics to the greatest extent possible.

(6)    Antenna Use Permit Required Findings. The following are the required findings for every Antenna Use Permit:

(A)   That the proposed antenna facility will not create any significant or meaningful blockage to public views; and,

(B)   That the proposed antenna facility will be an enhancement to the City due to its ability to provide additional communication capabilities; and,

(C)   That the proposed antenna facility will be aesthetically integrated into its surrounding environment; and,

(D)   That the proposed antenna facility will not interfere with the reception or transmission of other wireless telecommunication signals within the surrounding community; and,

(E)   That the proposed antenna facility will operate in compliance with all applicable Federal safety regulations for such facilities; and,

(F)    That the public need for the use of the antenna facility has been documented.

(7)    Exceptional Case Approval Required Findings. In addition to the above findings, the following findings are also required when relevant for Exceptional Case Approvals.

(A)   That the proposed antenna facility cannot be implemented without the use of a freestanding antenna facility; and/or,

(B)   That the proposed antenna facility cannot reasonably operate without being located within the setbacks from residential uses, classrooms and scenic highways as established in this ordinance; and/or

(C)   That the Carrier acknowledges that they shall be responsible for any damage or injuries that result from hazards within Fall Zones or otherwise from such freestanding facility.

(8)    Fees. The fees and deposits for Antenna Use Permits and Exceptional Case Approvals shall be established by the City Council by resolution.

(c)    Antennas and Satellite Dish Antennas in Residential Districts. Antennas and satellite dish antennas located in the residential districts of the City shall conform to the following standards:

(1)    All ground-mounted antennas and satellite dish antennas shall be required to maintain their supporting structures at least five (5) feet from any property line and ten (10) feet from any other structure.

(2)    All ground-mounted antennas and satellite dish antennas shall be screened by walls, fences or landscaping at least six (6) feet in height obscuring visibility of the antenna or satellite dish antenna. Landscaping shall be of a type and variety capable of growing within one (1) year to provide a landscape screen which obscures the visibility of the antenna and supporting structure(s).

(3)    All antennas and satellite dish antennas and their supporting structures shall be located in the rear yard or any side yard, except a street side yard.

(4)    No antenna, satellite dish antenna, or its supporting structure shall be located in the area between the front property line and the dwelling.

(5)    The following height limit shall apply to all antennas:

 

Antenna Type

Maximum Height Above Grade

Satellite Dish Antennas

15 feet

Other Permitted Antennas

Maximum height of base zoning district

 

        Antennas, as defined in Section 9.75.010, may be permitted to exceed the maximum height of the base zoning district subject to the approval of a minor Conditional Use Permit. Such a permit may only be granted under the following circumstances:

 

(A)   The subject antenna is retractable, the height of the antenna when retracted is thirty-five (35) feet or less, the height of the antenna when extended is fifty (50) feet or less, and the applicant executes an agreement which stipulates that the antenna may only be extended during actual use of said antenna; or

(B)   The subject antenna is used solely for transmission and reception of ham radio signals, the operator is a FCC licensed amateur ham radio operator and the antenna is retractable with a maximum height of seventy (70) feet when extended and no higher than the maximum height limit of the base zoning district when retracted.

(6)    A maximum of two antennas, including satellite dish antennas or exempt antennas, shall be allowed per lot.

(7)    Antennas and satellite dish antennas shall not be mounted on the roof.

(d)    Antennas and Satellite Dish Antennas Located in Non-Residential Districts. Antennas and satellite dish antennas located in the non-residential zones of the City shall conform to the following standards:

(1)    All ground-mounted antennas and satellite dish antennas shall be required to maintain their supporting structures at least five (5) feet from any property line and ten (10) feet from any other structure.

(2)    All ground-mounted antennas and satellite dish antennas shall be screened by walls, fences or landscaping at least six (6) feet in height obscuring visibility of the antenna. Landscaping shall be of a type and variety capable of growing within one (1) year to provide a landscape screen which obscures the visibility of the antenna and supporting structure.

(3)    All antennas, satellite dish antennas, and their supporting structures shall be located in the rear yard or any side yard, except a street side yard.

(4)    No antenna, satellite dish antenna, or its supporting structure shall be located in the area between the front property line and the main structure or building.

(5)    No antenna or satellite dish antenna shall be higher than the maximum height permitted in the zone measured from grade level.

(6)    A maximum of two antennas, including satellite dish antennas or exempt antennas, shall be allowed per lot.

(7)    No antenna or satellite dish antenna shall be roof-mounted except on a flat portion of the roof structure with architecturally integrated parapets or screening elements.

(e)    Required Criteria and Performance Standards.

(1)    Antennas, commercial antennas, and satellite dish antennas shall be installed and maintained in compliance with the requirements of the Building Code. Antenna installers shall obtain a building permit prior to installation.

(2)    No advertising material shall be allowed on any antenna, commercial antenna, or satellite dish antenna.

(3)    All electrical wiring associated with any non-exempt antenna shall be buried underground or hidden in a manner acceptable to the Building Official.

(4)    No portion of an antenna or satellite dish antenna array shall extend beyond the property lines or into any front yard area. Guy wires shall not be anchored within any front yard area but may be attached to the building.

(5)    The antenna, commercial antenna, or satellite dish antenna, including guy wires, supporting structures and accessory equipment, shall be located and designed so as to minimize the visual impact on surrounding properties and from public streets. The materials used in constructing the antenna or satellite dish antenna shall not be unnecessarily bright, shiny, garish, or reflective.

(6)    Every antenna, commercial antenna, or satellite dish antenna must be adequately grounded, for protection against a direct strike of lightning, with an adequate ground wire. Ground wires shall be of the type approved by the latest edition of the Electrical Code for grounding masts and lightning arrestors and shall be installed in a mechanical manner, with as few bands as possible, maintaining a clearance of at least two (2) inches from combustible materials. Lightning arrestors shall be used that are approved as safe by the Underwriter’s Laboratories, Inc., and both sides of the line must be adequately protected with proper arrestors to remove static charges accumulated on the line. When lead-in conductors of the polyethylene ribbon-type are used, lightning arrestors must be installed in each conductor. When coaxial cable or shielded twin lead is used for lead-in, suitable protection may be provided without lightning arrestors by grounding the exterior metal sheath.

(7)    A wind velocity test may be required for any non-exempt antenna, as deemed necessary by the Building Official.

(f)    Variances. Pursuant to the procedures of Chapter 9.67 of the Zoning Code, any person may seek a variance from the provisions of this Section. Any variance so granted is revocable for failure by the applicant or property owner to comply with the conditions imposed. A variance may be issued for an antenna or satellite dish antenna if it meets the following standards:

(1)    Locating the antenna or satellite dish antenna in conformance with the specifications of this section would obstruct the antenna’s reception window or otherwise excessively interfere with reception, and such obstruction or interference involves factors beyond the applicant’s control; or, the cost of meeting the specifications of this section is excessive given the cost of the proposed antenna.

(2)    The variance application includes a certification that the proposed installation is in conformance with applicable City Building regulations. Furthermore, the application must contain written documentation of such conformance, including load distributions within the building’s support structure and certified by a registered engineer.

(3)    If it is proposed that the antenna or satellite dish antenna will be located on the roof, where possible, the antenna shall be located on the rear portion of the roof and be consistent with neighboring improvements, uses and architectural character.

(g)    Non-Conforming Antennas and Satellite Dish Antennas. Antennas and satellite dish antennas, in any zone, which were lawfully constructed and erected prior to the effective date of this Code, which do not conform to the requirements of this Section for the particular zoning district in which they are located, shall be accepted as non-conforming uses for a period of one (1) year from the date of adoption of this Code. Thereafter, the antennas shall be subject to abatement as set forth below via removal, modification, or relocation to comply with the standards of this Code. Any antenna or satellite dish antenna constructed, or erected in violation of this Code or any prior law, ordinance or regulation shall be subject to immediate abatement.

(h)    Notice of Non-Conforming Antennas or Satellite Dish Antennas.

(1)    Upon the determination of the Director of Community Development that the provisions of this Chapter apply to a given parcel of land on which an antenna or satellite dish antenna is located, the Director or his/her designee shall send a notice thereof by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner thereof as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and shall cause such property to be posted with a similar notice.

(2)    The notice provided for in this Section shall state that the property and antenna in question is a non-conformity, shall state the date of abatement established in accordance with Section 9.63.050, shall state that an administrative hearing will be held before the Director of Community Development, and shall state the date of such hearing.

(i)     Hearing.

(1)    Within sixty (60) days after the issuance of the notice prescribed in Section 9.63.050, the Director of Community Development shall hold an administrative hearing to determine whether the nonconformity should be abated or whether a time extension should be granted as provided in Section 9.63.070.

(2)    The Director of Community Development shall receive written and oral testimony at such hearing in regard to abatement.

(3)    At the close of the hearing, the Director of Community Development shall find and determine whether the nonconformity should be abated and all facts in support thereof, whether the owner of the property can amortize his/her investment in the term for abatement provided in accordance with Chapter 9.63.

(4)    The Director of Community Development shall also find and determine whether the structure encompassing the nonconforming use can economically be used in its present condition or can successfully be modified for a purpose permitted in the zone in which it is located.

(j)     Decision and Order. The decision of the Director of Community Development and the findings in support thereof shall be in the form of a written order and shall be served upon the property owner personally or by United States certified mail, return receipt requested, within ten (10) days after the decision is rendered.

(k)    Right of Appeal. The decision of the Director of Community Development may be appealed to the Planning Commission within fifteen (15) days of the order, provided, however, that the appeal period shall not commence until service of the order. The decision of the Planning Commission may be appealed to the City Council in the same manner.

(l)     Recordation of Order. After the conclusion of all appeals, notice of the decision and order of the Director of Community Development, or the Planning Commission, or City Council in the case of an appeal, shall be recorded with the County Recorder of the County of Orange.

(m)   Extension of Time.

(1)    The Director of Community Development and the City Council on appeal, shall grant an extension of the time for abatement of nonconformity where it finds that an unreasonable hardship would otherwise be imposed on the property owner.

(2)    The Director of Community Development and the Planning Commission, or City Council on appeal, shall consider the following factors, among others, in determining whether to grant an extension of time and the length of the term:

(A)   The nature of the use.

(B)   The amount of the owner’s investment in improvements.

(C)   The convertibility of improvements to permitted uses.

(D)   The character of the neighborhood.

(E)   The detriment, if any, caused to the neighborhood by continuance of the nonconforming use.

(F)    The amount of time needed to amortize the investment.

(n)    Proof of Amortization. The Director of Community Development and the Planning Commission or City Council on appeal shall base its decision as to the length of the permitted amortization period on any competent evidence presented, including but not limited to the depreciation schedule attached to the owner’s latest federal income tax return.

(o)    Relocation. Where the Director of Community Development finds that a nonconforming antenna or satellite dish antenna, either in its present condition or as modified, can be used in compliance with the standards set forth in this Code for the zone in which it is located, the nonconforming antenna or satellite dish antenna may be granted an extension sufficient to permit it to be relocated on the site wherein such use is permitted and which has substantially equivalent utility for the use. In no event shall such extension be more than two (2) years.

(p)    Antennas Used for Transmission Purposes.

(1)    Except as provided in subsection (2) below, prior to the approval by the City for the installation of any non-exempt antenna, the applicant must submit a written statement that the antenna will not be used for transmission purposes; or, that the use of the antennas for transmission purposes will not exceed Effective Instantaneous Radiated Power (EIRP) levels of 80 decibel watts (DBW).

(2)    Antennas used for transmission purposes which exceed EIRP levels of 80 DBW may be approved by the Director, subject to the imposition of reasonable conditions to protect the applicant and the public health and safety. Reasonable conditions shall include, but not be limited to, fencing, screening, warning signs, partial submersion below ground level, and other like conditions.

(3)    Any applicant aggrieved by a decision of or condition imposed by the Director of Community Development, may appeal that decision or condition pursuant to Section 9.61.110 of this Code.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93); amended by Ord. 94-09 5/24/94; Ord. 94-21, 12/13/94; Ord. 98-06, 9/22/98; Ord. 03-07, 4/9/03)

 

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 9.07.030 Home Occupations.
(a)    The residence in which a home occupation is conducted shall not display any indication of a business.

(b)    Only persons residing in the residence shall be involved in the business; no outside employees shall be permitted.

(c)    No more than one room of the residence shall be used for business purposes. Required garages shall not be used for the business in any manner, including storage of materials, and no portion of the business shall be conducted out of doors.

(d)    The business shall generate no more than 10 vehicle trips per day.

(e)    Permitted business equipment shall be limited to that normally associated with a residential use.

(f)    The business shall not produce any noise, heat, vibration, glare, dust, or odor effects other than those ordinarily associated with a residential use.

(g)    No actual retail sales shall be conducted on the premises other than sales by phone or mail.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 9.07.040 Alcoholic Beverage Outlets.
        The following regulations shall apply to alcoholic beverage outlets established after February 11, 1993. The establishment, operation, and maintenance of any alcoholic beverage outlet shall be subject to the following regulations:

(a)    Establishment. The establishment of an alcoholic beverage outlet includes the opening of such a business, the relocation of such a business to a new location, the conversion of an existing use or premises to an alcoholic beverage outlet use, and/or the expansion or change of the type of alcoholic beverages to be sold at an existing alcoholic beverage outlet (i.e., a change in the type of retail liquor license within a license classification). For purposes of this Section, establishment shall not mean the transfer of an existing license from one operator to another at a location which is occupied by an existing alcoholic beverage outlet, unless there is a proposed change in the type of license.

(b)    Conditional Use Permit. A Minor Conditional Use Permit, shall be required for the establishment of an alcoholic beverage outlet in the following situations:

(1)    Sale of alcoholic beverages for off-site consumption when located within:

(A)   Five hundred (500) feet of any area zoned or used for any church, park, or educational institution utilized by minors; or

(B)   Five hundred (500) feet of any hospital or public beach; or

(C)   One hundred (100) feet of any area zoned or used for residential purposes.

(2)    Sale of alcoholic beverages for on-site consumption when located within:

(A)   Five hundred (500) feet of any area zoned or used for any church, park or educational institution utilized by minors; or

(B)   One hundred (100) feet of any area zoned or used for residential purposes.

(3)    Any establishment conducting concurrent sale of alcoholic beverages and motor vehicle fuels.

(c)    Findings. An application for a Conditional Use Permit shall not be approved unless the following findings can be made in addition to the required for a findings for the approval of a Conditional Use Permit contained in Chapter 9.65.

(1)    That the proposed use will not be contrary to the public interest or injurious to nearby properties and that the spirit and intent of this Section will be observed;

 

(2)    That the proposed use will not enlarge or encourage the development of a “skid row” area;

(3)    That the establishment of an additional regulated use in the area will not be contrary to any program of neighborhood conservation nor will it interfere with any other city program; and,

(4)    That all applicable regulations of the zoning district in which the use is permitted will be observed.

(d)    General Provisions. Where the alcoholic beverage outlet is proposed on a site which abuts the property line of any property zoned or used for residential purposes, a six (6) foot high solid masonry wall shall be constructed between the parking area of the proposed use and the adjacent residential property. Said wall shall be designed and constructed in compliance with all other applicable provisions of this Code including, but not limited to, Section 9.05.090, Sight Visibility Area and Section 9.05.120, Fences, Walls and Hedges.

(e)    Sale of Alcoholic Beverages for Off-Site Consumption. The sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises including parking lots shall be prohibited. There shall be appropriate and conspicuous posting of a notice inside the premises indicating that consumption of alcohol, either inside or outside of the building on the premises is prohibited by law. The notice shall be at least one and one-half (1-1/2) square feet in size.

(f)    Sale of Alcoholic Beverages for On-Site Consumption. The sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption off the premises shall be prohibited. There shall be appropriate and conspicuous posting of a notice inside the premises, indicating that consumption of alcohol outside the building on the premises including its parking lot is prohibited by law, except as may be permitted in any designated outdoor eating or drinking area, such as an on-site patio. The notice shall be at least one and one-half (1-1/2) square feet in size.

(g)    Concurrent Sale Requirements. Any use engaged in the concurrent sale of the motor vehicle fuels and alcoholic beverages shall meet the following requirements:

(1)    An establishment engaged in the sale of motor vehicle fuels may offer beer and wine, and not distilled spirits, for sale for off-site consumption.

(2)    Beer and wine products shall not be displayed within five (5) feet of the cash register or the front door unless such display occurs within a permanently affixed cooler which existed as of January 1, 1988.

(3)    Advertisement of beer and wine products shall not be displayed at motor vehicle fuel islands, on fuel pumps, on the canopy supports or the canopy structure covering said motor vehicle fuels islands.

(4)    The sale of beer or wine shall not be made from a drive-through window.

(5)    Display or sale of beer or wine products shall not be made from an ice tub.

(6)    Self-illuminating advertising for beer or wine products shall not be located on buildings or in the windows.

(7)    Employees on duty between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 2:00 a.m. shall be at least twenty-one (21) years of age to sell beer or wine.

(8)    A notice shall be posted within three (3) feet of the cash register bearing the following message: “Don’t Drink and Drive.” The notice shall be at least one and one-half (1-1/2) square feet in size.

(9)    Additional requirements on the establishment and operation of facilities engaged in the concurrent sale of motor vehicle fuels and beer and wine which are not inconsistent with this

        Section, may be imposed by the Planning Commission, or the City Council on appeal, where a Conditional Use Permit is required to establish such a use.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-02, 1/11/94; Ord. 08-09, 7/15/08)

 

9.07.050 Utility Substations.
(a)    Approval of a Site Development Permit pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 9.71, shall be required for all utility substations, including electrical distribution and transmission substations, sewage and potable water system pump stations, and similar facilities.

(b)    Utility substations and similar facilities shall be established only on lots that conform to the minimum lot size requirements of the zoning district in which they are located.

(c)    All buildings, structures, and landscaping shall be visually compatible with surrounding development.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.07.060 Entertainment Establishments Providing Dancing, Music, and Similar Activities.
(a)    Any live entertainment use, as defined in Section 9.75.270, which is located within two hundred (200) feet of any residential structure, shall require a minor Conditional Use Permit. The minor Conditional Use Permit shall be processed pursuant to Chapter 9.65 and shall be subject to consent approval by the Planning Commission.

(b)    Noise levels shall not exceed the standards set forth in the City Noise Ordinance when measured from the nearest property line.

(c)    All live entertainment uses requiring a minor Conditional Use Permit shall be operated in compliance with the following conditions:

(1)    Sound controls appropriate to the proposed use shall be provided. This may require modifications to the subject structure including, but not limited to, vestibule entries and soundproof windows.

(2)    Dancing, music, and similar entertainment uses shall not be permitted between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. Greater restrictions on permitted hours of operation may be applied as warranted to maintain compatibility with adjacent uses.

(3)    The parking lot of the subject use shall be designed and lighted to provide adequate security for patrons of the establishment and vehicles in the lot as determined by the Chief of Police. Supplemental security measures, such as video monitoring or security guards, may be required as conditions of approval.

(4)    Any other condition which, in the determination of the Planning Commission, is necessary to ensure compatibility with, and enhancement to the subject and surrounding properties, and which is required as a condition of approval.

(d)    Exemptions. Subject to a review by the Director of Community Development, the following uses shall be exempt from the requirement for a minor Conditional Use Permit.

(1)    Any live entertainment use consisting of three (3) or less performers and/or involving amplification of one hundred fifty (150) watts or less; or

(2)    The use of any stereo system, music recording machine, karaoke machine, or jukebox associated with a live entertainment use; or

(3)    Any similar live entertainment use with no impact outside the structure where the live entertainment is performed, as determined by the Director of Community Development. This exemption may only be granted when it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Director

        of Community Development that such uses can be conducted without resulting in an undue impact to the surrounding area.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94)

 

9.07.070 Churches.
(a)    Churches and church facilities shall require the approval of a Conditional Use Permit pursuant to Chapter 9.65.

(b)    All buildings, structures, and landscaping shall be developed in a manner harmonious and compatible with development on surrounding properties.

(c)    Establishment of a church does not automatically permit any school, day nursery, kindergarten, or any congregation of persons for purposes other than religious instruction, worship, or guidance. Any such additional uses shall be subject to the use requirements of the zoning district in which they are located.

(d)    Churches in residential districts may not be established in structures designed to function as dwelling units.

(e)    Establishment of emergency shelters for up to a maximum of ten (10) beds/persons is allowed by right as an accessory use, subject to development and management standards contained in Section 9.19.040(b).

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 10-06, 5/24/10)

 

9.07.080 Motor Vehicle Sales.
(a)    Motor vehicles sales uses shall require the approval of a Conditional Use Permit pursuant to Chapter 9.65.

(b)    The minimum lot width of any site supporting a motor vehicle sales business shall be one hundred (100) feet.

(c)    The minimum lot area shall be ten thousand (10,000) square feet.

(d)    Proper walls or fencing and landscaping shall be required to ensure compatibility with, and enhancement to surrounding land uses.

(e)    A permanent sales building two hundred (200) square feet or larger shall utilized to conduct the business. Portable buildings or mobile homes are not permitted.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.07.090 Adult Oriented Businesses.
        No person shall be permitted to establish, operate or maintain an Adult Oriented Business as that term is defined in Section 5.32.110 of this Code unless:

(a)    The property on which the proposed business is to be located is:

(1)    Located in the City’s Community Commercial/Vehicle (CC/V), Visitor/Recreation Commercial (V/RC), and/or Industrial/Business (I/B) zoning districts;

(2)    Located in excess of three hundred (300) feet away from of any residentially zoned property or any residential use properly approved by the City;

(3)    Located in excess of three hundred (300) feet away from any lot upon which there is properly located a religious institution, public park or school;

(4)    Located in excess of three hundred (300) feet away from any lot upon which there is located another adult oriented business;* and

(b)    There is obtained and maintained in full force and effect a properly issued Dana Point Adult Oriented Business Permit pursuant to Chapter 5.32 of this Code.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 96-10, 8/13/96; Ord. 03-06, 4/9/03)

 

*       All measurements referenced in Section 9.07.090, subsections (a)(1)—(4) inclusive, shall be measured in a straight line without regard to intervening objects or structures from the nearest point on the property line of residential structure, religious institution, public park or school to the closest point of the building or unit within the building proposed to house the adult-oriented business.

 

9.07.100 Fortune-Telling.
(a)    Conditional Use Permit Required. Fortune telling uses shall require the approval of a Conditional Use Permit pursuant to Chapter 9.65. A Conditional Use Permit application for a fortune-telling use shall include the following information:

(1)    The name, home and business address, and business telephone number of the applicant.

(2)    A record of all convictions for violations of this division, or other similar laws regulating fortune-telling, within five (5) years proceeding the date of the application.

(3)    The fingerprints of the applicant on a form provided by the Police Services Department.

(4)    Two (2) copies of a photograph of the operator, one (1) inch by one (1) inch in size, taken within six (6) months of the date of application.

(5)    The address, city and state, and the approximate dates where and when the applicant practiced a similar business either alone or in conjunction with others, for the three (3) years preceding the date of the application.

(6)    All names used by the applicant during the previous five (5) years in conjunction with a fortune-telling business or practice.

(7)    A non-refundable application fee, to cover the cost of processing the application, in an amount set by Resolution of the City Council.

(b)    Investigation. Within three (3) working days of its filing, the application shall be referred to the Police Services Department for investigation and report. The investigation shall be conducted to verify the facts contained in the application and any supporting data. The investigation shall be completed and a report made in writing to the City Manager within fourteen (14) days after the application is referred to the Police Services Department, unless the applicant requests or consents to an extension of the time period.

(c)    Hearing and Decision. The City Manager shall consider the application and the Police Services Department report at a hearing held not less than seven (7) nor more than fourteen (14) days following receipt of the Police Services Department report described in Section 9.07.110(b). Notice of the time and place of the hearing and a copy of the Police Services Department report shall be given to the applicant personally or by certified mail at least five (5) days prior to the hearing. Any interested party shall be heard at the hearing. The City shall have the burden of proof should the City wish to deny the permit. The decision of the City Manager to approve or deny the permit shall be in writing, and if adverse to the applicant, shall contain findings of fact and a determination of the issues presented. Unless the applicant agrees in writing to an extension of time, the City Manager shall make his or her decision approving or denying the permit within forty-eight (48) hours after completion of the hearing on the application for a permit and shall immediately notify the applicant of his or her action by personal service or certified mail.

(d)    Approval of Permit. The City Manager shall approve the permit unless he or she makes any of the following findings:

(1)    That any of the information contained in the application and supporting data is false;

 

(2)    That the applicant, within one (1) year from the date of the application, has been convicted of any violation of this division;

(3)    That the applicant has not paid an applicable business or registration fee; or

(4)    That the applicant has not agreed to abide by and comply with all conditions of the permit and applicable laws.

(e)    Term of Permit. The term of the permit shall be one (1) year. A renewal application shall be filed between ninety (90) and thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the permit and shall be processed in the same manner as a new application.

(f)    Posting of Fees.

(1)    Each person required to obtain a permit pursuant to Section 9.07.100(a) shall post on his or her business premises as a sign containing the following information:

(A)   The true name of the fortune-telling practitioner;

(B)   Each service provided by the fortune-telling practitioner;

(C)   The fees charged for each service provided by the fortune-telling practitioner;

(D)   The statement, “By law, this business is prohibited from charging or soliciting any fee, payment or remuneration beyond these established rates.”

(2)    The sign required by this section shall be prominently posted in the interior of the business premises at a point near the entry and shall be conspicuously visible to every person seeking the services of the fortune-teller. The sign lettering shall be of uniform size with each letter at least one-half (½) inch in height.

(3)    If the fortune-telling service is provided at a location other than the fortune-teller’s permanent place of business, the fortune-teller shall provide the information required by this section on eight and one-half (8½) by eleven (11) inch paper in legible print or type. The paper shall also include the name and permanent address of the person(s) providing the fortune-telling services. A true, correct and complete copy of such paper shall be given to each client prior to providing any fortune-telling services.

(4)    No person shall charge any fee, payment, remuneration, or item of value for fortune-telling services in excess of the fees set forth on the sign or paper required by this Section.

(g)    Receipts. Prior to the acceptance of any money or item of value from a client, other than the acceptance of a gratuitous tip given voluntarily by the client, the fortune-teller shall issue a written receipt to the client, clearly showing:

(1)    The date;

(2)    The name of the client;

(3)    The amount of money received or specific description of item of value received; and

(4)    The purpose for which the money or item of value was received.

(h)    Client’s Record of Consultation. No person engaging in fortune-telling services shall prohibit a client from making an audio recording or taking written notes of the information conveyed by the fortune-teller.

(i)     Revocation of Permit. The City Manager shall, at all times, have the power to revoke any permit granted hereunder should the City Manager determine:

(1)    That the permittee has violated any provision of this division; or

(2)    That any information contained in the permit application is false; or

(3)    That the issuance of the permit was based upon fraud, mistake or any misleading or untrue statements.

        Should the City Manager have reason to believe that grounds for revocation exist, the City Manager shall notify the permittee, by registered mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the permittee at the address provided in the application and stated on the permit. Said notice shall set forth the date, time and location of a hearing to be held on the matter. Said hearing shall be held within twenty (20) days after said notice is mailed.

        The City Manager shall conduct a revocation hearing, at the time and place specified, to determine whether the permit shall be revoked. All interested persons shall be heard at the hearing. The burden of proof for revocation shall be on the City.

        Unless the permittee agrees in writing to an extension of time, the City Manager shall make his or her decision regarding the revocation within forty-eight (48) hours after completion of the hearing, and shall cause written notice of said decision to be sent to the permittee by registered mail, return receipt requested within twenty-four hours after said decision is made. If the permit is revoked, the notice shall contain findings supporting the decision. An appeal of the City Manager’s decision may be taken pursuant to Section 9.61.110.

(j)     Exception—Entertainment. The provisions of this division shall not apply to any person engaged solely in the business of entertaining the public by demonstrations of fortune-telling at public places and in the presence of and within the hearing of all other persons in attendance, and at which no questions are answered as part of such entertainment except in a manner to permit all persons present at such public place to hear such answers.

(k)    Exception—Religious Practice. The provisions of this division shall not be construed to include, prohibit or interfere with the exercise of any religious or spiritual function of any priest, minister, rector, or an accredited representative of any bona fide church or religion where such priest, minister, rector, or accredited representative holds a certificate of credit, commission or ordination under the laws of any state or territory or the United States of America or any voluntary religious association, and who fully conforms to the rites and practices prescribed by the supreme conference, assembly, convention, convocation, association synod of the system or faith with which they are affiliated, provided, however, that any church or religions organization which is organized for the primary purpose of conferring certificates of commission, credit or ordination for a price and not primarily for the purpose of teaching and practicing a religious doctrine or belief, is not deemed to be a bona fide church or religious organization.

(l)     Penalties. Any person violating or failing to comply with any provision of this Section shall be guilty of an infraction, and subject to punishment as set forth in the Municipal Code.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-21, 12/13/94)

 

9.07.110 Recycling Facilities.
(a)    No person shall establish or operate a recycling facility within the City of Dana Point without first obtaining the approval or permit required by this Section. Recycling facilities permitted by this Section shall comply with all applicable criteria and standards as follows and any additional conditions which may be established by the Planning Commission:

(1)    Reverse Vending Machines. Reverse vending machines occupying up to fifty (50) square feet of floor area within or directly adjacent to a commercial structure maybe approved by the Director of Community Development when the machines:

(A)   Are established in conjunction with a primary use which is in compliance with the Zoning, Building, Fire and Health Codes of the City and County;

(B)   Are located within thirty (30) feet of the entrance to the primary use, and do not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation;

(C)   Do not occupy parking spaces required by the primary use;

(D)   Do not require additional parking spaces;

(E)   Are not more than eight (8) feet in height;

(F)    Are constructed and maintained with durable waterproof and rustproof material;

(G)   Are clearly marked with operating instructions and the telephone number of a responsible person to call if the machine is out of order;

(H)   Are maintained in a clean, attractive, and litter free condition on a daily basis;

(I)    Are illuminated to ensure comfortable and safe operation;

(J)    Are usable at least as long as the operating hours of the primary use.

(2)    Small Collection Recycling Facilities and Mobile Recycling Units. Small collection facilities and mobile recycling units occupying less than five hundred (500) square feet of floor area may be approved by the Planning Commission pursuant to a Conditional Use Permit when the facilities or units:

(A)   Are established in conjunction with a primary use which is in compliance with the zoning, building, fire and health codes of the City and County;

(B)   Occupy no more than three (3) of the parking spaces required for the primary use, not including spaces required for the periodic removal of containers or materials;

(C)   Do not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation;

(D)   Accept only glass, metals, plastic containers, and paper. Other reusable materials may be permitted if reviewed and deemed appropriate by the Planning Commission;

(E)   Use no power driven equipment other than that required to operate reverse vending machines;

(F)    Are constructed and maintained with durable waterproof and rustproof material;

(G)   Are secure when the site is not attended;

(H)   Are of sufficient capacity to accommodate materials collected and the proposed collection schedule;

(I)    Are maintained in a clean, attractive, and litter free condition on a daily basis;

(J)    Are clearly marked with operating instructions and a telephone number of a responsible person to call if the facility is out of order;

(K)   Require no additional parking spaces;

(L)   Are attended during their hours of operation, which should be as least as long as those of the primary use(s) to which they are appurtenant, and are operated in a manner so as not to disrupt the activities of the primary use(s) or nearby residential properties.

(M)  Such facilities shall only provide recycling services for resident household recyclers. Such facilities shall not provide recycling services and shall not accept deposits from merchant or vendor recycling services.

(3)    Large Collection Recycling Facilities. Large collection recycling facilities covering more than five hundred (500) square feet of floor area or established independent of an existing commercial use may only be permitted by approval of a Conditional Use Permit, pursuant to Chapter 9.65, when the facilities:

(A)   Maintain a three hundred (300) foot distance from property zoned for residential use;

(B)   Are maintained in a clean, attractive, and litter-free condition on a daily basis;

(C)   Provide covers, secure containers for the exterior storage or material;

(D)   Provide one parking space for each five hundred (500) square feet of floor area, plus one space for each employee and one space for each commercial vehicle operated by the facility;

(E)   Are attended during their hours of operation, which shall be limited to the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. daily, and are operated in a manner so as not to disrupt the activities of the primary use(s) to which they are appurtenant or nearby residential properties;

(F)    Operate using only such power-driven processing equipment as may be approved by the Planning Commission.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 9.07.120 Outdoor Display, Sales or Storage.
        The following restrictions shall apply to the outdoor display, sales, or storage of goods and materials in non-residential districts:

(a)    Only goods and materials associated with on-site uses may be stored, sold, or displayed.

(b)    No outdoor display, sales, or storage shall exceed six (6) feet in height except as approved by a Site Development Permit or Temporary Site Development Permit as outlined in Chapters 9.71 and 9.39, respectively.

(c)    Outdoor display, sales, and storage of garden equipment and supplies, and building materials may only be permitted as an accessory use within the side or rear yards of properties zoned for such uses.

(d)    No outdoor display, sales, or storage shall occupy any part of a required parking area or encroach upon the public right-of-way.

(e)    Outdoor display, sales, or storage shall not violate sight visibility area standards of Section 9.05.090 of this Code.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.07.130 Service Stations.
(a)    Public Services. All service stations shall provide the following facilities and services to the public free of charge:

(1)    Restrooms maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.

(2)    Water and air shall be made available 24 hours per day in a convenient, conspicuous and well-lit location. All air hoses shall be equipped with operating and accurately calibrated gauges.

(b)    Facility Design. The site design of any new service station shall be in substantial conformance with the design concepts illustrated below. This requirement shall also apply to the remodeling of any existing service station where more than fifty (50) percent of the floor area of the existing structure is demolished or remodeled.



 

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94; Ord. 94-21, 12/13/94; Ord. 96-10, 8/13/96)

 

9.07.140 Solid Waste Disposal Facilities.
        A solid waste disposal facility may only be permitted by approval of a Conditional Use Permit pursuant to Chapter 9.65. The Conditional Use Permit shall establish appropriate conditions of approval to address the following development standards and operational controls:

(a)    Visual Screening. The facility shall be provided with visual screening, appropriate to the size, location, and orientation of the site, to prevent public view of facility operations.

(b)    Noise. The facility shall not include any operations or machinery that would violate the City Noise Ordinance.

(c)    Odor Control. The facility shall employ whatever means necessary to eliminate and contain odors on site.

(d)    Buffer Areas. Buffer areas to provide sufficient separation between the facility and adjacent uses. The buffer area shall include solid walls or fencing and landscaping.

(e)    Hours of Operation. The hours of operation of the facility shall be limited so as not to disturb adjacent uses. In no case may the facility be operated during the hours between 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 9.07.150 Trash and Recycling Storage Areas.
(a)    Purpose.

(1)    The California Solid Waste Reuse and Recycling Access Act (Act) was adopted to meet the urgent need for state and local agencies to address access to solid waste for source reduction, recycling, and composting activities. In accordance with the California Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989 (AB 939), the City of Dana Point must divert fifty (50) percent of all solid waste by January 1, 2000, through source reduction, recycling, and composting activities. As such, diverting fifty (50) percent of all solid waste will require the participation of residential, commercial, industrial, and public sectors.

(2)    The lack of adequate areas for collecting and loading recyclable materials that are compatible with surrounding land uses is a significant impediment to diverting solid waste and constitutes an urgent need for the City to address access to solid waste for source reduction, recycling, and composting activities.

        This Section has been developed to meet that need and comply with Public Resources Code Section 42911. This Section will fulfill the requirements of State Law, while being tailored to address issues specific to the City of Dana Point.

(b)    Definitions. The following definitions shall apply to the language contained in this Section:

(1)    “Development project” means any of the following:

(A)   A project for which a building permit is required for a commercial, office, industrial, institutional, or residential building, where solid waste is collected and loaded. At a minimum, this includes all new development projects, and any single alternation of an existing development project requiring a building permit.

(B)   Any new public facility where solid waste is collected and loaded and any improvements for areas of a public facility used for collecting and loading solid waste.

(2)    “Recycling Area” or “Area for Recycling” means space allocated for collecting and loading of recyclable materials.

(c)    General Requirements.

(1)    Any new development project for which an application for a building permit is submitted on or after the effective date of this Section shall include adequate, accessible, and convenient areas for collecting and loading recyclable materials. A plan shall be submitted to the Director of Community Development that shows the location, materials, and size of such facilities. Such plan shall be approved prior to issuance of grading or building permits.

(2)    Any improvements for areas of a public facility used for collecting and loading solid waste shall include adequate, accessible, and convenient areas for collecting and loading recyclable materials.

(3)    Any existing project for which an application for a building permit is submitted on or after the effective date of this Section for modifications that meet one or both of the conditions below shall include adequate, accessible and convenient areas for collecting and loading recyclable materials according to the size and design standards as defined in subsection (d).

(A)   A single alteration which is subsequently performed that adds thirty (30) percent or more to the existing floor area of the development project; or

(B)   Multiple alterations which are conducted within a twelve (12) month period which collectively add thirty (30) percent or more to the existing floor area of the development project.

(d)    Size and Design Standards. Facilities for recycling shall be designed in accordance with the following standards.

(1)    Size Standards. Areas for recycling shall be adequate in capacity, number, and distribution to serve the uses and development where the project occurs. Refer to the City’s Recycling Guidelines for the recommended sizes for recycling facilities.

(2)    Design Standards.

(A)   Bin-type trash, recyclable and green waste storage areas shall be screened with an enclosure.

(B)   The design and construction of recycling areas shall not prevent security of any recyclable materials placed therein.

(C)   Recycling containers or facilities shall provide protection against weather or other conditions which might render the collected materials unmarketable.

(D)   Bin-type trash, recycling and green waste storage facilities shall have the ability to be accessed at all times by collection vehicles and personnel. Minimum clearance required by the collection methods and vehicles utilized by the hauler shall be utilized.

(E)   Bin-type trash, recycling and green waste storage facilities shall have a maximum one (1) square foot sign, clearly identifying all recycling and solid waste collection and loading areas and the materials accepted therein. The sign shall be posted adjacent to all points of access to the recycling areas.

(F)    Developments and transportation corridors adjacent to recycling areas shall be adequately protected from any adverse impacts.

(G)   The property owner shall be responsible for the upkeep and care of the trash, recyclable and green waste storage areas, gates, and enclosures so that it shall remain in a clean and working condition.

(H)   Each trash, recycling and green waste container shall be covered. Container lids may act as suitable cover, provided that they remain fully closed.

(3)    Recycling Guidelines. Applicants should refer to the City’s Recycling Guidelines for assistance in designing facilities for recycling.

(e)    Location.

(1)    The exterior trash, recycling and green waste storage area may be located on the outside or the exterior of a structure/building, or in a designated interior area with access such as a garage, or in rear yards and interior side yards. Except as noted in subsection (4), Exceptions to Location Standards below, the exterior storage area shall not be located in any required front yard setback, un-fenced street side yard, required parking, open space or landscaped areas. The trash, recycling and green waste storage containers shall not be visible from any public right-of-way.

(2)    Trash, recycling and green waste areas shall not be located in any area required by the Municipal Code to be constructed and/or maintained as unencumbered, according to fire and other applicable building and/or public safety laws.

(3)    Within multiple residential developments there shall be a trash, recycling and green waste storage area located no greater than two hundred fifty (250) feet from each living unit.

(4)    Exceptions to Location Standards. The primary goal of this Section is to require and/or encourage a well designed and attractive trash, recycling and green waste collection facility at each property while minimizing undue hardships for the property owner(s). Hardships are recognized based upon the unique features inherent to each existing developed property that may interfere with the goal of siting the recyclable storage area. Trash, recycling and green waste storage areas proposed in areas other than those permitted by subsections (1) through (3) above, may be approved if properly designed. Also, the screening of trash containers, when properly designed, may exceed the height limitations in Section 9.05.120. Property owners may submit an application for approval of a minor Conditional Use Permit in order to vary from locational standards or the height of screening for the trash containers. Applications for such proposals are required to include a letter and site plan explaining the locational hardship, and payment of applicable fees.

        The Director of Community Development may approve the minor Conditional Use Permit pursuant to Chapter 9.65. In approving a minor Conditional Use Permit for altering the location standards or screening height for a trash storage area, the Director of Community Development must make the following findings:

(A)   That the nature, condition, and development of adjacent uses, buildings, and structures have been considered, and the proposal will not adversely affect or be materially detrimental to the adjacent uses, buildings, or structures.

(B)   That this request is made on the basis of a hardship condition and not as a matter of convenience.

(C)   That trash, recycling and green waste containers shall be aesthetically pleasing and adequately screened so as not to be seen from the public right-of-way.

(f)    Amortization Of Non-Conforming Development.

(1)    Unless an extension is granted by the City in accordance with subsection (f)(2) below, within ninety (90) days for residential land uses and one (1) year for non-residential land uses, following the date of adoption of this Section, whether or not existing developed properties obtain a building or grading permit for improvements as noted in subsection (c), all existing developed properties shall provide for trash, recycling and green waste storage areas in accordance with the requirements of this Section.

(2)    Time Extension. Prior to the expiration of the ninety (90) day or one (1) year period, a written request may be made to the Community Development Department for an extension in accordance with the following:

(A)   Time Period. The Planning Commission may approve a time extension for a period deemed appropriate, up to one (1) year.

(B)   Application and Fee. An application shall be submitted on a form provided by the Director of Community Development and accompanied by a fee set by a Resolution of the City Council. The application shall include a letter from the property owner indicating why the amortization period would create a hardship.

(C)   Findings. The Planning Commission shall make the following finding in approving an extension of time for the amortization period:

1.     That due to special circumstances, immediate installation will result in hardship for the applicant.

(g)    Inconsistent Provisions. This Section shall supersede any inconsistent provisions of the Dana Point Municipal Code and any other ordinance or regulation to the extent that such regulation is less restrictive than the provisions hereof. This Section shall not affect the requirements of any ordinance or regulation to the extent that such regulation is more restrictive than the provisions of this Section.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94)

 

9.07.160 Single Room Occupancy.
        All single room occupancy (SRO) projects shall comply with the following provisions:

(a)    General Provisions.

(1)    A Conditional Use Permit shall be required for all SRO projects.

(2)    All units in a SRO project shall be for rent only.

(3)    The rates for the rental of units in a SRO project shall be restricted so that fifty (50) percent of the units in the project are affordable to persons of very low income and

        thirty (30) percent of the units are affordable to persons of low income, as defined under Affordable Housing. Twenty (20) percent of the units may be unrestricted.

(4)    Affordable units must be rented on a monthly basis. Unrestricted units can be rented on a daily, weekly or monthly basis.

(5)    A transient occupancy tax of five (5) percent shall be charged on all stays of less than thirty-one (31) days and transmitted to the City of Dana Point.

(b)    Unit Requirements.

(1)    Unit Size. Units in a SRO project shall comply with the following size requirements:

 

 

Minimum Size

Maximum Size

One-person unit

150 sf

225 sf

Two-person unit

250 sf

350 sf

 

The average size of all units within a SRO project may not exceed three hundred (300) square feet.

(2)    Maximum Occupancy. Units of two hundred twenty-five (225) square feet or less may not be occupied by more than one person. No more than two persons shall occupy any unit which is greater than two hundred fifty (250) square feet.

(3)    Furnishings. Each unit within a SRO project shall be furnished with a bed, chair, table, and telephone.

(4)    Facilities. Full or partial kitchens, bathrooms and laundry facilities must be provided in every SRO project. Such facilities may be enclosed within each unit or provided in a common area. Laundry facilities may be deleted if the project is located within one thousand (1,000) feet of an existing laundromat.

(c)    Project Requirements.

(1)    Number of Units. All proposed SRO projects shall contain at least ten (10) SRO units, not including the required on-site manager’s unit.

(2)    Manager’s Unit. All SRO projects shall include a dwelling unit for an on-site manager. Said unit shall be at least five hundred (500) square feet but shall not exceed eight hundred (800) square feet. Said unit shall be located on the ground floor of the project and shall be adjacent to the lobby of the project.

(3)    Entryway/Lobby Design. All SRO projects shall have one controlled entryway into a main lobby area. The lobby area shall include a front desk with facilities for a receptionist to monitor activity in the lobby. The lobby shall include mailboxes located either behind the front desk or in the common area. Other facilities which should be considered for areas adjacent to the lobby are storage facilities, laundry facilities and vending machines. The lobby area shall be monitored by video cameras.

(4)    Parking. Each SRO project shall provide three parking stalls plus .5 parking stalls for every one-person unit and .8 parking stalls for every two-person unit. In addition, each SRO project shall provide .4 secure bicycle stalls for each unit excluding the on-site manager’s unit.

(5)    Common Areas. Each SRO project shall provide a minimum of four hundred (400) square feet of common recreational space. An additional fifty (50) square feet of common recreational space shall be required for each SRO unit over ten (10). The required space may be provided in multiple areas, however no area less than two hundred (200) square feet may be counted toward this requirement.

(6)    Building Code Compliance. All SRO projects shall comply with the most recently adopted City Building, Plumbing, Mechanical, Electrical, Fire and Housing Codes.

(d)    Management Plan.

(1)    A management plan shall be submitted for review and approval along with the submittal for the Conditional Use Permit. The plan shall address all management and operations policies, security programs, emergency procedures, rental procedures, resident rules, proposed rental rates and maintenance programs. The plan shall also include a provision for an annual report to be submitted to the City detailing the operations of the facility.

(2)    The management plan shall include a provision for an on-site, twenty-four (24) hour manager.

(3)    The management plan shall include a security plan which includes a comprehensive video monitoring system, secured entrances and exits, and should include other regulations which would serve to promote the safety of the project tenants.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94)

 

9.07.170 Demolition of Structures.
        (Pending)

 

9.07.180 Timeshare Development and Operation Standards.
        (Pending)

 

9.07.190 Keeping of Animals in Residential Districts.
        The keeping of animals in residential districts shall be subject to the following provisions:

(a)    Number of Animals. The keeping of three (3) or fewer dogs, cats, or other small animals over the age of four (4) months is permitted in all residential districts. The keeping of between four (4) and six (6) domesticated animals over the age of four (4) months shall be in compliance with the applicable provisions of Section 10.03.190 of the Municipal Code. The use agreement shall serve as an official acknowledgement by the permit applicant of the provisions of this Section.

(b)    Domesticated Livestock. The keeping of up to two (2) domesticated livestock, as defined in Section 9.75.120, is permitted in all residential districts subject to the execution of a use agreement with the City of Dana Point and the issuance of an animal permit by the Orange County Health Care Agency. The use agreement shall serve as an official acknowledgement by the permit applicant of the provisions of this Section. Approval of the permit shall be subject to the following findings as determined by the Director of Community Development:

 

(1)    That the domesticated livestock animal(s) at the proposed location will not jeopardize, endanger, or otherwise constitute a menace to the public health or safety; and

(2)    That the proposed site is adequate in size and shape to accommodate the number and type of animal(s) for which the permit is requested without harm to the animal(s) or material detriment to the use, enjoyment, or valuation of the property of other persons located in the vicinity of the site.

(3)    That there shall be no more than one (1) animal on lots less than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet in size and that a maximum of two (2) animals may be permitted on lots over fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet in size.

(4)    That lots containing domesticated livestock shall have a solid, impenetrable fence or wall in accordance with the provisions of Section 9.05.120.

(5)    That domesticated livestock shall be spayed or neutered and continuously registered with an applicable, nationally recognized animal association or organization.

(c)    Location. Structures for the keeping of animals overnight (i.e. pens, cages, aviaries, corrals, stables, etc.) excepting dog houses or rabbit hutches, other than inside the subject residence are not permitted:

(1)    Within twenty-five (25) feet of any adjoining existing residential structure, or any area where a residential structure may be legally located if no residential structure exists; or

(2)    Within any required front yard setback area.

(d)    Prohibited Uses. The following animal related uses are prohibited in residential districts:

(1)    The keeping of livestock (as defined in Section 9.75.120), poultry or bees;

(2)    The keeping of more than six (6) animals over the age of four (4) months;

(3)    Kennels, unless approved in accordance with a use agreement and animal permit pursuant to subsection (a) above;

(4)    Grooming parlors; or

(5)    Commercial breeding and sales of animals.

(Added by Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94; amended by Ord. 94-21, 12/13/94; Ord. 96-10, 8/13/96)

 

9.07.200 Tattoo Parlors.
        The operation of any tattooing establishment, as defined in Section 9.75.270, within the City of Dana Point shall be in compliance with the applicable provisions of Chapter 6 of the Dana Point Municipal Code. Tattoo parlors may only be permitted subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 9.65. (Added by Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94; amended by Ord. 96-10, 8/13/96; Ord. 96-13, 11/26/96)

 

9.07.210 Second Dwelling Units or Granny Flats.
(a)    Purpose and Intent. This Section provides standards and procedures for the development of second dwelling units. These standards are established so that second dwelling units may be evaluated under conditions that will assure their compatibility and enhancement to the site and surrounding land uses, and provide a safe, desirable and affordable living environment.

(b)    Development Standards. Where a single family dwelling unit exists on a lot zoned for such purposes, the property owner may establish a second dwelling unit from the same lot, provided it be occupied by an individual adult or two senior adults and may be attached to or detached from the primary single family unit, but may not be sold as a separate dwelling unit. The following standards shall be met and shall not be modified or varied from:

(1)    The second dwelling unit shall not exceed thirty (30) percent of the living area of the primary residence when attached or one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet when detached;

(2)    Second dwelling units whether attached or detached shall not encroach into any setback area required for the primary structure;

(3)    An additional parking stall, in accordance with the standards described in Chapter 9.35, shall be provided for the second dwelling unit;

(4)    The second dwelling unit shall be compatible in height, setback and architectural design with the primary structure and the surrounding land uses;

(5)    Second dwelling units must be affordable to persons of low and moderate income, and remain affordable for the life of the project. The life of the project shall be determined as the length of time the second dwelling unit is occupied; and

(6)    Each second dwelling unit shall have adequate storage and private open space.

(c)    Coastal Development Permit. If the second unit requires a Coastal Development Permit it shall be processed in accordance with Chapter 9.69, with the exception of the required public hearing. Per Government Code Section 65852.2, cities may not use a discretionary process for approving a second unit. The Coastal Development Permit will be processed ministerially. Public noticing and a Notice of Final Action will be filed in accordance with the Coastal Development Permit process.

(d)    The ministerial decision to approve or deny a request for a second unit may be appealed to the Planning Commission in accordance with Section 9.61.110.

(Added by Ord. 94-21, 12/13/94; amended by Ord. 96-10, 8/13/96; Ord. 03-07, 4/9/03)

 

9.07.220 Mobilehomes.
(a)    Purpose and Intent. This Section provides standards and procedures for the development and expansion of mobilehome parks and individual mobilehomes on individual lots in areas zoned for single family residential development. The following regulations shall apply to all new mobilehomes and mobilehome developments, and to the modification of existing mobilehomes or mobilehome developments. These regulations are established so that mobilehome development may be evaluated under conditions that will ensure their compatibility with other surrounding permitted uses, create a safe and desirable living environment for mobilehome residences, and address land use compatibility.

(b)    Mobilehome Parks.

(1)    Conditional Use Permit Required. The development of a new mobilehome park or the modification or expansion of an existing mobilehome park requires the approval of a Conditional Use Permit and Site Development Permit by the Planning Commission as described in Chapters 9.65 and 9.71.

(2)    Development Standards. The general mobilehome park development standards are described in Chapter 9.09. In addition to those general standards, the following design criteria apply to mobilehome parks.

(A)   Circulation. Vehicular and pedestrian circulation ways shall be separate. Adequate sight distance and warning information shall be maintained wherever such circulation ways intersect.

(B)   Trash and Recycling Storage. Where individual trash and recycling pick-up is not provided, common trash and recycling storage area(s) shall be provided within a totally walled and roofed structure with a roof not exceeding twelve (12) feet in height. The enclosure or enclosures shall be located within two hundred (200) feet of all mobilehomes within the park.

(C)   Perimeter Landscaping and Walls. A perimeter wall of six (6) feet in height shall be provided along the perimeter of the mobilehome park. A minimum of five (5) feet of landscaped area shall be provided along each side of the required perimeter wall when such wall is adjacent to an existing or proposed public or private street. A minimum ten (10) foot landscape area shall be provided between the perimeter wall and mobilehomes where the perimeter wall is not adjacent to an existing or proposed public or private street.

(c)    Individual Manufactured Homes on Individual Lots. In compliance with California Government Code Sections 65852.3, et seq., individual manufactured home installation in individual lots zoned for single family residential development shall comply with the following standards in addition to those of the base zoning district. For purposes of this Section, “manufactured home” shall mean mobilehome or modular home.

(1)    Each manufactured home installation shall at a minimum, comply with the site development standards for the applicable RSF-2, -3, -4, -7, - 8, -12, -14, or -22 zoning districts and for the RD-14 and RMF-7, -14, -22, -30 zoning districts. Manufactured homes shall also adhere to the development standards that are applicable to a conventional single-family dwelling. These are the only zoning districts in which individual manufactured homes may be placed on individual lots.

(2)    Each manufactured home shall be placed on a foundation system consisting of a solid concrete or masonry wall under the outside perimeter of the manufactured home; or piers or other open construction meeting the requirements of the currently effective City Building Code, combined with skirting placed around the outside of the manufactured home in such a manner that the exterior siding appears to start at ground level.

(3)    The exterior siding of the manufactured home shall be similar in appearance to siding material customarily used in conventionally-built single family dwellings. Matte-finish wood, vinyl or aluminum siding which are typically used in the construction of single family dwellings are permitted siding materials. High-gloss finishes and peeling, dented or damaged siding materials are not permitted.

(4)    Roof pitch shall be similar to roofs of the same type and material on single family dwellings in the neighborhood. Flat roofs are only permitted if they are the predominant roof pitch in the neighborhood. Otherwise, a minimum roof pitch of 3:12 is required.

(5)    Roofing material shall be consistent in color and texture with the roofs of existing single family dwellings in the neighborhood. Roofs made of corrugated metal, or rolled aluminum or fiberglass materials are not permitted.

(6)    Roofs shall have an eave overhang of at least sixteen (16) inches, measured perpendicularly from the vertical side of the manufactured home.

(7)    The exterior siding, roof materials and roof pitch of the garage shall be the same as the manufactured home siding, roof materials and roof pitch, and consistent with the siding, roof materials and roof pitch of existing single family dwellings in the neighborhood.

(8)    Manufactured homes which are more than ten (10) years old are not permitted on single family residential lots. Proof of the date of manufacture of the manufactured home shall be required at the time of building plan check submittal.

(9)    Manufactured homes are not permitted on single family residential lots which are located within the immediate vicinity of any place, building, structure or other object having special character or special historical interest or value which is listed on the National Register of Historic places, pursuant to California Government Code Section 37361.

(10)  The permanent placement of a manufactured home on a single family lot shall comply with all required procedures from the California Health and Safety Code Section 18551.

(Added by Ord. 94-21, 12/13/94; amended by Ord. 96-10, 8/13/96; Ord. 00-07, 10/24/00)

 

9.07.230 Massage Establishments.
        The establishment and operation of any massage establishment, as defined in Section 9.75.270, within the City of Dana Point shall be in compliance with the applicable provisions of Chapter 5.20 of the Dana Point Municipal Code. (Added by Ord. 96-10, 8/13/96)

 

9.07.240 Drive Through Uses.
(a)    Purpose and Intent. This section provides standards and procedures for the development of non-restaurant drive through uses. These standards are established so that proposed drive through uses may be designed in such a manner to assure their compatibility and enhancement to the site and surrounding land uses, and to provide a safe and desirable living environment.

(b)    Use Restrictions.

(1)    Drive through uses shall only be permitted to sites that are developed entirely with commercial uses.

(2)    Kiosks shall be prohibited.

(c)    Development Standards.

(1)    All forms of speaker amplification shall be prohibited.

(2)    The hours of operation shall be limited from 7 a.m. to 10 p.m.

(3)    On site parking.

(A)   Drive Through uses shall comply with the parking standards of Section 9.35.080(e) for “General Retail”.

(B)   The total amount of required off-street parking may be reduced if justified by a parking demand study and an alternative parking design is submitted for review and approval by the Planning Commission to accommodate the total required off-street parking assuming the entire building contains retail uses.

(4)    The drive through use shall be designed to minimize conflicts with on-site circulation and to preclude impacts to the public roadways. The on-site circulation shall be reviewed and approved by the Traffic Engineering Department.

(5)    The drive through aisles shall be properly screened with landscaping to help minimize the potential visual impact.

(Added by Ord. 99-07, 8/10/99)

 

9.07.250 Historic Resources.
(a)    Purpose and Intent.

(1)    To provide a voluntary program that aides property owners that wish to preserve historic properties within the community by providing fiscal benefits or zoning and code incentives to preserve their properties.

(b)    Definitions. The following definitions shall apply to the language contained in this Section:

(1)    “Alteration” means any change or modification, through public or private action, to the character-defining or significant exterior physical features of properties affected by this chapter. Such changes may be changes to or modification of structure, architectural details, or visual characteristics, grading, surface paving, the addition of new structures, and the placement or removal of any significant objects such as signs, plaques, light fixtures, street furniture, walls, fences, steps, plantings, and landscape accessories affecting the significant visual and/or historical qualities of the property.

(2)    “Demolition” means any act or process that destroys in part or in whole and individual historic resource or an historic resource or other structure within an historic district.

(3)    “Designated Historic Resource” means a parcel or part thereof on which an historic resource is or has been situated, and any abutting parcel or part thereof constituting part of the premises on which the historic resource is situated, and which has been designated an historic resource in the Dana Point Historical Resource Register.

(4)    “Historic Resource” means improvements, buildings, structures, signs, or other objects of scientific, aesthetic, educational, cultural, architectural, or historical significance to the owner citizens of the City and the State of California, the Southern California region, or the nation which may be eligible for local designation for historic preservation by the City pursuant to the provisions of this Section. A historical resource is either included in the Inventory or may be added in accordance with Section 9.07.250(f)(2).

(5)    “Improvement” means any building, structure, place, fence, gate, landscaping, tree, wall, parking facility, work of art, or other object constituting a physical feature of real property, or any part of such feature.

(6)    “Inventory” refers to the 1997 City of Dana Point Historic Resources Inventory which identifies resources in the City which may be considered historical. Owners of property which were included in the Inventory are eligible to apply to be included on the City’s Historic Resources Register.

(7)    “Ordinary Maintenance and Repair” means any work, for which a building permit is not required by law, where the purpose and effect of such work is to correct any deterioration of or damage to a structure or any part thereof and to restore the same to its condition prior to the occurrence of such deterioration or damage.

(8)    “Preservation” means the identification, study, protection, restoration, or acquisition of historic resources.

(9)    “Register” refers to the City of Dana Point Historic Resource Register. Inclusion on the Register results from submittal of an application to the Community Development Department by the property owner, with exception of the two structures in the City which are eligible for listing on the National Register of Historic Places.

(10)  “Secretary of the Interior Standards for Rehabilitation” means the guidelines prepared by the National Park Service for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings and the Standards for Historic Preservation Projects prepared by the National Park Service with Guidelines for Applying the Standards.

(11)  “Significant Feature” means the natural or man-made elements embodying style or type of historic resource, design, or general arrangement and components of an improvement, including but not limited to, the kind, color, and texture of the building materials, and the type and style of all windows, doors, lights, signs, and other fixtures appurtenant to such improvement.

(c)    City of Dana Point Historic Architectural Resources Inventory.

(1)    The 1997 City of Dana Point Historic Architectural Resources Inventory (Inventory) identifies resources in the City which may be considered historical. The Inventory was developed based on the National Register of Historic Places Guidelines for determining historical resources. Meeting criteria “j” and at least two of other criteria were utilized to determine the significance of a property. However, in most instances, at least four criteria applied. The criteria utilized in developing the Inventory is detailed below:

(A)   Buildings, structures, or places that are important key focal or pivotal points in the visual quality or character of an area, neighborhood, or survey district.

(B)   Structures that help retain the characteristics of the town that was 50 years ago.

(C)   Structures that contribute to the unique urban quality of a downtown.

(D)   Structures contributing to the architectural continuity of the street.

(E)   Structures that are identified with a person or person who significantly contributed to the culture and/or development of the city, state, or nation.

(F)    Structures that represent an architectural type or period and/or represent the design work of known architects, draftsmen, or builders whose efforts have significantly influenced the heritage of the city, state, or nation.

(G)   Structures that illustrate the development of California locally and regionally.

(H)   Buildings retaining the original integrity of and/or illustrating a given period.

(I)    Structures unique in design or detail, such as, but not limited to, materials, windows, landscaping, plaster finishes, and architectural innovation.

(J)    Structures that are at least 50 years old or properties that have achieved significance within the past 50 years if they are of exceptional importance.

(2)    The Inventory identified two (2) structures which may be eligible for listing on the National Register of Historic Places. As such, this section shall provide additional protection to these structures. The two structures are the Dolph Mansion located at 34000 Capistrano by the Sea and a single-family Palisades home located at 35101 Camino Capistrano.

(3)    The Inventory also identified sixty-one (61) properties which have potential to be considered historically significant and included on the City of Dana Point Historic Resources Register (Register).

(4)    Resources are not subject to any provisions of this Section as result of being included in the Inventory. The intent of the Inventory is only to identify resources which are eligible for inclusion in the City’s Register. Resources are included in the Register only upon request of the property owner, with exception of the two structures which may be eligible to be listed on the National Register of Historic Places.

(5)    Properties identified in the Inventory shall not be prejudiced in any form as result of being included in the Inventory.

(d)    Dana Point Historic Resources Register.

(1)    A structure or resource becomes locally designated and included in the Dana Point Historic Resources Register only as result of the property owner submitting a Historical Preservation Application to the Community Development Department and approved by the Historic Preservation Commission. Procedures for applying for designation are defined in Section 9.07.250(f).

(2)    The two structures eligible for listing in the National Register of Historic Places shall be designated by the City as historically significant and, as such, included in the local Register.

(3)    Requests to delete a designated historic resource from the Register shall be submitted in writing to the Community Development Director who shall remove the property from the Register. The Community Development Director shall report the removal of resources from the Register to the Commission, when deemed necessary by the Director.  See Section 9.07.250(g) for additional details related to removing structures from the Register.

(4)    Requests to delete the two structures eligible for listing in the National Register of Historical Places for the purpose shall be subject review of the Historic Preservation Commission.

(5)    The Community Development Director shall periodically propose and process for deletion from the Dana Point Register those designated historic resources which have been lawfully removed, demolished or disturbed to such an extent that, in the Community Development Director’s opinion, they no longer qualify for placement on the Register.

(6)    The Register shall be maintained by the Community Development Director or his/her designee.

(7)    Owners which place their historical resource in the Register are eligible for incentives detailed in Section 9.07.250(i).

(e)    Historic Preservation Commission.

(1)    There is hereby established that the members of the City of Dana Point Planning Commission shall act as the Historic Preservation Commission, hereinafter referred to as the “Commission”.

(2)    A quorum of the Commission shall be defined as three voting members.

(3)    Powers and Duties. The Commission shall have the following powers and duties:

(A)   Adopt procedural rules for the conduct of its business in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

(B)   Recommend in accordance with the criteria set forth in section (e) the designation of historic resources including historic districts, landmark sites, and landmarks within the City including all information required for each designation.

(C)   Maintain a local register of historic resources consistent with the National Register of Historic Places criteria including historic districts, landmark sites, and landmarks within the City including all information required for each designation.

(D)   Adopt prescriptive standards to be used by the Commission in reviewing applications for permits to construct, change, alter, modify, remodel, remove, or significantly affect any historic resource.

(E)   Make recommendations to the City Council on the use of various federal, state, local, or private funding sources and mechanisms, such as the Mills Act and State Historic Building Code, available to promote historic resource preservation in the City.

(F)    Approve or disapprove, in whole or in part, or approve with conditions, applications for permits pursuant to Section 9.07.250(h).

(G)   Review all applications for permits, environmental assessments, environmental impact reports, environmental impact statements, and other similar documents, as set forth in this Section, pertaining to designated and potential historic resources. The Community Development Department shall forward such documents to the Commission for review as appropriate.

(H)   Review and comment on actions and environmental documentation associated with City-sponsored actions, programs, capital improvements, or activities as they relate to designated and potential historic resources.

(I)    Cooperate with local, county, state, and federal governments in the pursuit of the objectives of historic resource preservation.

(J)    Provide opportunity for direct public participation in historic resource preservation responsibilities. Commission meetings shall be open to the public with published agenda and minutes in accordance with the California Open Meeting Act. The published agenda shall be mailed in advance of meetings to individuals and citizen organizations interested in the Commission’s activities.

(K)   Confer recognition upon the owners of landmarks or property or structures within historic districts by means of certificates, plaques, or markers, and from time to time issue commendations to owners of historic resources who have rehabilitated their property in an exemplary manner.

(L)   Undertake any other action or activity necessary or appropriate to the implementation of its powers or duties to fulfill the objectives of historic resource preservation.

(f)    Historic Resource Designation Procedures.

(1)    Property owners of resources identified in the 1997 City of Dana Point Historic Architectural Resources Inventory may request placement on the City of Dana Point Historic Resources Register in the following manner:

(A)   Owner(s) of resources included in the City’s Inventory may request inclusion in the Register by submitting a Historical Resource Application to the Community Development Department.

(B)   Owner(s) of structures which were identified in the Inventory as being potentially eligible for the National Register of Historic Places are, upon adoption of this ordinance, considered locally significant and are included in the City’s Register. National designation may also be requested for these structures.

(C)   Historic Resource Applications shall be made to the Community Development Director or his/her designee, who shall within 30 days of receipt of a completed application, prepare and make recommendations on the contents of the contract for consideration by the Historic Preservation Commission. No fees are required to process the application.

(D)   The Commission shall determine at a regular public meeting based on the documentation provided as to whether the nomination application is appropriate for and shall by motion approve the application in whole or in part, or shall by motion disapprove it in its entirety.

(E)   The Director, Planning Commission or City Council may also initiate such proceedings on their own motion for resources on public property.

(2)    Property owners not identified in the Inventory, upon demonstrating achievement of criteria “j” and two other criteria listed in Section 9.07.250(c)(1), may submit a Historical Resource Application requesting inclusion in the Register.

(g)    Deletion From Dana Point Historic Resources Register.

(1)    The procedure for deletion of a designated historic resource from the Dana Point Register shall be as follows:

(A)   The owner(s) of a designated historic resource may request deletion of the listed resource from the Dana Point Register.

(B)   Requests to delete a designated historic resource from the Register shall be submitted in writing to the Community Development Director who shall remove the property from the Register. The Community Development Director shall report the removal of resources from the Register to the Commission, as deemed necessary by the Director.

(C)   Requests to delete the two structures which are eligible for National designation shall be subject to review by the Historic Preservation Commission. If deletion is requested for the purpose of demolishing the structure, a conditional use permit shall be required. Procedures for applying for a conditional use permit are detailed in Section 9.65 of the City’s Zoning Code.

(D)   The Community Development Director shall periodically propose and process for deletion from the Dana Point Register those designated historic resources which have been lawfully removed, demolished or disturbed to such an extent that, in the Community Development Director’s opinion, they no longer qualify for placement on the Register.

(E)   Requests to delete a designated historic resource that has benefited from any of the incentives identified in Section 9.07.250(i) shall be forwarded to the Commission for review and action, and may be subject to penalties deemed appropriate by the Commission based on the significance of the resource at the time of the proposed deletion.

(F)    The Commission shall not recommend that a resource be removed from the City’s list of designated historic resources unless it is discovered that the information relied on by the Commission and the City Council in making the original designation was erroneous or false, or that circumstances wholly beyond the owner’s control have rendered the resource ineligible for designation based on the criteria listed in Section 9.07.250(e) and it would be unfeasible to restore the resource.

(h)    Exterior Alteration Of Designated Historic Resources.

(1)    Review Process. All applications for a building permit for exterior alteration to any designated historic resource shall be reviewed as follows:

(A)   Community Development Department staff shall review and approve minor exterior alterations. Minor exterior alterations are those alterations which the Community Development Director or his/her designee determines will not adversely affect the exterior architectural characteristics nor the historical or aesthetic value of the historic structure, its site or surroundings including window replacement, routine maintenance, residential additions less than 250 square feet, and the replacement of minor non-historic architectural features with materials and detailing consistent with existing historical features of the structure.

(B)   The Commission shall review and approve applications involving major modifications to any designated historic resource. Major alterations include substantial additions, alterations, and restorations to a designated historic resource.

(2)    Application Process. Requests to conduct exterior alterations to a structure included on the Register shall be subject to a Site Development Permit. Minor alterations shall be reviewed by the Community Development Director while major alterations are to be reviewed by the Commission. The process and timeframe for submitting the Site Development Permit are detailed in Chapter 9.61 of the City’s Zoning Code.

(3)    Standards of Review. In evaluating applications, the review bodies shall consider the architectural style, design, arrangement, texture, materials and color, and any other pertinent factors. The prime concern should be the exterior appearance of the building site. The proposed alterations should not adversely affect the exterior architectural characteristics nor the historical or aesthetic value of the building and its site.

(4)    Appeals. Any action by the Director may be appealed to the Commission. Any action by the Commission may be appealed by any interested party to the City Council. Appeal procedures shall follow those detailed in Chapter 9.61 of the City Zoning Code.

(5)    Structures on Septic Systems. Applicants proposing alterations who are on a septic system and are located within 100-feet of a main sewer line shall include with their application plans for linking the property to the main sewer line. Properties in excess of 100-feet of the main sewer line are exempt from this provision and may continue operating on a septic system provided that the septic system is safe and operable.

(i)     Preservation Incentives.

(1)    The Commission is authorized to develop and implement preservation incentive programs that are consistent with this Chapter. Incentives shall be made available for properties listed on the Register that undergo maintenance or alteration consistent with the Secretary of the Interior Standards for Rehabilitation.

(A)   State Historic Building Code. The Building Official is authorized to use and shall use the California State Historic Building Code (SHBC) for projects involving designated historic resources. The SHBC provides alternative building regulations for the rehabilitation, preservation, restoration, or relocation of structures designated as historic resources. The SHBC shall be used for any designated historic resource in the City’s building permit procedure.

(B)   Fee Waivers. Any permit fees for minor or major exterior modifications to historic resources done in accordance with the Secretary of the Interior Standards for Rehabilitation shall be waived provided that the work is consistent with the historic criteria under which the property was designated an historic resources.

(C)   Development Standard Flexibility.

1.     Parking Standards.

a.     Designated residential structures may add additional floor area and bedrooms without providing additional parking provided that such additions do not exceed more than 50 percent of the original square footage of the structure and that at least two covered parking spaces have been provided on-site. This incentive is not available when second units are proposed.

b.     Designated historic commercial structures with limited off-street parking may be granted a conditional use permit to allow a reduction in parking requirements to a maximum of 50 percent when supported by documentation that demonstrates that the use will not adversely affect parking availability to surrounding properties.

c.     Designated historic commercial structures may add up to 15 percent of the existing floor area, not to exceed 500 square feet, without providing additional parking and without bringing any existing nonconformity into compliance with the current zoning regulations, subject to review and approval by the Commission. The addition must be removed if the historic building is demolished.

d.     The Commission may establish a parking in-lieu fee for the adaptive re-use of designated historic commercial structures that have no or limited off-street parking.

2.     Setbacks.

a.     Additions to designated historic resources shall be allowed to maintain legal non-conforming front, side and rear yard setbacks up to the line of existing encroachment, provided that all setbacks as required by the Uniform Building Code are maintained.

(D)   Mills Act Contracts.

1.     Mills Act contracts granting property tax relief shall be made available by the City of Dana Point only to owners of properties listed in the Dana Point Historic Resources Register, as well as properties located within the City of Dana Point that are listed in the National Register of Historic Places or the California Register of Historical Places. Properties that have been previously listed on the above-mentioned register(s), but that have been removed from the register(s) and are no longer listed, shall not be eligible for a Mills Act contract with the City.

2.     Mills Act contracts shall be made available pursuant to California law. The Community Development Department shall make available appropriate Mills Act application materials. The Mills Act application may be processed with the Historic Resource Application.

3.     Mills Act contract applications shall be made to the Community Development Director or his/her designee, who shall within 30 days of receipt of a completed application, prepare and make recommendations on the contents of the contract for consideration by the City Council. A fee of $40 for the application will be required, to cover all or portions of the costs of the preparation of the contract or an amount set by City Council Resolution may be charged.

4.     The City Council shall, in public hearing, resolve to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the proposed contract. Should the City Council fail to act on the proposed contract within one year of its receipt of the proposal, the proposal shall be deemed denied.

5.     A Mills Act contract application that has failed to be approved by the City Council cannot be resubmitted for one year from the date of City Council action, or where the Council fails to take action, within one year from the date that the application is deemed denied pursuant to (4) above.

(E)   Preservation Easements. Preservation easements on the facades of buildings designated as an historic resource may be acquired by the City or nonprofit group through purchase, donation, or documentation pursuant to California Civil Code 815.

(F)    Official Recognition/Awards. The Commission, on an annual basis, may recognize those projects involving designated historic resources that have demonstrated a high level of commitment to maintaining or restoring the historic integrity of the resource. The Community Development Department may nominate all projects implemented within a calendar year for award consideration by the Commission.

(j)     Duty To Keep In Good Repair.

(1)    The owner, occupant, or other person in actual charge of a designated historic resource or an improvement, building, or structure shall keep in good repair all of the exterior portions of such improvement, building, or structure, all of the interior portions thereof when subject to control as specified in the designating ordinance or permit, and all interior portions thereof whose maintenance is necessary to prevent deterioration and decay of any exterior architectural feature.

(2)    Accordance with the Secretary of the Interior Standards for Rehabilitation.

(3)    It shall be the duty of the Community Development Director to enforce this Section.

(k)    Ordinary Maintenance And Repair.

(1)    Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural feature in or on any property covered by this Section that does not involve a change in design, material, or external appearance thereof, nor does this ordinance prevent the construction, reconstruction, alteration, restoration, demolition, or removal of any such architectural feature when the Community Development Director certifies to the Commission that such action is required for the public safety due to an unsafe or dangerous condition which cannot be rectified through the use of the California State Historic Building Code and when such architectural feature can be replaced according to the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards.

(l)     Enforcement And Penalties.

(1)    Any person who violates a requirement of this Section or fails to comply with a condition of approval of any certificate or permit issued under this Section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to provisions of Section 1.01.200 of the Dana Point Municipal Code.

(2)    Any person who constructs, alters, removes, or demolishes a designated historic resource in violation of this Section shall be required to restore the building, object, site, or structure to its appearance or setting prior to the violation. Any action to enforce this provision may be brought by the City of Dana Point or any other interested party. This civil remedy shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, any criminal prosecution and penalty and other remedy provided by law.

(Added by Ord. 01-02, 2/27/01)

Chapter 9.09 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 18-01 and 18-07. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 9.09.010 Intent and Purpose.
        The residential zoning districts are intended to permit a range of residential densities and dwelling types, in an organization and pattern consistent with the General Plan Land Use Policy Map. All residential zoning districts provide for high quality, attractive, and liveable residential neighborhoods.

(a)    Very Low Density. Very low density residential districts have a maximum density of 3 dwelling units per acre. Districts in this classification include Residential Single Family 2 and 3 (RSF 2 and RSF 3). The RSF 2 and RSF 3 districts provide for very low density, single family residential neighborhoods. These districts include single family detached residential dwellings at a maximum density of 2 and 3 dwellings per net acre of land, respectively.

(b)    Low Density. Low density residential districts have a maximum density of 7 dwelling units per acre. Districts in this classification include Residential Single Family 4 and 7 (RSF 4 and RSF 7) and Residential Multiple Family 7 (RMF 7). The RSF 4 and RSF 7 districts provide for low density, single family residential neighborhoods. These districts include single family detached and attached residential dwellings at a maximum density of 4 and 7 dwellings per net acre of land, respectively. The Residential Multiple Family 7 (RMF 7) district provides for low density, multiple family residential neighborhoods. This district includes multiple family development at a maximum density of 7 dwellings per net acre of land.

(c)    Medium Density. Medium density residential districts have a maximum density of 14 dwelling units per acre. Districts in this classification include Residential Single Family 12 (RSF 12), Residential Beach Road 12 (RBR 12), Residential Duplex 14 (RD 14) and Residential Multiple Family 14 (RMF 14). The RSF 12 and RBR 12 districts provide for medium density single family residential development. These districts include single family detached and attached residential dwellings at a maximum density of 12 dwellings per net acre of land. Residential Duplex 14 (RD 14) district provides for medium density residential development consisting of duplexes at a maximum density of 14 dwellings per net acre of land. Residential Multiple Family 14 (RMF 14) districts provide for medium density multiple family residential neighborhoods. These districts include multiple family residential development at a maximum density of 14 dwellings per net acre of land.

(d)    High Density. High Density Residential Districts have maximum density of 30 dwelling units per acre. Districts in this classification include Residential Beach Road Duplex (RBR 18), Residential Single Family 22 (RSF 22), Residential Multiple Family 22 and 30 (RMF 22, RMF 30). The Residential Beach Road Duplex 18 (RBRD 18) district provides for moderate density residential development consisting of duplexes at a maximum density of 18 dwellings per net acre of land. The Residential Multiple Family 22 and 30 (RMF 22 and RMF 30) districts provide for high density, multiple family residential neighborhoods. These districts include multiple family residential development at a maximum density of 22 and 30 dwellings per net acre of land, respectively.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 96-10, 8/13/96)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 9.09.020 Permitted Uses, Accessory Uses, Temporary Uses and Conditional Uses.
(a)    Several classes of uses are allowed in Residential Districts. Each of these classes must promote the residential character of the individual districts. These classes of uses are:

(1)    Permitted Use — allowed by right if no discretionary review is required. Certain permitted uses, indicated by P*, are also regulated by provisions contained in Chapter 9.07.

(2)    Accessory Use — allowed by right if accessory to a dwelling unit or a residential development.

(3)    Temporary Use — allowed on a temporary basis in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 9.39.

(4)    Conditional Use — allowed subject to the approval of a Conditional Use Permit in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 9.65. Certain conditional uses, indicated by a C*, are also regulated by provisions contained in Chapter 9.07.

(5)    Prohibited Use — not allowed in the subject residential district.

(b)    The following Table lists the classification of allowable uses in the Residential Districts. Any use not expressly allowed is prohibited.

 

 

SECTION 9.09.020(b)

RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS

 

LAND USES

RSF 2

RSF 3

RSF 4

RSF 7

RSF 8

RSF 12

Accessory Living Quarters

A

A

A

A

A

A

Communal Housing

X

X

X

X

X

X

Dwelling, Multiple Family

X

X

X

X

X

X

Dwelling, Single Family

P

P

P

P

P

P

Dwelling, Duplex

X

X

X

X

X

X

Employees’ Quarters

C

C

C

C

C

C

Game Courts

A

A

A

A

A

A

Granny Flat

C*

C*

C*

C*

C*

C*

Home Occupation

P*

P*

P*

P*

P*

P*

Manufactured Home

P*

P*

P*

P*

P*

P*

Mobilehome Park

C*

C*

C*

C*

C*

P*

Mobilehome Subdivision

C*

C*

C*

C*

C*

C*

Model Home Complex

T*

T*

T*

T*

T*

T*

Open Space

P

P

P

P

P

P

Park, Public

P

P

P

P

P

P

Recreational Facilities, Private

A

A

A

A

A

A

Religious Uses

C*

C*

C*

C*

C*

C*

Second Dwelling Units

P

P

P

P

P

P

Senior Citizen Housing

X

X

X

X

X

X

Single Room Occupancy

X

X

X

X

X

X

Temporary Uses

T*

T*

T*

T*

T*

T*

Trails, Riding and Hiking

P

P

P

P

P

P

 

LEGEND:

 

 

P = Permitted Use

P* = Permitted Use subject to special use standards (see Chapter 9.07)

C = Conditional Use

C* = Conditional Use subject to special use standards (see Chapter 9.07)

T = Temporary Use

T* = Temporary Use subject to special use standards (see Chapter 9.39)

X = Prohibited Use

A = Accessory Use

 

 

SECTION 9.09.020(b)

RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS

(continued)

 

LAND USES

RSF 2

RSF 3

RSF 4

RSF 7

RSF 8

RSF 12

Adult Day Care Facility

C

C

C

C

C

C

Adult Day Health Care

C

C

C

C

C

C

Adult Day Health Center

C

C

C

C

C

C

Community Care Facility

C

C

C

C

C

C

Community Treatment Facility

C

C

C

C

C

C

Congregate Care Facility

C

C

C

C

C

C

Congregate Living Health Facility

C

C

C

C

C

C

Convalescent Facility

C

C

C

C

C

C

Day Care Center

C

C

C

C

C

C

Day Treatment Facility

C

C

C

C

C

C

Emergency Shelter

C

C

C

C

C

C

Family Day Care Home, Large

C

C

C

C

C

C

Family Day Care Home, Small

P

P

P

P

P

P

Foster Family Home

P

P

P

P

P

P

Group Dwelling

C

C

C

C

C

C

Group Home

P

P

P

P

P

P

Intermediate Care Facility

C

C

C

C

C

C

Residential Care Facility for the Elderly

C

C

C

C

C

C

Residential Facility

C

C

C

C

C

C

Small Family Home

P

P

P

P

P

P

Social Day Care Facility

C

C

C

C

C

C

Social Rehabilitation Facility

C

C

C

C

C

C

 

LEGEND:

 

 

P = Permitted Use

P* = Permitted Use subject to special use standards (see Chapter 9.07)

C = Conditional Use

C* = Conditional Use subject to special use standards (see Chapter 9.07)

T = Temporary Use

T* = Temporary Use subject to special use standards (see Chapter 9.39)

X = Prohibited Use

A = Accessory Use

 

 

SECTION 9.09.020(b)

RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS

(continued)

 

LAND USES

RBR 12

RBRD 18

RD 14

RSF 22

Accessory Living Quarters

C

C

C

C

Communal Housing

X

X

X

X

Dwelling, Multiple Family

X

X

X

X

Dwelling, Single Family

P

P

P

P

Dwelling, Duplex

X

P

P

X

Employees’ Quarters

C

C

X

X

Game Courts

A

A

A

A

Granny Flat

C*

C*

X

C*

Home Occupation

P*

P*

P*

P*

Manufactured Home

P*

P*

P*

P*

Mobilehome Park

X

X

C*

X

Mobilehome Subdivision

X

X

C*

X

Model Home Complex

X

X

X

T*

Open Space

P

P

P

P

Park, Public

P

P

P

P

Recreational Facilities, Private

A

A

A

A

Religious Uses

C*

C*

C*

C*

Second Dwelling Units

P

X

X

X

Senior Citizen Housing

X

X

X

C

Single Room Occupancy

X

X

X

X

Temporary Uses

T*

T*

T*

T*

Trails, Riding and Hiking

P

P

P

P

 

LEGEND:

 

 

P = Permitted Use

P* = Permitted Use subject to special use standards (see Chapter 9.07)

C = Conditional Use

C* = Conditional Use subject to special use standards (see Chapter 9.07)

T = Temporary Use

T* = Temporary Use subject to special use standards (see Chapter 9.39)

X = Prohibited Use

A = Accessory Use

 

SECTION 9.09.020(b)

RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS

(continued)

 

LAND USES

RBR 12

RBRD 18

RD 14

RSF 22

Adult Day Care Facility

C

C

C

C

Adult Day Health Care

C

C

C

C

Adult Day Health Center

C

C

C

C

Community Care Facility

C

C

C

C

Community Treatment Facility

C

C

C

C

Congregate Care Facility

C

C

C

C

Congregate Living Health Facility

C

C

C

C

Convalescent Facility

C

C

C

C

Day Care Center

C

C

C

C

Day Treatment Facility

C

C

C

C

Emergency Shelter

C

C

C

C

Family Day Care Home, Large

C

C

C

C

Family Day Care Home, Small

P

P

P

P

Foster Family Home

P

P

P

P

Group Dwelling

C

C

C

C

Group Home

P

P

P

P

Intermediate Care Facility

C

C

C

C

Residential Care Facility for the Elderly

C

C

C

C

Residential Facility

C

C

C

C

Small Family Home

P

P

P

P

Social Day Care Facility

C

C

C

C

Social Rehabilitation Facility

C

C

C

C

 

LEGEND:

 

 

P = Permitted Use

P* = Permitted Use subject to special use standards (see Chapter 9.07)

C = Conditional Use

C* = Conditional Use subject to special use standards (see Chapter 9.07)

T = Temporary Use

T* = Temporary Use subject to special use standards (see Chapter 9.39)

X = Prohibited Use

A = Accessory Use

 

SECTION 9.09.020(b)

RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS

(continued)

 

LAND USES

RMF 7

RMF 14

RMF 22

RMF 30

Accessory Living Quarters

X

X

X

X

Communal Housing

X

X

X

X

Dwelling, Multiple Family

P

P

P

P

Dwelling, Single Family

P

P

P

P

Dwelling, Duplex

P

P

P

P

Employees’ Quarters

X

X

X

X

Game Courts

A

A

A

A

Granny Flat

X

X

X

X

Home Occupation

P*

P*

P*

P*

Manufactured Home

P*

P*

P*

P*

Mobile Home Park

C*

C*

C*

C*

Mobile Home Subdivision

C*

C*

C*

C*

Model Home Complex

T*

T*

T*

T*

Open Space

P

P

P

P

Park, Public

P

P

P

P

Recreational Facilities, Private

A

A

A

A

Religious Uses

C*

C*

C*

C*

Second Dwelling Units

X

X

X

X

Senior Citizen Housing

C

C

C

C

Single Room Occupancy

C

C

C

C

Temporary Uses

T*

T*

T*

T*

Trails, Riding and Hiking

P

P

P

P

 

LEGEND:

 

 

P = Permitted Use

P* = Permitted Use subject to special use standards (see Chapter 9.07)

C = Conditional Use

C* = Conditional Use subject to special use standards (see Chapter 9.07)

T = Temporary Use

T* = Temporary Use subject to special use standards (see Chapter 9.39)

X = Prohibited Use

A = Accessory Use

 

SECTION 9.09.020(b)

RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS

(continued)

 

LAND USES

RMF 7

RMF 14

RMF 22

RMF 30

Adult Day Care Facility

C

C

C

C

Adult Day Health Care

C

C

C

C

Adult Day Health Center

C

C

C

C

Community Care Facility

C

C

C

C

Community Treatment Facility

C

C

C

C

Congregate Care Facility

C

C

C

C

Congregate Living Health Facility

C

C

C

C

Convalescent Facility

C

C

C

C

Day Care Center

C

C

C

C

Day Treatment Facility

C

C

C

C

Emergency Shelter

C

C

C

C

Family Day Care Home, Large

C

C

C

C

Family Day Care Home, Small

P

P

P

P

Foster Family Home

P

P

P

P

Group Dwelling

C

C

C

C

Group Home

P

P

P

P

Intermediate Care Facility

C

C

C

C

Residential Care Facility for the Elderly

C

C

C

C

Residential Facility

C

C

C

C

Small Family Home

P

P

P

P

Social Day Care Facility

C

C

C

C

Social Rehabilitation Facility

C

C

C

C

 

LEGEND:

 

 

P = Permitted Use

P* = Permitted Use subject to special use standards (see Chapter 9.07)

C = Conditional Use

C* = Conditional Use subject to special use standards (see Chapter 9.07)

T = Temporary Use

T* = Temporary Use subject to special use standards (see Chapter 9.39)

X = Prohibited Use

A = Accessory Use

 

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94; Ord. 03-07, 4/9/03)

 

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 9.09.030 Development Standards.
        The following Table provides the minimum acceptable standards for development within the Residential Districts necessary to assure quality development and attractive local residential areas. The development standards are supplemented, and where applicable, superseded by the special development standards described in Chapter 9.05, Chapter 9.07, and Section 9.09.040. Parking standards are provided in Chapter 9.35.

 

SECTION 9.09.030

RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

 

DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS (1)

RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS

RSF 2

RSF 3

RSF 4

RSF 7

(a) Minimum Lot Size: (2)

17,500 sf

12,000 sf

8,700 sf

5,000 sf

(b) Minimum Lot Width - (2)

 

 

 

 

Standard Lot:

70 ft

50 ft

50 ft

50 ft

Cul-De-Sac Lot (at front building setback line):

30 ft

30 ft

30 ft

30 ft

Flag Lot (for access extension):

20 ft

20 ft

20 ft

20 ft

(c) Minimum Lot Depth: (2)

100 ft

80 ft

75 ft

75 ft

(d) Maximum Lot Coverage:

35%

35%

45%

60% (12)

(e) Minimum Land Area Per Unit: (3)

17,500 sf

11,667 sf

8,750 sf

5,000 sf

(f) Maximum Height:

28 ft/ (4)

28 ft/ (4)

28 ft/ (4)

28 ft/ (4)

2 stories

2 stories

2 stories

2 stories

(g) Minimum Front Yard Building Setback - (5)

 

 

 

 

From Ultimate Public Street ROW line:

20 ft

10 ft

20 ft

20 ft

Flag Lot (from connection with access extension):

10 ft

10 ft

10 ft

10 ft

(h) Minimum Side Yard Setback - (5)

 

 

 

 

Interior Side:

10 ft

8 ft

5 ft

5 ft

Exterior Side:

15 ft

10 ft

10 ft

10 ft

Flag Lot: (6)

10 ft

8 ft

5 ft

5 ft

(i) Minimum Rear Yard Setback - (5)

 

 

(7)

 

Standard Lot:

30 ft

25 ft (7)

25 ft

25 ft

Flag Lot and Cul-De-Sac Lot:

30 ft

25 ft (7)

25 ft

25 ft

Adjacent to Alley: (13)

20 ft

20 ft

15 ft

15 ft

(j) Minimum Open Space (private):

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

(k) Minimum Landscape Coverage:

25%

25%

25%

25%

(l) Minimum Building Separation -

(between primary and accessory buildings on the same lot):

 

 

 

 

10 ft

10 ft

10 ft

10 ft

 

* See footnotes at end of section.

 

 

SECTION 9.09.030

RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

(continued)

 

DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS (1)

RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS

RSF 8

RSF 12

RBR 12

RBRD 18

(a) Minimum Lot Size: (2)

4,800 sf

3,000 sf

4,200 sf

4,800 sf

(b) Minimum Lot Width - (2)

 

 

 

 

Standard Lot:

45 ft

40 ft

45 ft

45 ft

Cul-De-Sac Lot (at front setback line):

30 ft

30 ft

N/A

N/A

Flag Lot (for access extension):

20 ft

20 ft

10 ft

10 ft

(c) Minimum Lot Depth: (2)

70 ft

60 ft

50 ft

50 ft

(d) Maximum Lot Coverage:

60%

60% (12)

N/A

N/A

(e) Minimum Land Area Per Unit: (3)

4,375 sf

2,917 sf

2,917 sf

1,945 sf

(f) Maximum Height:

28ft/ (4)

28 ft/ (4)

28 ft/ (4)

28 ft/ (4)

2 stories

2 stories

2 stories (8)

2 stories (8)

(g) Minimum Front Yard Setback: (5)

 

 

 

 

From Ultimate Public Street ROW line:

20 ft

20 ft

20 ft (10)

20 ft (10)

Flag Lot (from connection with access extension):

10 ft

10 ft

N/A

N/A

(h) Minimum Side Yard Setback - (5)

 

 

 

 

Interior Side:

5 ft

5 ft

3.5 ft

3.5 ft

Exterior Side:

10 ft

10 ft

3.5 ft

3.5 ft

Flag Lot: (6)

5 ft

5 ft

5 ft

5 ft

(i) Minimum Rear Yard Setback - (5)

 

 

 

 

Standard Lot:

25 ft

15 ft

(9)

(9)

Flag Lot and Cul-De-Sac Lot:

25 ft

15 ft

(9)

(9)

Adjacent to Alley: (13)

15 ft

10 ft

(9)

(9)

(j) Minimum Open Space (private):

800 sf per du

N/A

N/A

N/A

(k) Minimum Landscape Coverage:

25%

25%

10% (11)

10% (11)

(l) Minimum Building Separation

 

 

 

 

(between primary and accessory buildings on the same lot):

10 ft

10 ft

10 ft

10 ft

 

* See footnotes at end of section.

 

 

SECTION 9.09.030

RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

(continued)

 

DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS (1)

RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS

RSF 22

RD 14

RMF 7

(a) Minimum Lot Size: (2)

2,000 sf

5,000 sf

15,000 sf

(b) Minimum Lot Width - (2)

 

 

 

Standard Lot:

40 ft

45 ft

60 ft

Cul-De-Sac Lot (at front setback line):

25 ft

30 ft

30 ft

Flag Lot (for access extension):

N/A

25 ft

25 ft

(c) Minimum Lot Depth: (2)

50 ft

100 ft

100 ft

(d) Maximum Lot Coverage:

60% (12)

50%

50%

(e) Minimum Land Area Per Unit: (3)

1,591 sf

2,500 sf

5,000 sf

(f) Maximum Height:

28 ft/ (4)

2 stories

28 ft/ (4)

2 stories

28 ft/ (4)

2 stories

(g) Minimum Front Yard Setback - (5)

 

 

 

From Ultimate Public Street ROW line:

7.5 ft

20 ft

20 ft

Flag Lot (from connection with access extension):

7.5 ft

15 ft

15 ft

(h) Minimum Side Yard Setback - (5)

 

 

 

Interior Side:

4 ft

4 ft

5 ft

Exterior Side:

4 ft

10 ft

10 ft

Flag Lot: (6)

4 ft

4 ft

5 ft

(i) Minimum Rear Yard Setback - (5)

 

 

 

Standard Lot:

7.5 ft

15 ft

15 ft

Flag Lot and Cul-De-Sac Lot:

7.5 ft

15 ft

15 ft

Adjacent to Alley: (13)

7.5 ft

10 ft

10 ft

(j) Minimum Open Space

(private and common):

Private:

N/A

20% ac

400 sf/du

Common:

N/A

N/A

30% ac

(k) Minimum Landscape Coverage:

20%

15%

25%

(l) Minimum Building Separation

(between primary and accessory buildings on the same lot):

 

8 ft

 

10 ft

 

10 ft

 

* See footnotes at end of section.

 

 

SECTION 9.09.030

RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

(continued)

 

DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS (1)

RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS

RMF 14

RMF 22

RMF 30

(a) Minimum Lot Size: (2)

7,500 sf

4,800 sf

4,800 sf

(b) Minimum Lot Width - (2)

 

 

 

Standard Lot:

45 ft

45 ft

45 ft

Cul-De-Sac Lot (at front setback line):

25 ft

25 ft

25 ft

Flag Lot (for access extension):

25 ft

25 ft

25 ft

(c) Minimum Lot Depth: (2)

100 ft

90 ft

90 ft

(d) Maximum Lot Coverage:

60%

60%

60%

(e) Minimum Land Area Per Unit: (3)

2,600 sf

1,591 sf

1,167 sf

(f) Maximum Height:

28 ft/ (4)
2 stories

28 ft/ (4)
2 stories

28 ft/ (4)
2 stories

(g) Minimum Front Yard Setback - (5)

 

 

 

From Ultimate Public Street ROW line:

20 ft

20 ft

20 ft

Flag Lot (from connection with access extension):

15 ft

15 ft

15 ft

(h) Minimum Side Yard Setback - (5)

 

 

 

Interior Side:

5 ft

10 ft

15 ft

Exterior Side:

10 ft

10 ft

15 ft

Flag Lot: (6)

15 ft

10 ft

15 ft

(i) Minimum Rear Yard Setback - (5)

 

 

 

Standard Lot:

15 ft

20 ft

20 ft

Flag Lot and Cul-De-Sac Lot:

15 ft

N/A

N/A

Adjacent to Alley: (13)

10 ft

15 ft

15 ft

(j) Minimum Open Space
(private and common):

Private:

200 sf/du

200 sf/du

100 sf/du

Common:

30% ac

25% ac

20% ac

(k) Minimum Landscape Coverage:

25%

20%

15%

(l) Minimum Building Separation
(between primary and accessory buildings on the same lot):

10 ft

10 ft

10 ft

 

Footnotes for Section 9.09.030:

(1)      See Chapter 9.75 for definitions and illustrations of development standards.

(2)      Development standard applies to any proposed subdivision of land. These standards do not apply to existing lots where no subdivision is proposed nor to proposed condominiums or other common lot subdivisions.

(3)      Land Area per Dwelling Unit may not be rounded up. (Example: 14,250 square feet/2,500 square feet of land per dwelling unit = 5.7 dwelling units which equals 5 dwelling units, not 6 dwelling units.)

(4)      Subject to the measurement and design criteria in Section 9.05.110(a).

(5)      For existing lots less than fifty (50) feet wide and/or less than one hundred (100) feet deep, see Section 9.05.190 for reduced front, side and rear building setbacks.

(6)      If the side yard of a flag lot is adjacent to the rear yard of a residentially zoned lot, that side yard setback shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet.

(7)      Additional rear yard building setback from a bluff top may be required by Section 9.27.030.

(8)      For RBR 12 and RBRD 18, maximum building height is twenty-eight (28) feet as measured eighteen (18) inches above the Flood Plain Overlay 3 (FP-3) requirement or Beach Road which ever is higher. Mezzanines may be allowed subject to compliance with the applicable provisions of the Uniform Building Code.

(9)      See Section 9.09.040(a) for special building setbacks and standards for maximum projections into required yards applicable to properties on Beach Road.

(10)    Setback for the first floor as measured from the right-of-way line of Beach Road. The second floor may project a maximum of five (5) feet into the required front yard setback.

(11)    A minimum of ten (10) percent of that portion of the lot area bounded by the side property lines, the Beach Road property line and the structure stringline.

(12)    The maximum lot coverage standard for hillside lots, as defined in Section 9.05.110(a)(4)(A) of this Title, within the RSF7, RSF12 and RSF22 Zoning Districts shall be no greater than fifty (50) percent.

(13)    Subject to standards in Section 9.35.040(e) for garage setbacks.

 

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94; Ord. 94-21, 12/13/94; Ord. 96-10, 8/13/96; Ord. 96-13, 11/26/96; amended during 8/99 supplement; amended by Ord. 06-02, 4/12/06; Ord. 08-06, 6/3/08; Ord. 08-09, 7/15/08)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 9.09.040 Special Development Standards.
(a)    Development in the Residential Beach Road 12 (RBR 12) and Residential Beach Road Duplex 18 (RBRD 18) Zoning Districts shall comply with the following standards:

(1)    The following Table provides the requirements for structural stringlines, patio stringlines, and front yard setbacks for properties in the Residential Beach Road 12 (RBR 12) and Residential Beach Road Duplex 18 (RBRD 18) Districts.

 

 

 

          SECTION 9.09.040(a)(1)

 

Beach Road Address

Tract 889 Lot Number

Measurement from roadside property line to structure stringline along: west property line/east property line (a)

Measurement from roadside property line to patio stringline along: west property line/east property line (b)

35051

35055

35057

35061

35065

35067

Block 2, Lot 133

132

131

130

129

128

102/102

102/102

102/101

101/101

101/101

101/105

120/120

120/120

120/118

118/116

116/116

116/120

          walkway (d)

35071

35075

35077

35081

35083

35087

35091

35093

35095

35097

35099

35101

35105

35107

35111

35115

35119

35121

Block 2, 127

126

125

124

123

122

121

120

119

118

117

116

115

114

113

112

111

110

107/112

112/116

116/116

116/116

116/116

116/115

115/114

114/114

114/113

113/112

112/112

112/111

111/111

111/111

111/111

111/111

111/111

111/112

121/126

126/131

131/131

131/128

128/128

128/125

125/122

122/119

119/120

120/123

123/126

126/130

130/129

129/129

129/129

129/129

129/129

129/129

          walkway (d)

35125

35127

35131

35135

35141

 

35145

 

35147

 

35155

 

35157

35161

35165

35167

35171

35175

35177

35181

35185

35189

35191

35195

Block 2, 109

108

107

106

105,

NWLY 1/2 104

103,

SELY 1/2 104

102,

NWLY 1/2 101

100,

SELY 1/2 101

99

98

97

96

95

94

93

92

91

90

89

88

112/112

112/113

113/113

113/113

 

113/114

 

114/115

 

115/115

 

115/116

116/116

116/117

117/116

116/115

115/115

115/114

114/113

113/113

113/112

112/112

112/111

111/110

129/128

128/128

128/128

128/128

 

128/128

 

128/128

 

128/127

 

127/127

127/127

127/125

125/124

124/123

123/122

122/121

121/120

120/119

119/118

118/118

118/118

118/118

 

* See footnotes on Page 9.09-19

 

SECTION 9.09.040(a)(1)

(continued)

 

Beach Road Address

Tract 889 Lot Number

Measurement from roadside property line to structure stringline along: west property line/east property line (a)

Measurement from roadside property line to patio stringline along: west property line/east property line (b)

Front Setback (Ground Floor) (e)(f)

35197

35201

35205

35211

35215

35221

35225

35235

35241

Block 2, 87

86

85

84

83

82

81 and 80

79

78

110/109

109/108

108/107

107/106

106/105

105/104

104/102

102/103

103/104

118/117

117/117

117/116

116/116

116/115

115/115

115/114

114/113

113/115

20

20

20

20

20

20

20

20

20

          walkway (d)

35245

35251

35255

35261

35265

Block 2, 77

76

75

74

73

104/106

106/107

107/108

108/110

110/109

115/116

116/117

117/118

118/119

119/118

20

20

20

20

20

          walkway (d)

35271

35275

35283

35285

35291

35295

35301

35305

35311

35315

35321

35325

35331

35335

34341

35345

35351

35355

Block 2, 72

71

70

69

68

67

66

65

64

63

62

61

60

59

58

57

56

55

108/103

103/ 99

99/ 99

99/ 98

98/ 97

97/ 96

96/ 95

95/ 93

93/ 93

93/ 94

94/ 96

96/ 97

97/ 98

98/ 99

99/100

100/101

101/103

103/104

118/115

115/113

113/113

113/111

111/110

110/108

108/106

106/104

104/104

104/106

106/107

107/108

108/110

110/111

111/112

112/114

114/115

115/116

20

20

20

20

20

20

20

20

20

20

20

20

20

20

20

20

20

20

          walkway (d)

35361

35365

35371

35375

35381

35385

Block 2, 54

53

52

51

50

49

104/104

104/103

103/102

102/101

101/100

100/ 99

117/117

117/117

117/117

117/116

116/116

116/116

20

20

20

20

20

20

walkway (d)

35391

35395

35401

35405

35411

35415

35425

Block 2, 48

47

46

45

44

43

42

99/ 98

98/ 98

98/ 98

98/ 97

97/ 97

97/ 97

97/ 97

116/116

116/116

116/115

115/114

114/113

113/112

112/111

20

20

20

20

20

20

20

          walkway (d)

 

* See footnotes on Page 9.09-19

 

SECTION 9.09.040(a)(1)

(continued)

 

Beach Road Address

Tract 889 Lot Number

Measurement from roadside property line to structure stringline along: west property line/east property line (a)

Measurement from roadside property line to patio stringline along: west property line/east property line (b)

Front Setback
(Ground Floor) (e)(f)

35431

35435

35441

35445

35451

35455

35461

35465

35471

35475

35481

35485

35491

35495

 

35505

Block 2, 41

40

39

38

37

36

35

34

33

32

31

30

29

28,

NWLY 1/3 27

26,

SELY 2/3 27

97/ 97

97/ 96

96/ 96

96/ 96

96/ 96

96/ 96

96/ 98

98/ 99

99/101

101/102

102/104

104/106

106/107

 

107/109

 

109/112

111/110

110/109

109/108

108/107

107/106

106/106

106/108

108/110

110/113

113/115

115/117

117/120

120/122

 

122/125

 

125/129

20

20

20

20

20

20

20

20

20

20

20

20

20

 

20

 

20

          walkway (d)

35507

35511

35515

35521

35525

35527

35531

Block 2, 25

24

23

22

21

20

19

112/114

114/115

115/116

116/116

116/116

116/116

116/116

129/131

131/134

134/136

136/137

137/139

139/141

141/142

20

20

20

20

20

20

20

          walkway (d)

35535

35537

 

(g)

 

35541

35545

35551

35555

35557

35561

35565

35567

35571

35575

35577

Block 2, 18

17

 

 

16

15

14

13

12

11

10

9

8

7

6

115/115

115/114

 

 

119/115

115/112

112/109

109/106

106/106

106/101 (h)

101/101 (h)

101/104 (h)

104/103

103/ 98

98/ 93

143/144

144/143

 

 

147/145

145/143

143/140

140/138

138/134

134/132

132/131

131/128

128/124

124/121

121/118

20

20

 

 

20

20

20

20

20

20

20

20

20

20

20

          walkway (d)

35581

35585

35587

35591

35595

Block 2, 5

4

3

2

1

91/ 85

85/ 80

80/ 78

78/ 77

77/ 77

117/113

113/110

110/107

107/103

103/100

18 (9)

18 (9)

18 (9)

18 (9)

18 (9)

          walkway (d)

 

* See footnotes on Page 9.09-19

 

SECTION 9.09.040(a)(1)

(continued)

 

Beach Road Address

Tract 889 Lot Number

Measurement from roadside property line to structure stringline along: west property line/east property line (a)

Measurement from roadside property line to patio stringline along: west property line/east property line (b)

Front Setback (Ground Floor) (e)(f)

35601

35605

35611

35615

35621

35625

35631

35635

35641

35645

35651

Block 1, 69

68

67

66

65

64

63

62

61

60

59

76/ 70

70/ 69

69/ 66

66/ 64

64/ 62

62/ 59

59/ 57

57/ 55

55/ 52

52/ 50

50/ 47

99/ 95

95/ 91

91/ 90

90/ 89

89/ 87

87/ 86

86/ 84

84/ 83

83/ 81

81/ 80

80/ 78

18 (9)

18 (8)

18 (8)

18 (8)

18 (8)

18 (8)

18 (8)

18 (8)

18 (8)

18 (7)

18 (6)

          walkway (d)

35655

35657

35661

35665

35667

35671

35675

35677

35679

35685

35687

Block 1, 58

57

56

55

54

53

52

51

50

49

48

48/ 50

50/ 51

51/ 50

50/ 51

51/ 51

51/ 51

51/ 50

50/ 49

49/ 49

49/ 48

48/ 47

78/ 76

76/ 74

74/ 73

73/ 73

73/ 72

72/ 71

71/ 69

69/ 71

67/ 65

65/ 63

63/ 61

18 (6)

18 (7)

18 (7)

18 (7)

18 (7)

18 (7)

18 (7)

18 (6)

18 (6)

18 (6)

18 (6)

          walkway (d)

35691

35695

35697

35701

35705

Block 1, 47

46

45

44

43

47/ 47

47/ 47

47/ 48

48/ 48

48/ 49

60/ 60

60/ 60

60/ 60

60/ 61

61/ 61

18 (6)

18 (6)

18 (6)

18 (6)

18 (6)

          walkway (d)

35707

35711

35715

35721

35725

35731

35735

35737

35741

Block 1, 42

41

40

39

38

37

36

35

34

49/ 50

50/ 50

50/ 51

51/ 51

51/ 52

52/ 51

51/ 55

55/ 55

55/ 54

61/ 62

62/ 62

62/ 62

62/ 63

63/ 63

63/ 62

62/ 64

64/ 65

65/ 67

18 (6)

18 (7)

18 (7)

18 (7)

18 (7)

18 (7)

18 (8)

18 (8)

18 (8)

          walkway (d)

35745

35747

35751

35755

35757

35761

35765

35767

35771

35775

35777

35781

35785

Block 1, 33

32

31

30

29

28

27

26

25

24

23

22

21

54/ 53

53/ 52

52/ 51

51/ 51

51/ 51

51/ 58

58/ 56

56/ 58

58/ 60

60/ 62

62/ 64

64/ 64

64/ 66

67/ 68

68/ 70

70/ 71

71/ 73

73/ 74

74/ 74

74/ 74

74/ 74

74/ 74

74/ 74

74/ 74

74/ 78

78/ 82

18 (8)

18 (7)

18 (7)

18 (7)

18 (7)

18 (8)

18 (8)

18 (8)

18 (8)

18 (8)

18 (8)

18 (8)

18 (8)

 

* See footnotes on Page 9.09-19

 

 

SECTION 9.09.040(a)(1)

(continued)

 

Beach Road Address

Tract 889 Lot Number

Measurement from
roadside property line to structure stringline along: west property line/east property line (a)

Measurement from
roadside property line to patio stringline along: west property line/east property line (b)

Front Setback (Ground Floor) (e)(f)

             walkway (d)

35787

Block 1, 20

67/ 69

83/ 87

18 (8)

35791

19

69/ 72

87/ 90

18 (9)

35795

18

72/ 74

90/ 94

18 (9)

35797

17

74/ 76

94/ 97

18 (9)

35801

16

76/ 78

97/101

18 (9)

35805

15

78/ 80

101/104

18 (9)

35807

14

80/ 80

104/106

18 (9)

35811

13

80/ 83

106/107

18 (9)

             walkway (d)

35815

Block 1, 12

84/ 88

107/107

18 (9)

35817

11

88/ 91

107/107

18 (9)

35821

10

91/ 94

107/109

20

35825

9

94/ 97

109/110

20

35827

8

97/101

110/111

20

35831

7

101/104

111/113

20

35835

6

104/107

113/114

20

35837

5

107/108

114/115

20

35841

4

108/106

115/115

20

35845

3

106/104

115/116

20

35845

2

104/103

116/116

20

35851

1

103/102

116/116

20

35855

 

P.M. 142-10

Parcel 1 (i)

 

102/102

 

116/116

 

20

35857

P.M. 142-10

Parcel 2 (i)

 

102/102

 

116/116

 

20

 

Footnotes for Section 9.09.040(a)(1):

(a)      No enclosed portion of any structure shall extend seaward of a straight line drawn between the structure stringline measurements set forth in this section for the east and west property lines of the subject property.

(b)      No patio or unenclosed portion of any structure shall extend seaward of a straight line drawn between the patio stringline measurements set forth in this section for the east and west property lines of the subject property. Where vertical displacement exists between the lowest level patio and sandy beach, a stairway may encroach seaward of the patio stringline no more than three (3) feet. Where the patio stringline lies inland of an ocean protective device (OPD), an accessway from the lowest level patio to the OPD may be constructed as necessary to link the patio with a stairway to the beach.

(c)      Deleted by Ord. 99-05, 4/27/99.

(d)      Location of a twelve (12) foot wide walkway extending from Beach Road to the beach. According to Tract Map No. 889, walkways are for the use of the property owners within the Capistrano Bay Community.

(e)      May be reduced to the figure shown in parenthesis. If the setback on the ground floor is less than eighteen (18) feet, three parking spaces must be provided perpendicular to Beach Road.

(f)      The second floor of any structure may project a maximum of five (5) feet into the required front setback for the first floor, but no closer than five (5) feet to the ultimate right-of-way line for Beach Road.

(g)      The roadside line from which measurements are taken juts five (5) feet inland at this turnaround point. For properties directly seaward of the turnaround, the roadside measurement line is not necessarily their property line.

(h)      A modification has been made that applies to the three indicated lots only. A control value of 101 feet shall extend from the midpoint of the lot a 35561 across 35565 to the midpoint of the lot at 35567. Therefore, any construction on the eastern half of 35561, on any portion of 35565 or on the western half of 35567 may extend no further than 101 feet. Any construction on the western half of 35561 or the eastern half of 35567 may extend no further than the control values established for their western and eastern property lines respectively.

(i)       This parcel is not a part of Tract No. 889. The stringline measurements set forth in this section for this parcel are based upon a line twenty (20) feet seaward of and parallel to the inland property line.

 

(2)    Maximum Projections into Required Yards. The following Table provides the requirements for allowable projections into required yards for properties in the Residential Beach Road 12 (RBR 12) and Residential Beach Road Duplex 18 (RBRD 18) Districts.

 

SECTION 9.09.040 (a)(2)

MAXIMUM PROJECTION INTO REQUIRED YARDS

 

Item

Maximum Projection

Minimum Distance From Property Lines (B)

Maximum Projection Above District Height Limit

Other Limitations

Front Yard Area

Seaward Of Structure Stringline

Side Yard Area (A)

 

 

 

(a)   Antennas (C)

NP

NP

NP

N/A

Not Permitted (D)

2 maximum

(b)  Architectural Projections:(i.e. Eaves,Cornices and Roof Overhangs)

2¢6²

2¢6²

2¢6²

2¢0²

NP

None

(c)   Balconies

5¢0²

8¢0²

NP

6¢0²

NP

(E)(F)

(d)  Barbecues and Other Appliances

N/A

To patio stringline

To PL

0¢0²

N/A

(G)(H)

(e)   Basements

NP

NP

NP

N/A

N/A

None

(f)   Bay Windows

2¢6²

NP

NP

3¢0²

NP

(I)

(g)   Chimneys (J)

2¢0²

NP

6²

3¢0²

3¢0²

(E)(K)

(h)  Decks, Patios and Walks (between Front Yard Setback and Structure Stringline)

N/A

N/A

To PL

0¢0²

N/A

Horizontal surface to a maximum height of 18² above FP-3 elevation for the site. (I)(L)(M)

 

 

SECTION 9.09.040 (a)(2)

MAXIMUM PROJECTION INTO REQUIRED YARDS

(continued)

 

Item

Maximum Projection

Minimum Distance From Property Lines (B)

Maximum Projection Above District Height Limit

Other Limitations

Front Yard Area

Seaward Of Structure Stringline

Side Yard Area (A)

 

 

 

(i)   Decks, Patios and Walks (between Structure Stringline and Patio Stringline)

N/A

To patio stringline (Except as provided in Section 9.09.040(a)(1) Footnote (b)

To PL

0¢0²

N/A

The surface must be the lower of: 1) 18² above FP-3 elevation for the site; or 2) 30² above the average pregraded/existing elevation at the structure stringline; or 3) 4 feet above Beach Road at the centerline of the site. (I)(L)(M)

(j)   Detached Accessory Structures

NP

To patio stringline (N)

None

None (N)

None

(O)

(k)  HVAC, Mech. Equip. and Window Mounted Air Conditioners

NP

NP

1¢6²

2¢0²

NP

(P)

(l)   Patio Covers

NP

8¢0²

NP

6¢0²

NP

(Q)

(m) Planter Boxes

2¢0²

2¢0²

NP

10¢0²

N/A

(R)

(n)  Pool Equipment

NP

N/A

2¢6²

2¢0²

N/A

(P)(S)

(o)  Roof Decks

NP

NP

NP

3¢0²

NP

None

(p)  Second Stories

5¢0²

NP

NP

N/A

NP

(T)

(q)  Stairways and Stairway Landings

2¢6²

NP
(Except as provided in Section 9.09.040(a)(1), Footnote (b)

NP

5¢0²

NP

(E)

(r)   Swimming Pools and Spas

NP

NP

NA

3¢0² (U)

N/A

(V)

 

NP = Not Permitted

N/A = Not Applicable

PL = Property Line

 

 

Footnotes for Section 9.09.040(a)(2):

(A)     On a corner lot, projections permitted in a front yard setback also apply to a street side yard.

 

(B)     In any instance where there is a conflict between the allowable maximum projection and the minimum distance from property line standard, the minimum distance from property line standard shall rule.

 

(C)     For radio antennas, only see Section 9.07.020 for satellite dish antennas.

 

(D)     This provision shall not apply to television and radio antennas used to receive UHF, VHF, FM and AM signals. Such antennas may exceed the district height limit by up to ten (10) feet. FCC licensed amateur ham radio operators may apply for a Conditional Use Permit for a radio tower greater than the maximum height limit, but not exceeding seventy (70) feet.

 

(E)     The total horizontal length of all projections (marked by this footnote) on a given building elevation shall not exceed the maximum percentage of building elevation length as specified below: (Note: Building elevation length is measured at the first floor and not adjusted for multiple storied buildings.)

 

BUILDING ELEVATION:

Front:

Side:

Rear:

MAXIMUM PERCENTAGE OF BUILDING ELEVATION LENGTH:

60%

40%

80%

 

        The above stated maximum percentages have been established as a measure to control the overuse or abuse of the projection provisions in this Table. The maximum percentages will help prevent aesthetically inappropriate architectural facades or features that would pose a detriment to adjacent properties. At the discretion of the Director of Community Development, the total length of all projections on a given elevation may be reduced to below the indicated maximums in order to implement this intent.

 

(F)      Column supports for balconies may be a maximum of twelve (12) inches square, and may be no closer than six (6) feet from a side property line. Balcony guard rails may be three (3) feet above the 2nd floor, or as required by the Uniform Building Code.

 

(G)     Outdoor appliances or permanent deck structures along side property lines or the rear stringline limit cannot exceed forty-two (42) inches above the lowest patio elevation permitted by Chapter 9.31 “Floodplain Overlay Districts.”

 

(H)     Outdoor appliances or permanent deck structures may utilize tempered glass for wind deterrence, as permitted by Section 9.09.040(a)(3), to a maximum of five (5) feet above the lowest permitted patio elevation, or two (2) feet above the outdoor appliance.

 

(I)      Including deck railings or deck structures.

 

(J)      A maximum of two chimneys may project into required yards or above the height limit.

 

(K)     Maximum horizontal dimension of three (3) feet when above the height limit.

 

(L)     Provided district landscape requirements are met.

 

(M)    Those portions of deck, patios, or walks that are attached to the main structure and within three (3) feet of the side property line must meet UBC requirements for fire resistance.

 

(N)     Subject to the applicable provisions of the Uniform Building Code and Uniform Fire Code.

 

(O)     Maximum Height: Twelve (12) feet.

 

(P)      Pool equipment may be placed adjacent to the rear or side property line subject to a minor Site Development Permit which shall include, but not be limited to, an acoustics report demonstrating compliance with the City’s Noise Ordinance. (Amended per city’s instructions, based on Ord. 97-12, 11/12/97 and Ord. 97-13, 11/25/97)

 

(Q)     The height of a patio cover in the patio stringline area may not exceed ten (10) feet above the lowest permitted deck elevation.

 

(R)     Only allowed on the 2nd floor as an extension of second floor framing; and may be a maximum of three (3) feet in height.

 

(S)      No higher than the height of the deck, patio, or walk.

 

(T)     No support columns permitted.

 

(U)     As measured from the edge of the water within the swimming pool or spa.

 

(V)     See Section 9.31.060(f)(10) regarding the construction of pools and spas in floodplain zones.

 

(3)    Walls, Fences, Windscreens, and Railings. The following standards shall apply to the construction of:

(A)   Walls, fences, windscreens and railing between the front setback and the structure stringline:

        Materials — any material that conforms with local ordinance, including UBC requirements for fire resistive construction, as applicable.

        Height — a maximum of six (6) feet higher than the finished floor of the adjacent walk, deck, balcony, or patio allowed in Section 9.09.040(a)(2).

        In the case of elevated sideyard decks, walks, or patios, the railing may extend down to the finished grade forming a fence. This fence may be higher than eight (8) feet above the finished grade of the adjoining property in cases where the structure on the subject property has been appropriately elevated to the FP-3 level and the structure on the adjacent property has not been so elevated.

(B)   Walls, fences, windscreens and railings between the structure stringline and the patio stringline:

        Material — clear tempered glass with uprights and railings as required by City Code and not exceeding the following maximum finished dimensions:

 

Vertical posts: 6² x 6²

Horizontal railings: 3² x 6²

 

        Height — a maximum of six (6) feet higher than the finished floor of the adjacent deck, balcony, or patio allowed in Section 9.09.040 (a)(2).

(4)    Offers to dedicate easements for public pedestrian access laterally along the beach at Capistrano Beach will be required as a condition of any new development project, as defined in public access ordinance (Section 9.27.030(a)(2)(A) of this Zoning Code), requiring a coastal development permit along Beach Road, consistent with the requirements of the public access ordinance (Section 9.27.030(a) of this Zoning Code).

(b)    Condominium, Stock Cooperative, and Community Apartment Conversions.

(1)    Purpose and Intent. This Section provides standards and criteria for converting multiple family dwellings, including dwelling units in a rental mobilehome park to residential condominium, stock cooperative and community apartment types of ownership. The standards and criteria promote the retention of affordable housing and promote design quality.

(2)    Development Standards. Where possible the conversion shall be designed to comply with all applicable development standards of the zoning district in which it is located. In addition, the following standards shall apply:

(A)   Conversion projects shall provide high quality urban design by the provision of architectural enhancement, high quality landscaping, high quality construction, and improvements to the function of the site and project signage.

(B)   Privacy between residential units shall be enhanced through urban design, insulation, and other means.

(C)   Individual gas and/or electrical metering systems shall be provided for each dwelling unit.

(D)   Where individual trash and recycling pick-up is not provided, common trash and recycling storage shall be provided within a totally walled and roofed structure with a roof not exceeding twelve (12) feet in height. All enclosures shall be located within two hundred (200) feet of all dwelling units.

(3)    Conditional Use Permit and Tentative Tract or Parcel Map Required. Conversion requires approval of a Conditional Use Permit and Tentative Tract or Parcel Map by the Planning Commission as described in Chapter 9.65 and Title 7. The application for conversion must also include the following additional information.

(A)   A detailed report by licensed certified professionals describing the condition of all structural, electrical, plumbing, and mechanical elements of the existing development, including noise insulation, and the estimated cost of repair or improvement, if any, in a form acceptable to the City.

(B)   A complete and current mailing list and two sets of addressed stamped envelopes of all tenants occupying the subject property as specified by the Department of Community Development shall be submitted and utilized to provide notice of the public hearing for consideration of the application for conversion.

(C)   A housing program which includes, at a minimum, the following:

1.     The means by which the provision or expansion of affordable housing opportunities will be achieved by the conversion consistent with the goals and policies of the General Plan.

2.     A study of the balance of housing in the City, including vacancy rates, other available housing of similar type and rent; the current rents and estimated monthly payments and fees of the units to be converted, and all improvements and/or renovations contemplated;

3.     For mobilehomes, the estimated costs for movement of each mobilehome to an available reasonably comparable space;

4.     A current survey of existing tenants as to their length of occupancy and the number of those who will purchase one of the units; and

 

5.     A relocation plan which comprehensively identifies all the steps which will be taken to assure the successful proposed relocation of each tenant with the minimum disruption to their lives. The relocation plan shall also state what specific relocation assistance existing tenants will be given, including the cost of physical moving, first and last months’ rent, security and cleaning deposits, phone connection and utility deposits. Particular consideration shall be given to the elderly, handicapped, families with children, and other tenants who may encounter difficulty in finding a new residence.

(4)    Tenant Provisions. Each application for conversion shall include assurance that the following provisions will be or have been satisfied.

(A)   By certified mail or other verifiable means the property owner shall provide tenants a ninety (90) day preemptive right to purchase a unit or right of exclusive occupancy upon more favorable terms and conditions than those on which such unit or share will be initially offered to the general public. Such right shall be in writing and shall be irrevocable for a period of ninety (90) days after the commencement of sales and notification of the tenant of such right.

(B)   By certified mail or other verifiable means, the property owner shall provide, in writing, all tenants a minimum of one hundred and eighty (180) days advance notice of termination of their tenancy due to an approved conversion plan, except that a one (1) year notice shall be provided for dwelling units in a mobilehome park conversion.

(C)   “Art-in-Public-Places” Program. All new development projects located in the zoning districts described in this Chapter are subject to the provisions of the “Art-in-Public Places” Program as described in Section 9.05.240.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94; Ord. 94-13, 8/23/94; Ord. 94-21, 12/13/94; Ord. 97-05, 9/9/97; Ord. 97-12, 11/12/97; Ord. 97-13, 11/25/97; Ord. 99-05, 4/27/99; Ord. 08-06, 6/3/08)

Chapter 9.11 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 18-01 and 18-07. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


9.11.010 Intent and Purpose.
        The commercial districts permit a range of commercial uses to support the commercial and service needs of residents, visitors, and the City’s workforce.

(a)    Neighborhood Commercial District. The Neighborhood Commercial (NC) district provides for a limited range of smaller-scale business activities which serve the needs of residents who live nearby. Typical businesses include, but are not limited to, small food and drug stores, child care, clothing stores, neighborhood serving convenience stores, professional and business offices. These regulations are intended to ensure that development within the Neighborhood Commercial zone is compatible with the surrounding area with respect to the type of use scale, intensity of development, architectural character, and other impacts upon the community, and that the activities serve the needs of the adjoining residential neighborhoods.

(b)    Community Commercial/Pedestrian District. The Community Commercial/Pedestrian (CC/P) district provides for medium intensity commercial uses that serve community-wide needs in a pedestrian-oriented environment. The Community Commercial/Pedestrian District provides for the high quality design of commercial areas that include, but are not limited to, commercial services, professional business offices, retail sales, child care, restaurants, entertainment uses, and community facilities. The regulations promote integrated commercial districts which are designed to encourage positive pedestrian activity and minimize pedestrian and vehicular conflicts. These regulations promote architecturally pleasing commercial structures, with human scale and pedestrian character including efficient internal access, ingress and egress, and pedestrian amenities such as plazas, courtyards, and attractive landscaping.

(c)    Community Commercial/Vehicular District. The Community Commercial/Vehicular (CC/V) District provides for higher intensity commercial uses that serve community and subregional needs with an emphasis on convenient automobile access while incorporating efficient, safe, and attractive pedestrian circulation. The Community Commercial/Vehicular District provides for the high quality design of commercial areas that include, but are not limited to, larger commercial uses such as department stores, furniture and appliances stores, grocery stores, drug stores, and automotive related uses. The regulations promote integrated commercial developments which are designed to accommodate high volume retail businesses with appropriate facilities for the access, circulation, and parking of cars. These regulations promote architecturally pleasing commercial structures situated and designed to facilitate the efficient circulation of motor vehicles.

(d)    Visitor/Recreation Commercial (V/RC) District. The Visitor/Recreation Commercial (V/RC) District provides for visitor-serving uses such as resorts, hotels, motels, restaurants, conference facilities, commercial-recreation uses, specialty and convenience shops, and recreation/open space uses. Supporting uses include, but are not limited to, community facilities, such as museums and theaters. Secondary uses may include offices, personal services, clinical services and similar uses provided they are not the primary use on the site and do not occupy the first floor of the structure. Development within this district shall provide visitor-serving facilities in a manner which promotes fiscal stability and has minimal negative impact on surrounding land uses. Commercial uses shall provide high quality design of sites and structures with extensive landscaping, open space and public and private recreational opportunities.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 9.11.020 Permitted Uses, Accessory Uses, Temporary Uses, and Conditional Uses.
(a)    Several classes of uses are allowed in the Commercial Districts. Each of these classes must promote the commercial character of the individual districts. These classes of uses are:

(1)    Permitted Use — allowed by right if no discretionary review is required. Certain permitted uses, indicated by a P*, are also regulated by provisions contained in Chapter 9.07.

(2)    Accessory Use — allowed by right if accessory to a permitted or conditional commercial development.

(3)    Temporary Use — allowed on a temporary basis in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 9.39.

(4)    Conditional Use — allowed subject to the approval of a Conditional Use Permit in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 9.65. Certain conditional uses, indicated by a C*, are also regulated by provisions contained in Chapter 9.07.

(5)    Prohibited Use — not allowed in the subject commercial district.

(b)    The following Table lists the classification of allowable uses in Commercial Districts. Any use not expressly allowed is prohibited.

 

 

SECTION 9.11.020(b)

COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS

 

LAND USES

NC

CC/P

CC/V

V/RC

Administrative Office Uses

P

P

P

C

Adult Businesses

X

X

P*

P*

Adult Day Health Care

X

C

C

X

Alcoholic Beverage Outlets

P*/C*

P*/C*

P*/C*

P*/C*

Animal Hospital

X

P

P

X

Animal Shelter

X

C

C

X

Automotive Sales and Rental Uses

X

C*

C*

C*

Bed and Breakfast Inn

X

P

X

P

Building Materials Sales and Service Uses

X

P

P

C

Business Service Uses

P

P

P

X

Caretaker’s Residence

X

C

C

C

Clinical Services

P

P

P

P

Commercial Antennas

C*

C*

C*

C*

Commercial Entertainment Uses

C

P

P

C

Commercial Recreation Uses

C

P

P

C

Construction and Maintenance Services

P

P

P

X

Cultural Uses

P

P

P

P

Dance Halls/Clubs

C

C

C

C

Day Care Centers

P

P

P

C

Drinking Establishments

P*/C*

P*/C*

P*/C*

P*/C*

Drive - Through Uses

C

C

C

C

Drug Abuse Recovery or Treatment Facility

X

C

C

X

Educational Uses

C

P

P

C

Emergency Shelter

C

C

C

X

 

LEGEND:

 

 

P = Permitted Use

P* = Permitted Use subject to special use standards (see Chapter 9.07)

C = Conditional Use

C* = Conditional Use subject to special use standards (see Chapter 9.07)

T = Temporary Use

T* = Temporary Use subject to special use standards (see Chapter 9.39)

X = Prohibited Use

A = Accessory Use

 

 

SECTION 9.11.020(b)

COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS

(continued)

 

LAND USES

NC

CC/P

CC/V

V/RC

Family Day Care Home, Large

X

C

C

X

Family Day Care Home, Small

X

C

C

X

Food Service Uses, Specialty

P

P

P

P

Fortune Telling

X

C*

C*

C*

Furniture Store

P

P

P

C

Hospital, Acute Psychiatric

X

C

C

X

Hospital, Chemical Dependency Recovery

X

C

C

X

Hospital, General Acute Care

X

C

C

X

Hospital, Special

X

C

C

X

Hotel

X

P

P

P

Institutional Uses

X

C

P

X

Kennel

C

P

P

X

Live Entertainment Uses

C*

C*

C*

C*

Major Automotive Uses

X

C

C

X

Marine Uses

P

P

P

P

Massage Establishments

X

P*

P*

P*

Medical Office Uses

P

P

P

X

Membership Organizations

X

P

P

C

Minor Automotive Uses

X

X1

C

X

Minor Repair Service Uses

P

P

P

X

Motel

X

X

P

P

Open Space

P

P

P

P

Park, Public

P

P

P

P

 

1           NOTE: All minor automotive uses existing prior to (final action date), or applications for such uses which were deemed complete prior to that date, shall be considered legal conforming uses and shall be exempt from the provisions of Chapter 9.63.

 

LEGEND:

 

 

P = Permitted Use

P* = Permitted Use subject to special use standards (see Chapter 9.07)

C = Conditional Use

C* = Conditional Use subject to special use standards (see Chapter 9.07)

T = Temporary Use

T* = Temporary Use subject to special use standards (see Chapter 9.39)

X = Prohibited Use

A = Accessory Use

 

 

SECTION 9.11.020(b)

COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS

(continued)

 

LAND USES

NC

CC/P

CC/V

V/RC

 Personal Service Uses

P

P

P

P

 Photographic, Reproduction and Graphic Service Uses

P

P

P

P

 Professional Office Use

          -On the second floor or above, or below street level

          -Street Level

 

P

P

 

P

P

 

P

P

 

P

C

 Recreational Uses

C

P

P

P

 Recycling Facilities

P*

P*

P*

X

 Religious Uses

X

C*

C*

X

 Research and Development Uses

C

P

P

X

 Residential Care Facility for the Elderly

C

C

C

X

 Residential Facility

C

C

C

X

 Restaurant

P

P

P

P

 Restaurant, Drive-Through

C

C

P

P

 Restaurant, Fast Food

C

C

P

P

 Restaurant, Take-Out

P

P

P

P

 Restaurant, Walkup

C

P

P

P

 Retail Sales Uses

P

P

P

P

 Single Room Occupancy

X

C

C

C

 Skilled Nursing Facility

X

C

C

X

 Social Rehabilitation Facility

X

C

C

X

 Tattoo Parlors

X

C*

C*

C*

 Temporary Uses

T*

T*

T*

T*

 Timeshares

X

X

X

X

 Transportation Uses

X

X

P

P

 Video Arcades or Game Rooms

C

C

C

C

 

LEGEND:

 

 

P = Permitted Use

P* = Permitted Use subject to special use standards (see Chapter 9.07)

C = Conditional Use

C* = Conditional Use subject to special use standards (see Chapter 9.07)

T = Temporary Use

T* = Temporary Use subject to special use standards (see Chapter 9.39)

X = Prohibited Use

A = Accessory Use

 

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-02, 1/11/94; Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94; Ord. 94-21, 12/13/94; Ord. 96-10, 8/13/96; Ord. 97-05, 9/9/97; Ord. 97-12, 11/12/97; Ord. 97-13, 11/25/97; Ord. 03-07, 4/9/03)

 

9.11.030 Development Standards.
        The following general development standards table provides the minimum acceptable standards for development within the commercial districts necessary to assure quality development and attractive local commercial areas. The development standards are supplemented, and where applicable, superseded by the special development standards described in Chapter 9.05, Chapter 9.07, and Section 9.11.040. Parking standards are provided in Chapter 9.35.

 

SECTION 9.11.030

COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

 

DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS (1)

COMMERCIAL ZONING DISTRICTS

NC

CC/P

CC/V

V/RC

(a) Minimum Lot Size (2)

5,000 sf

5,000 sf

15,000 sf

15,000 sf

(b) Minimum Lot Width (2)

40 ft

50 ft

100 ft

100 ft

(c) Minimum Lot Depth (2)

100 ft

80 ft

120 ft

150 ft

(d) Maximum Lot Coverage

35%

60%

45%

40%

(e) Maximum Height

31-35 ft(3)

3 stories(4)

31-35 ft(3)

3 stories(4)

31-35 ft(3)

3 stories (4)

31-35 ft(3)

3 stories(4)

(f) Standard Floor Area Ratio (5)

.35:1

.6:1

.5:1

.5:1

(g) Minimum Front Yard Setback (6)

 

  From Ultimate Public Street R/W Line

20 ft

10 ft (7)

20 ft

5 ft

(h) Minimum Side Yard Setback

 

  Interior Side

10 ft

0 ft

0 ft

5 ft

  Street Side (6)

15 ft

5 ft

10 ft

5 ft

(i) Minimum Rear Yard Setback

 

  Standard (8)

15 ft

0 ft

15 ft

15 ft

  Adjacent to Alley or Street (6)

10 ft

5 ft

10 ft

10 ft

(j) Minimum Landscape Coverage (6)

10%

10%

15%

20%

(k) Minimum Building Separation

10 ft

10 ft

10 ft

10 ft

 

Note: See Footnotes on following page

 

 

Footnotes for Section 9.11.030:

 

(1)      See Chapter 9.75 for definitions and illustrations of development standards.

 

(2)      Development standard applies to proposed subdivisions of land through a SDP. The standards may be modified by the Planning Commission when necessary to accommodate the parcel configuration for an integrated commercial development subject to the approval of a Conditional Use Permit pursuant to Chapter 9.65.

 

(3)      Subject to the measurement and design criteria in Section 9.05.110(b).

 

(4)      A maximum of 3 stories may only be permitted in accordance with Section 9.05.200.

 

(5)      A maximum FAR of 1.75:1 may be permitted in accordance with Section 9.05.210.

 

(6)      All setback areas adjacent to public streets must be landscaped.

 

(7)      A zero setback may be allowed if the structure is designed to occupy no more than sixty (60) percent of the front 10 feet of the parcel and with an increase in minimum landscape coverage to fifteen (15) percent.

 

(8)      Twenty (20) feet adjacent to residential use or district.

 

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94; Ord. 94-21, 12/13/94)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 9.11.040 Special Development Standards.
(a)    Accessory Uses and Structures. Setbacks for detached accessory buildings or structures shall be established through a Site Development Permit and shall be consistent with the provisions of Section 9.05.080, Maximum Projections into Required Yard Areas.

(b)    Sign Programs. Multi-tenant commercial development shall be required to obtain approval for a project sign program pursuant to Chapter 9.37.

(c)    “Art-in-Public-Places” Program. All new development projects located in the zoning districts described in this Chapter are subject to the provisions of the “Art-in-Public-Places” Program as described in Section 9.05.240.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-13, 8/23/94)

Chapter 9.13 MIXED USE DISTRICTS*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 18-01 and 18-07. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


9.13.010 Intent and Purpose.
        The mixed use districts provide for the compatible and beneficial mixture of commercial, office and residential uses in a single structure or on a single site. These districts are designed to achieve a convenient business and residential environment in areas where multiple activities and an increased degree of pedestrian orientation are considered to be desirable. The districts also provide a transitional or buffering zone between exclusive nonresidential and residential districts. Residences in the Mixed Use District provide housing near sources of employment or commercial and professional services—an alternative to exclusively residential districts. This alternative housing is intended to add to the City’s supply of affordable housing, reduce commutes between home and work, and promote a strong, stable, and desirable pedestrian-oriented business environment.

(a)    Commercial/Residential (C/R). The Commercial/Residential (C/R) district provides for compatible mixtures of commercial and office uses, and residential units in the same building or on the same parcel. Allowable commercial and office uses include those that are typically permitted in the Community Commercial (CC) districts. These uses provide for a commercially-oriented environment that also offers compatibility for residential uses. The only projects allowed in this district are commercial or mixed use (commercial/residential) projects. Residential development is only permitted in conjunction with commercial development as part of a mixed use project.

(b)    Residential/Commercial-18 (R/C-18). The Residential/Commercial-18 (R/C-18) district provides for a mixture of residential uses with commercial and office uses in the same building or on the same parcel. Allowable commercial and office uses include those which are visitor serving in nature and at the same time are compatible with residential uses such as bed and breakfast inns, restaurants, specialty and convenience shops and recreation/open space uses such as coastal recreation equipment, rental shops and environmental education facilities related to coastal ecology. This district provides for a residential density of eighteen (18) units per acre. New development within Residential/Commercial-18 shall be sited in a manner that minimizes the residential development residents’ vehicle miles traveled (VMT). VMT siting considerations shall include, but not be limited to: close proximity of the new development to existing or planned transit stops (efforts should be made to site residential development within one-half mile to existing or planned transit stops); walkability to commercial development like restaurants, grocery stores and cultural venues; and close proximity to, and/or provision of, bicycle amenities like bicycle racks and bicycle lanes or dedicated bicycle pathways. It implements the State’s Mello Act and the City’s goals, objectives and policies for production of affordable housing by requiring that any project of new construction with more than ten residential units, which is located within the Coastal Overlay District, shall be required to provide a minimum ten percent (10%) of the total housing units as “affordable units,” as defined in the Housing Element of the City’s General Plan and pursuant to the provisions of the aforementioned State’s Mello Act. The only projects allowed in this district are mixed use (residential/commercial) projects. The gross floor area for commercial uses is limited to a maximum of ten percent (10%) of the total site area. Properties fronting Pacific Coast Highway are required, at a minimum, to provide visitor serving commercial uses on the ground floor of all the buildings fronting Pacific Coast Highway, for a minimum depth of forty (40) feet. (Visitor serving uses are those allowed under the Visitor/Recreation Commercial (V/RC) zoning designation in Sections 9.11.010 and 9.11.020(b)).

(c)    Professional/Residential (P/R). The Professional/Residential (P/R) district includes a mixture of professional offices and residential use in the same building or on the same parcel. Allowable professional uses typically include those that are permitted in the Professional/Administrative (P/A) district. These uses provide for a professional office-oriented environment that also offers compatibility for residential uses. The only projects allowed in this district are professional or mixed use (professional/residential) projects. Residential development is only permitted in conjunction with professional development as part of a mixed use project. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94; Ord. 09-06, 7/27/09; Ord. 12-05, 5/1/12)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 9.13.020 Permitted Uses, Accessory Uses, Temporary Uses and Conditional Uses.
(a)    Several classes of use are allowed in Mixed Use Districts. Each of these classes must promote the mixed use character of the districts. These classes of uses are:

(1)    Permitted Use — allowed by right if no discretionary review is required. Certain permitted uses, indicated by a P*, are also regulated by provisions contained in Chapter 9.07.

(2)    Accessory Use — allowed by right if accessory to a permitted or conditional use.

(3)    Temporary Use — allowed on a temporary basis in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 9.39.

(4)    Conditional Use — allowed subject to the approval of a Conditional Use Permit in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 9.65. Certain conditional uses, indicated by a C*, are also regulated by provisions contained in Chapter 9.07.

(5)    Prohibited Use — not allowed in the subject mixed use district.

(b)    Certain uses other than permitted uses may not be suitable or desirable in every location within Mixed Use Districts and, therefore require a Temporary Use Permit as described in Chapter 9.39, or discretionary review through the Conditional Use Permit process described in Chapter 9.65.

(c)    The following Table lists the classification of allowable uses in Mixed Use Districts. Any use not expressly allowed is prohibited.

 

SECTION 9.13.020(c)

MIXED USE DISTRICTS

 

LAND USES

C/R

R/C-18

P/R

 

Administrative Office Uses

P

P

P

 

Adult Day Care Facility

C

X

C

 

Alcoholic Beverage Outlet

P*/C*

P*/C*

P*/C*

 

Automotive Sales and Rental Uses

C* (1)

C* (1)

X

 

Bed and Breakfast Inn

 

C

 

 

Business Service Uses

P

X

P

 

Caretaker’s Residence

C

C

C

 

Civic Uses

C

C

P

 

Clinical Service Uses

P

C

P

 

Commercial Antenna

C

C

C

 

Community Care Facility

C

X

C

 

Congregate Care Facility

C

X

C

 

Congregate Living Health Facility

C

X

C

 

Convalescent Facility

C

X

C

 

Cultural Uses

P

P

P

 

Day Care Centers

P

X

C

 

Day Treatment Facility

C

X

C

 

Drinking Establishments

P*/C*

P*/C*

X

 

Drive Through Uses

C (5)

X

X

 

Drug Abuse Recovery or Treatment Facility

C

X

C

 

Dwelling Unit, Multiple Family

A (2)

P (3)

C (2)

 

Dwelling Unit, Single Family

P (4)

P (4)

C (2)

 

Educational Uses

X

X

C

 

Family Day Care Home, Large

C

C

C

 

Family Day Care Home, Small

C

C

C

 

Food Service Uses, Specialty

P

P

C

 

Group Dwelling/Group Home

C

X

C

 

Hospital, Acute Psychiatric

C

X

C

 

Hospital, Chemical Dependency Recovery

C

X

C

 

Hospital, General Acute Care

C

X

X

 

Hospital, Special

C

X

C

Intermediate Care Facility

C

X

C

Live Entertainment Uses

C*

C*

X

Medical Office Uses

P

P

P

Membership Organizations

P

P

C

Minor Repair Service Uses

P

C

P

Mixed Use Center

P

P

P

Mobilehome Park

P (6)

X

X

Open Space

P

P

P

Park, Public

P

P

P

Personal Service Uses

P

P

P

Photographic, Reproduction and Graphic Service Uses

P

P

P

Professional Office Uses

P

P

P

Public Utility Uses

C

X

X

Recreational Uses

C

C

C

Religious Uses

C*

C*

C*

Research and Development Uses

P

X

P

Residential Care Facilities for the Elderly

C

X

C

Residential Facility

C

X

C

Restaurant

P

P

C

Restaurant, Take-Out

P

P

C

Restaurant, Walkup

P

P

C

Retail Sales Uses

P

P

C

Sanitarium, Health

X

X

C

Sanitarium, Mental

X

X

C

Senior Citizen Housing

C

C

C

Single Room Occupancy

C

C

C

Skilled Nursing Facility

C

X

C

Small Family Home

C

X

C

Social Day Care Facility

C

X

C

Social Rehabilitation Facility

C

X

C

Temporary Uses

T*

T*

T*

 

LEGEND:

 

 

P = Permitted Use

P* = Permitted Use subject to special use standards (see Chapter 9.07)

C = Conditional Use

C* = Conditional Use subject to special use standards (see Chapter 9.07)

T = Temporary Use

T* = Temporary Use subject to special use standards (see Chapter 9.39)

X = Prohibited Use

A = Accessory Use

 

Footnotes for Section 9.13.020(c):

(1)    Accessory repair or service of motor vehicles is prohibited, but the incidental installation of parts or accessories, excluding mechanical components, is permitted.

(2)    Permitted only as an accessory use to commercial or professional uses in a mixed use project and located on the second floor only.

(3)    Permitted only as part of a mixed use project. In compliance with the Mello Act, new construction projects of more than ten residential units which are located within the Coastal Overlay District are required to provide a minimum ten percent (10%) of the units as “affordable units.”

(4)    A single family detached unit may only be permitted to replace an existing nonconforming single family residence. The replacement residence shall be developed in accordance with the development standards of the RSF 7 district. Single family attached units may be constructed as an accessory use in a mixed use project.

(5)    Permitted with a Conditional Use Permit which shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission and precludes restaurant/food uses, and liquor establishments, and permits such uses, but not limited to, dry cleaners, banks and pharmacies. (See Section 9.07.240)

(6)    Only those mobilehome parks in existence as of November 23, 1993 shall be permitted.

 

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-02, 1/11/94; Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94; Ord. 94-21, 12/13/94; Ord. 96-11, 8/27/96; Ord. 99-07, 8-10-99; Ord. 03-14, 8/27/03; Ord. 09-06, 7/27/09; Ord. 12-05, 5/1/12)

 

9.13.030 Development Standards.
        The following general development standards Table provides the minimum acceptable standards for development within the mixed use districts necessary to assure quality development and attractive local mixed use areas. The development standards are supplemented, and where applicable, superseded by the special development standards described in Chapter 9.05, Chapter 9.07, and Section 9.13.040. Parking standards are provided in Chapter 9.35.

 

SECTION 9.13.030

MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

 

Development Standards (1)

Mixed Use Zoning Districts

C/R

R/C-18

P/R

(a) Minimum Lot Size (2)

5,000 sf

5,000 sf

5,000 sf

(b) Minimum Lot Width (2)

50 ft

50 ft

50 ft

(c) Minimum Lot Depth (2)

100 ft

100 ft

100 ft

(d) Maximum Lot Coverage

40%

40%

35% (3)

(e) Maximum Residential Density

10 du/net ac

18 du/net ac

10 du/net ac

(f) Maximum Height

31-35 ft (4)
3 stories (5)

31-35 ft (4)
3 stories (5)

31 ft
2 stories

(g) Standard Floor Area Ratio (nonresidential) (6)

.5:1

N/A

.5:1

(h) Standard Floor Area Ratio for Mixed Use Projects (6)

.7:1

N/A

.5:1

(i) Minimum Front Yard Setback

 

From Ultimate Public Street R/W Line

5 ft

5 ft

0 ft

(j) Minimum Side Yard Setback

 

Interior Side

0 ft

5 ft

0 ft

Street Side

5 ft

5 ft

5 ft

(k) Minimum Rear Yard Setback

 

Standard Lot

15 ft

15 ft

15 ft

Adjacent to Alley or Street

10 ft

10 ft

10 ft

(l) Minimum Open Space (required for residential portion of development only)

Private:

100 sf per du

100 sf per du

100 sf per du

Common:

100 sf per du

100 sf per du

100 sf per du

(m) Minimum Landscape Coverage (7)

10%

15% (8)

15% (8)

(n) Minimum Building Separation

10 ft

10 ft

10 ft

(o) Minimum lockable, enclosed storage per residential unit provided in garage or carport area

250 cubic feet

250 cubic feet

250 cubic feet

(p) Separate trash and recycling facilities areas shall be provided for the residential component and the nonresidential component of C/R and P/R developments

Yes

Yes

Yes

 

Footnotes for Section 9.13.030:

(1)    See Chapter 9.75 for definitions and illustrations of development standards.

(2)    Development standard applies to proposed subdivisions of land. The standards may be waived by the Planning Commission when necessary to accommodate the parcel configuration for an integrated commercial development subject to approval of a Conditional Use Permit pursuant to Chapter 9.65.

(3)    An increase in lot coverage may be permitted with a Site Development Permit (pursuant to Chapter 9.71) provided that the development demonstrated exceptional design quality and improvements.

(4)    Subject to the criteria in Section 9.05.110(b)(4).

(5)    A maximum of 3 stories may be permitted in accordance with Section 9.05.200.

(6)    A maximum FAR of 1.5:1 may be permitted in accordance with Section 9.05.210.

(7)    All residential units shall be provided with twenty (20) square feet of private landscaped area which shall not be calculated in the minimum landscape coverage.

(8)    A decrease in landscape coverage may be permitted with a Site Development Permit with an approved landscape plan.

 

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94; Ord. 94-21, 12/13/94; Ord. 03-14, 8/27/03; Ord. 09-06, 7/27/09; Ord. 12-05, 5/1/12)

 

9.13.040 Special Development Standards.
(a)    Maximum Density. The maximum residential density in the mixed use districts is subject to the following requirements:

When residential dwelling units are combined with office, or retail commercial uses in a single building or on the same parcel, the maximum density shall be ten (10) dwelling units per net acre. The Floor Area Ratio requirements do not apply to the residential portion(s) of the structure.

The maximum residential density in the R/C-18 district shall be eighteen (18) dwelling units per acre. Proposed development does not have any presumptive development right or “entitlement” to the maximum residential density of eighteen (18) dwellings units per acre; the actual development allowed may be less than the maximum density due to localized conditions identified during the development review process. Projects of new construction with more than ten (10) residential units, which are located within the Coastal Overlay District and in the R/C-18 district, are also required to provide a minimum ten percent (10%) of the total housing units as “affordable units” in compliance with the Mello Act. Any affordable housing units provided pursuant to Government Code Section 65590(d) shall be counted toward compliance with affordable housing requirements of this Zoning district and the City’s General Plan. The affordable housing units are not counted in the density calculations of a project.

(b)    Accessory Uses and Structures. Accessory buildings or structures are subject to the same height and setback requirements described for primary buildings and structures in Section 9.13.030 except as modified by Section 9.05.080, Maximum Projections into Required Yard Areas.

(c)    Design Compatibility. New improvements or uses to the site or structure shall be sensitive to the fact that the new improvement or use will be within a district that may act as a transition or buffer between intensive nonresidential districts and residential neighborhoods. The new structure or use shall be designed so that it does not impact the adjacent uses, yet enhances the site’s use as a buffer or transition.

The new improvement or use shall recognize internal compatibility and create mutual enhancement with adjacent uses on-site. In order to properly mix residential and nonresidential uses on the same site, potential noise, odors, glare, excessive pedestrian traffic, or other significant impacts shall be reduced to a level of insignificance. New improvements shall be subject to the following additional standards:

(1)    Sound Mitigation. All residential dwellings shall be designed to be sound attenuated against present and future project noise. New projects, additions to existing projects, or new nonresidential uses in existing projects shall, under the discretion of the Director of Community Development, prepare an acoustical analysis report (by a City-certified acoustical engineer) describing the acoustical design features of the structure required to satisfy the exterior and interior noise standards (65db CNEL in outdoor living areas and an interior standard of 45db CNEL). The report shall include satisfactory evidence that the measures specified in the report(s) have been, or will be, incorporated into the design of the project.

(2)    Lighting Compatibility. All new projects, additions to existing projects, and new nonresidential uses, shall mitigate any light and glare impacts that may be directed towards on-site residential units. This may require, at the discretion of the Director of Community Development, the preparation of a photometric study which addresses the potential lighting impacts upon the residential units, any proposed mitigation measures, and evidence that the measures will be incorporated into the design of the project.

(3)    Design Standards. The design of the structure and site shall encourage integration of the street pedestrian environment with the nonresidential uses through the use of plazas and street furniture, yet use its design to hinder the street pedestrian from direct access to the on-site residential units.

The design of a mixed-use project shall ensure that the residential units are of residential character, creating a home and not simply a place to live. The design of the project shall ensure that privacy between other residential units and between other uses on site shall be maintained.

For projects in the R/C-18 zone, the ground floor area of any building fronting Pacific Coast Highway, for a minimum depth of forty (40) feet, is restricted to visitor serving commercial uses. Projects are also encouraged to coordinate visual and circulation linkages between adjacent developments to create design continuity. Emphasis should be on pedestrian orientation and pedestrian opportunities through widened sidewalks and street facing plazas, courtyards and richly planted landscape focus points oriented to the street. Appropriate landscape buffers should be provided between street and pedestrians and building sites.

(4)    Parking Standards. Parking areas for mixed use projects shall incorporate the following provisions:

(A)   Reserved parking stalls and appropriate signage indicating so, shall be required for each residential unit. This provision shall be included within the association bylaws.

(B)   Each residential unit shall be assigned a minimum forty-five (45) cubic foot exterior storage space and bicycle locker capable of securing two bicycles.

(C)   All parking areas shall be well lighted at all times.

(D)   The design of the structure will incorporate safe passages from the parking areas to the units. Enclosed corridors for pedestrian access between parking areas and residential units, in excess of ten (10) feet long, shall be prohibited.

(E)   Surface parking shall not be located to front Pacific Coast Highway.

(5)    Hours of Operation/Performance. In mixed use projects, nonresidential uses shall be restricted from operation between the hours of 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.

(6)    Joint Owners’ Association. A joint resident/commercial/office owner’s association shall be formed in all mixed use projects to ensure the well-being of each tenant on-site. The association shall be formed of equal voting rights according to type of use (i.e., residential, commercial, office). The association’s bylaws at a minimum shall include the following: determination of the maintenance and landscaping responsibilities, trash facility responsibilities, parking facility maintenance responsibility, assignment of parking spaces per each use, relationship between uses regarding association representation, voting procedures, and ways that problems are solved between the different on-site uses. The association bylaws shall be subject to review and approval by the Director of Community Development and City Attorney.

(7)    Signage Standards. All site signage shall minimize potential impacts of light, glare and noise, upon the on-site residential units. Signage for all uses shall be compatible with each other, and appropriately integrated into the structure/site design. All proposed signage shall conform to Chapter 9.37, Sign Regulations.

(d)    Sign Programs. Multi-tenant mixed use developments shall be required to obtain approval for a project sign program pursuant to Chapter 9.37.

(e)    “Art-in-Public-Places” Program. All new development projects located in the zoning districts described in this Chapter are subject to the provisions of the “Art-in-Public-Places” Program as described in Section 9.05.240.

(f)    In addition to the Special Development Standards located above, the following shall also apply to the site located at 34202 Del Obispo Street:

(1)    There shall be at least a twenty-five (25) foot setback from the property line adjacent to the San Juan Creek Bike Trail. Only development necessary to provide landscape features, pedestrian and bicycle uses and for passive park purposes are allowed within this setback area.

(2)    Public pedestrian and bicycle access to the San Juan Creek Bike Trail shall be provided on-site.

(3)    All streets and pedestrian and bicycle accessways shall be ungated and available to the general public for parking, vehicular, pedestrian, and bicycle access. All public entry controls (e.g., gates, gate/guard houses, guards, signage, etc.) and restrictions on use by the general public (e.g., preferential parking districts, resident-only parking periods/permits, etc.) associated with any streets, on-street parking areas, or pedestrian and bicycle accessways shall be prohibited.

(4)    An adequate buffer shall be established during the development review process between the South Orange County Wastewater Authority (SOCWA) parcel and development located on the subject parcel. The buffer must be located on the subject parcel and not the SOCWA parcel. Where necessary to accommodate an adequate buffer, the amount/density of residential development on-site shall be reduced and/or eliminated, as opposed to reducing the amount/density of allowed commercial/visitor serving uses on-site.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-13, 8/23/94; Ord. 09-06, 7/27/09; Ord. 12-05, 5/1/12)

Chapter 9.15 PROFESSIONAL/ADMINISTRATIVE DISTRICT
9.15.010 Intent and Purpose.
        The Professional/Administrative (P/A) district permits a range of office uses in areas which compliment adjacent residential, commercial, or industrial business districts. The P/A district is designed to be compatible with and buffer residential neighborhoods from commercial, industrial, business and other intensive land uses.

(a)    Professional/Administrative Office District. The Professional/Administrative (P/A) district provides for concentrations of single tenant or multi-tenant offices and supporting uses throughout the community. The district provides office services and employment including legal, medical services, financial institutions, corporate and governmental offices, and community facilities. Small convenience or service commercial districts are supporting uses that are included to meet the needs of residents, visitors, and business employees working within the district.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.15.020 Permitted Uses, Accessory Uses, Temporary Uses, and Conditional Uses.
(a)    Several classes of uses are allowed in the Professional/Administrative district. Each of these classes must promote the professional/administrative character of the district. These classes of uses are:

(1)    Permitted Use — allowed by right if no discretionary review is required.

(2)    Accessory Use — allowed by right if accessory to a permitted or conditional use.

(3)    Temporary Use — allowed on a temporary basis in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 9.39.

(4)    Conditional Use — allowed subject to the approval of a Conditional Use Permit in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 9.65.

(5)    Prohibited Use — not allowed in the Professional/Administrative District.

(b)    The following Table lists the classification of allowable uses in Professional/Administrative District. Any use not expressly allowed is prohibited.

 

SECTION 9.15.020(b)

PROFESSIONAL/ADMINISTRATIVE DISTRICT

 

LAND USES

P/A

 Administrative Office Uses

P

 Business Service Uses

P

 Civic Uses

P

 Clinical Service Uses

P

 Commercial Antennas

C

 Construction and Maintenance Service Uses

P

 Cultural Uses

P

 Educational Uses

P

 Hospital, Acute Psychiatric

C

 Hospital, Chemical Dependency Recovery

C

 Hospital, General Acute Care

C

 Hospital, Special

C

 Intermediate Care Facility

C

 Medical Office Uses

P

 Open Space

P

 Personal Service Uses

P

 Photographic, Reproduction and Graphic Service Uses

P

 Professional Office Uses

P

 Recreational Uses

C

 Research and Development Uses

P

 Residential Care Facility for the Elderly

C

 Sanitarium, Health

C

 Sanitarium, Mental

C

 Skilled Nursing Facility

C

 Small Family Home

C

 Social Rehabilitation Facility

C

 Temporary Uses

T*

 

LEGEND:

 

P = Permitted Use

C = Conditional Use

X = Prohibited Use

T* = Temporary Use subject to special use standards (see Chapter 9.39)

 

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-02, 1/11/94; Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94)

 

9.15.030 Development Standards.
        The following general development standards Table provides the minimum acceptable standards for development within the Professional/Administrative districts necessary to assure quality development and attractive local Professional/Administrative areas. The development standards are supplemented, and where applicable, superseded by the special development standards described in Chapter 9.05, Chapter 9.07, and Section 9.15.040. Parking standards are provided in Chapter 9.35.

 

SECTION 9.15.030

PROFESSIONAL/ADMINISTRATIVE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

 

Development Standards (1)

Professional/Administrative Zoning District

P/A

(a) Minimum Lot Size (2)

10,000 sf

(b) Minimum Lot Width (2)

60 ft

(c) Minimum Lot Depth (2)

100 ft

(d) Maximum Lot Coverage

35%

(e) Maximum Height

31 - 35 ft (3)/3 stories (4)

(f) Standard Floor Area Ratio (5)

.7:1

(g) Minimum Front Yard Setback

 

  From Ultimate Street R/W Line

10 ft

(h) Minimum Side Yard Setback

 

  Interior Side

10 ft

  Street Side

15 ft

(i) Minimum Rear Yard Setback

 

  Standard Lot

20 ft

  Adjacent to Alley or Street

15 ft

(j) Minimum Landscape Coverage

15%

(k) Minimum Building Separation

10 ft

 

Footnotes for Section 9.15.030:

 

(1)      See Chapter 9.75 for definitions and illustrations of development standards and uses.

 

(2)      Development standard applies to proposed subdivisions of land. The standards may be waived by the Planning Commission when necessary to accommodate the parcel configuration for an integrated commercial development.

 

(3)      Subject to the measurement and design criteria in Section 9.05.110(b)(4)

 

(4)      A maximum of three stories may only be permitted in accordance with Section 9.05.200.

 

(5)      A maximum FAR of 1.1:1 may be permitted in accordance with Section 9.05.210.

 

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-21, 12/13/94)

 

9.15.040 Special Development Standards.
(a)    Accessory Uses and Structures. Accessory buildings and structures are subject to the same height and setback requirements described for primary buildings and structures in Section 9.15.030 except as modified by Section 9.05.080, Maximum Projections into Required Yard Areas.

(b)    Sign Programs. Multi-tenant professional/administrative developments shall be required to obtain approval for a project sign program pursuant to Chapter 9.37.

(c)    “Art-in-Public-Places” Program. All new development projects located in the zoning districts described in this Chapter are subject to the provisions of the “Art-in-Public-Places” Program as described in Section 9.05.240.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-13, 8/23/94)

Chapter 9.17 INDUSTRIAL/BUSINESS DISTRICT*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 18-07. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


9.17.010 Intent and Purpose.
        The Industrial/Business district permits a range of light industrial, business, and marine oriented uses. The district also allows the potential for affordable housing as a conditional use.

(a)    Industrial/Business District. The Industrial/Business (I/B) district promotes the development of attractive, well-planned light industrial and business uses to serve the needs of the community, the City’s coastal resources and a stable and vital local economy. Uses include, but are not limited to, marine-related businesses, auto supplies and services, home furnishings and appliances, lumber yards, home improvement centers, wholesale businesses, light manufacturing, research and development, and support activities for the City’s commercial and office districts. The district provides for the development of an efficient and attractive industrial/business area that includes adequate circulation and landscaping, attractive buildings, and coordinated signage.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 9.17.020 Permitted Uses, Accessory Uses, Temporary Uses, and Conditional Uses.
(a)    Several classes of uses are allowed in Industrial/Business district. Each of these classes must promote the industrial/business character of the district. These classes of uses are:

(1)    Permitted Use — allowed by right if no discretionary review is required.

(2)    Accessory Use — allowed by right if accessory to a permitted or conditional use.

(3)    Temporary Use — allowed on a temporary basis in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 9.39.

(4)    Conditional Use — allowed subject to the approval of a Conditional Use Permit in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 9.65.

(5)    Prohibited Use — not allowed in the Industrial/Business District.

(b)    The following Table lists the classification of allowable uses in Industrial/Business district. Any use not expressly allowed is prohibited.

 

SECTION 9.17.020(b)

INDUSTRIAL/BUSINESS DISTRICT

 

LAND USES

I/B

 Administrative Office Uses

P

 Adult Businesses

P*

 Automotive Sales and Rental Uses

C*

 Building Materials Sales and Service Uses

P

 Business Service Uses

P

 Caretaker’s Residence

C

 Commercial Antenna

C

 Communal Housing

C

 Construction and Maintenance Service Uses

P

 Drive-Through Uses

C

 Educational Uses

P

 Hazardous Waste Facility

C*

 Heavy Industrial Uses

C

 Kennel

P

 Light Industrial Uses

P

 Major Automotive Uses

P

 Medium Industrial Uses

P

 Minor Automotive Uses

P

 Minor Repair Service Uses

P

 Open Space

P

 Photographic, Reproduction and Graphic Service Uses

P

 Public Utility Uses

P

 Recreational Uses

C

 Recycling Facilities

C*

 Research and Development Uses

P

 Restaurant

P

 Restaurant, Drive-Through

C

 Sanitary Sewer Facility

P

 Single Room Occupancy

C

 Solid Waste Disposal Facility

C*

 Storage Yard Uses

C

 Temporary Uses

T*

 Transportation Uses

P

 Warehouse and Storage Uses

P

 

LEGEND:

 

 

P = Permitted Use

P* = Permitted Use subject to special use standards (see Chapter 9.07)

C = Conditional Use

C* = Conditional Use subject to special use standards (see Chapter 9.07)

T = Temporary Use

T* = Temporary Use subject to special use standards (see Chapter 9.39)

X = Prohibited Use

A = Accessory Use

 

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-02, 1/11/94; Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94; Ord. 96-10, 8/13/96)

 

9.17.030 Development Standards.
        The following general development standards Table provides the minimum acceptable standards for development within the Industrial/Business Districts necessary to assure quality development and attractive local Industrial/Business areas. The development standards are supplemented, and where applicable, superseded by the special development standards described in Chapter 9.05, Chapter 9.07, and Section 9.17.040. Parking standards are provided in Chapter 9.35.

 

SECTION 9.17.030

INDUSTRIAL/BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

 

Development Standards (1)

I/B

(a) Minimum Lot Size (2)

20,000 sf

(b) Minimum Lot Width (2)

100 ft

(c) Minimum Lot Depth (2)

150 ft

(d) Maximum Lot Coverage

50%

(e) Maximum Height

31-35 ft (3) 3 stories (4)

(f) Standard Floor Area Ratio (5)

.5:1

(g) Minimum Front Yard Setback

 

  From Ultimate Public Street R/W Line

20 ft

(h) Minimum Side Yard Setback

 

  Interior Side

10 ft

  Street Side

20 ft

(i) Minimum Rear Yard Setback

 

  Standard Lot

25 ft

  Adjacent to Alley or Street

20 ft

(j) Minimum Landscape Coverage

20%

(k) Minimum Building Separation

10 ft

 

Footnotes for Section 9.17.030:

 

(1)      See Chapter 9.75 for definitions and illustrations of development standards.

 

(2)      Development standard applies to proposed subdivisions of land. The standards may be waived by the Planning Commission when necessary to accommodate the parcel configuration for an integrated commercial development.

 

(3)      Subject to the measurement and design criteria in Section `(b)(4).

 

(4)      A maximum of 3 stories may only be permitted in accordance with Section 9.05.200.

 

(5)      A Maximum FAR of .75:1 may be permitted in accordance with Section 9.05.210.

 

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-21, 12/13/94)

 

9.17.040 Special Development Standards.
(a)    Accessory Uses and Structures. Accessory buildings and structures are subject to the same height and setback requirements described for primary buildings and structures in Section 9.13.030 except as modified by Section 9.05.080, Maximum Projections into Required Yard Areas.

(b)    Sign Programs. Multi-tenant Industrial/Business developments shall be required to obtain approval for a project sign program pursuant to Chapter 9.37.

(c)    “Art-in-Public-Places” Program. All new development projects located in the zoning districts described in this Chapter are subject to the provisions of the “Art-in-Public-Places” Program as described in Section 9.05.240.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-13, 8/23/94)

Chapter 9.19 COMMUNITY FACILITIES DISTRICT*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 18-01 and 18-07. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 9.19.010 Intent and Purpose.
        The Community Facilities District provides for public, quasi-public, and private community uses to serve the needs of residents, visitors, property owners, employers and employees of businesses in the City. The District includes both public and private community uses such as civic buildings, schools, churches, hospitals, cultural, recreational facilities and sanitary sewer facilities, and other public facilities. Development within this District should serve to create public places and city landmarks, which contribute to City design. The District also allows multifamily housing at a density of twenty-two (22) units per acre to permit high density residential projects in compliance with the adopted Housing Element. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 10-06, 5/24/10)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 9.19.020 Permitted Uses, Accessory Uses, Temporary Uses, and Conditional Uses.
(a)    Several classes of uses are allowed in Community Facilities district. Each of these classes must promote the community character of the district. These classes of uses are:

(1)    Permitted Use — allowed by right if no discretionary review is required.

(2)    Accessory Use — allowed by right if accessory to a permitted or conditional use.

(3)    Temporary Use — allowed on a temporary basis in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 9.39.

(4)    Conditional Use — allowed subject to the approval of a Conditional Use Permit in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 9.65.

(5)    Prohibited Use — not allowed in the Community Facilities District.

(b)    The following Table lists the classification of allowable uses in Community Facilities district. Any use not expressly allowed is prohibited.

 

SECTION 9.19.020(b)

COMMUNITY FACILITIES DISTRICT

 

LAND USES

CF

 Adult Day Care Facility

C

 Adult Day Health Care

C

 Animal Shelter

C

 Athletic Field

P

 Cemetery

C

 Civic Uses

P

 Commercial Antennas

C

 Community Center

P

 Congregate Care Facility

C

 Congregate Living Health Facility

C

 Convalescent Facility

C

 Cultural Uses

P

 Day Care Centers

P

 Day Treatment Facility

C

 Drug Abuse Recovery or Treatment Facility

C

 Dwelling, Multiple-Family

P

 Educational Uses

P

 Emergency Shelters (Maximum 20 beds)

P

 Family Day Care Home, Large

C

 Family Day Care Home, Small

C

 Group Dwelling/Group Home

C

 Hospital, Acute Psychiatric

C

 Hospital, Chemical Dependency Recovery

C

 Hospital, General Acute Care

C

 Hospital, Special

C

 Institutional Uses

C

 Intermediate Care Facility

C

 Open Space

P

 Park, Public

P

 Public Land Uses

C

 Public Utility Uses

C

 Recreational Uses

C

 Recycling Facilities

C*

 Religious Uses

C

 Residential Care Facility for the Elderly

C

 Residential Facility

C

 Sanitarium, Health

C

 Sanitarium, Mental

C

 Sanitary Sewer Facilities

P

 Skilled Nursing Facility

C

 Small Family Home

C

 Social Day Care Facility

C

 Social Rehabilitation Facility

C

 Solid Waste Disposal Facility

C*

 Temporary Uses

T*

 Transportation Uses

C


LEGEND:

 

 

P = Permitted Use

P* = Permitted Use subject to special use standards (see Chapter 9.07)

C = Conditional Use

C* = Conditional Use subject to special use standards (see Chapter 9.07)

T = Temporary Use

T* = Temporary Use subject to special use standards (see Chapter 9.39)

X = Prohibited Use

A = Accessory Use

 

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94; Ord. 10-06, 5/24/10)

 

9.19.030 Development Standards.
        The following general development standards Table provides the minimum acceptable standards for development within the Community Facilities Districts necessary to assure quality development and attractive local community facilities. The development standards are supplemented, and where applicable, superseded by the special development standards described in Chapter 9.05, Chapter 9.07, and Section 9.19.040. Parking standards are provided in Chapter 9.35.

 

SECTION 9.19.030

COMMUNITY FACILITIES DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

 

Development Standards (1)

CF

For Residential Projects Only

(a) Minimum Lot Size (2)

5,000 sf

4,800 sf

(b) Minimum Lot Width (2)

50 ft

 

Standard Lot

 

45 ft

Cul-de-Sac Lot (at front setback line)

N/A

25 ft

Flag Lot (for access extension)

N/A

25 ft

(c) Minimum Lot Depth (2)

100 ft

90 ft

(d) Maximum Lot Coverage

35%

60%

(e) Maximum Height

31—35 ft (3)

31—35 ft (3)

3 stories (4)

3 stories (4)

(f) Standard Floor Area Ratio (5)

.4:1

N/A

(g) Minimum Front Yard Setback (8)

 

 

From Ultimate Public Street R/W Line

20 ft

20 ft

Flag Lot (from connection with access extension)

N/A

15 ft

(h) Minimum Side Yard Setback (8)

 

 

Interior Side

10 ft

10 ft

Street Side

15 ft

10 ft

Flat Lot (6)

N/A

10 ft

(i) Minimum Rear Yard Setback (8)

 

 

Standard Lot

20 ft

20 ft

Adjacent to Alley or Street (7)

15 ft

15 ft

(j) Minimum Landscape Coverage

20%

20%

(k) Minimum Open Space

 

 

Private

N/A

200 sf/du

Common

N/A

25% ac

(l) Minimum Building Separation

10 ft

10 ft

 

Footnotes for Section 9.19.030:

(1)    See Chapter 9.75 for definitions and illustrations of development standards.

(2)    Development standard applies to proposed subdivisions of land. These standards do not apply to existing lots where no subdivision is proposed nor to proposed condominiums or other common lot subdivisions. The standards may be waived by the Planning Commission when necessary to accommodate the parcel configuration for an integrated commercial development.

(3)    Subject to the design and measurement criteria in Section 9.05.110(b)(4) and Section 9.05.110(a) for residential projects.

(4)    A maximum of three (3) stories may only be permitted in accordance with Section 9.05.200.

(5)    A maximum of 1:1 may be permitted in accordance with Section 9.05.210.

(6)    If the side yard of a flag lot is adjacent to the rear yard of a residentially zoned lot, that side yard setback shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet.

(7)    Subject to standards in Section 9.35.040(e) for garage setbacks.

(8)    For existing lots less than fifty (50) feet wide and/or less than one hundred (100) feet deep, see Section 9.05.190 for reduced front, side and rear building setbacks for residential projects.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-21, 12/13/94; Ord. 10-06, 5/24/10)

 

9.19.040 Special Development Standards.
(a)    Accessory Uses and Structures.

(1)    Height and Setbacks. Accessory buildings and structures are subject to the same height and setback requirements described for primary buildings and structures in Section 9.19.030, except as modified by Section 9.05.080, Maximum Projections into Required Yard Areas.

(2)    Accessory uses that do not add gross floor area such as clock towers, flag poles, and monuments (and do not contain signage) may be allowed to exceed the maximum building height by up to fifteen (15) feet through approval of a Conditional Use Permit. Allowance to exceed the building height shall be based on findings of the decision-making body that such accessory use promotes a positive community identity that contributes to City design.

(b)    Emergency Shelters. The purpose of these standards is to ensure the development of emergency shelters do not adversely impact adjacent parcels or the surrounding neighborhood, and shall be developed in a manner which protects the health, safety, and general welfare of the nearby residents and businesses, while providing for the housing needs of homeless population of the community. The following performance standards shall apply to emergency shelters.

(1)    Emergency shelters which are set up as an accessory use to churches are limited to a maximum of ten (10) beds/persons facility.

(2)    Emergency shelters in the Community Facilities Zone are limited to a maximum of twenty (20) beds/persons facility.

(3)    Emergency shelters shall provide on-site waiting and intake areas screened from public view to the satisfaction of the Director of Community Development. The intake is allowed between the hours of 5:00 p.m. to 8:00 p.m. or at dusk, whichever is sooner, and the discharge hours shall be from 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.

(4)    Emergency shelters shall provide on-site management with security during operational hours only.

(5)    Emergency shelters shall be well lit during operational hours with adequate external lighting for security purposes. The lighting shall be stationary, directed away from adjacent properties and public rights-of-way, and of intensity compatible with the neighborhood to the satisfaction of the Director of Community Development.

(6)    Emergency shelters shall provide laundry facilities or services adequate for the number of residents. This requirement may be waived for emergency shelters which are set up as accessory use to churches by the Director of Community Development.

(7)    Emergency shelters may provide one or more of the following specific common facilities for the exclusive use of the residents and staff:

(A)   Central cooking and dining room(s);

(B)   Recreation room;

(C)   Counseling center.

(8)    For the purposes of noise abatement in residential districts, organized outdoor activities may only be conducted between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.

(9)    Emergency shelters shall provide a trash enclosure area that is completely enclosed with masonry walls not less than five (5) feet high with a solid gated opening to accommodate a standard sized trash bin, or other enclosures as approved by the Director of Community Development. The trash enclosure shall be accessible to trash collection vehicles.

(10)  The provider/management of an emergency shelter shall have a written management plan including, as applicable, provisions for staff training, neighborhood outreach, security, screening of residents to insure compatibility with services provided at the facility, and for training, counseling, and treatment programs for residents.

(11)  The provider shall not discriminate in any services provided and shall not require participation by residents in any religious or philosophical ritual, service, meeting or rite as a condition of eligibility.

(12)  Emergency shelters shall abide by all applicable development standards of the Community Facilities District and with parking standards as set forth in Chapter 9.35 of this Code.

(13)  No more than one emergency shelter shall be permitted within a radius of three hundred (300) feet from another such shelter.

(c)    “Art-in-Public-Places” Program. All new development projects located in the zoning districts described in this Chapter are subject to the provisions of the “Art-in-Public-Places” Program as described in Section 9.05.240.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-13, 8/23/94; Ord. 10-06, 5/24/10)

Chapter 9.21 RECREATION, OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION DISTRICTS
9.21.010 Intent and Purpose.
        The Recreation, Open Space, and Conservation Districts provide a range of public and private uses to meet the recreation and open space uses needs of City residents, visitors, and employees; and to conserve the City’s significant natural resources.

(a)    Recreation District. The Recreation (REC) district permits a wide range of higher intensity public and private active recreational uses. These uses are primarily outdoor and activity orientated. Recreation district uses include community facilities, outdoor athletic facilities, golf courses/health clubs, public parks and similar uses.

(b)    Open Space District. The Open Space (OS) district provides for a more limited range of public and private open space areas for low intensity, passive recreational purposes and related uses. The primary use within the Open Space district is passive recreation, such as trails, picnic areas, and other non-intensive or structured recreational activities.

(c)    Conservation District. The Conservation (CONS) district is intended for those lands that should remain in a natural state. Some minor intrusions from passive recreational uses may be appropriate if the primary goal of conservation and protection is achieved and there is a demonstrated need for such recreational uses. For areas within the coastal zone designated as the CONS district, “passive recreational uses” shall be limited to hiking, viewing of scenic areas, limited picnicking, and nature study.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 97-05, 9/9/97)

 

9.21.020 Permitted Uses, Accessory Uses, Temporary Uses, and Conditional Uses.
(a)    Several classes of uses are allowed in Recreation, Open Space, and Conservation Districts. Each of these classes must promote the recreational, open space, or conservation character of the districts. These classes of uses are:

(1)    Permitted Use — allowed by right if no discretionary review is required.

(2)    Accessory Use — allowed by right if accessory to a permitted or conditional use.

(3)    Temporary Use — allowed on a temporary basis in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 9.39.

(4)    Conditional Use — allowed subject to the approval of a Conditional Use Permit in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 9.65.

(5)    Prohibited Use — not allowed in the Recreation, Open Space, or Conservation District.

(b)    The following Table lists the classification of allowable uses in Recreation, Open Space, and Conservation Districts. Any use not expressly allowed is prohibited.

 

SECTION 9.21.020(b)

RECREATION/OPEN SPACE/CONSERVATION DISTRICTS

 

LAND USES

REC

OS

CONS

 Agriculture

 

C

 

 Animal Shelter

C

C

X

 Athletic Field

P

P

X

 Camp, Public

C

C

X

 Caretaker’s Residence

C

C

X

 Cemetery

C

C

X

 Commercial Antennas

C

C

X

 Commercial Recreational Uses

C

C

X

 Community Center

P

P

X

 Cultural Uses

P

P

X

 Equestrian Facility

P

P

X

 Food Services Uses, Specialty

C

X

X

 Open Space

P

P

C

 Open Space Uses

P

P

P

 Park, Public

P

P

C

 Public Land Uses

P

P

C

 Public Utility Uses

C

C

C

 Recreational Uses

P

C

X

 Recreational Vehicle Park

C

X

X

 Restaurant, Walkup

C

X

X

 Stable, Private

P

C

X

 Stable, Public

P

C

X

 Temporary Uses

T*

T*

X

 Trails, Riding and Hiking

P

P

P

 

LEGEND:

 

 

P = Permitted Use

P* = Permitted Use subject to special use standards (see Chapter 9.07)

C = Conditional Use

C* = Conditional Use subject to special use standards (see Chapter 9.07)

T = Temporary Use

T* = Temporary Use subject to special use standards (see Chapter 9.39)

X = Prohibited Use

A = Accessory Use

 

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 96-10, 8/13/96; Ord. 97-05, 9/9/97)

 

9.21.030 Development Standards.
        The following general development standards Table provides the minimum acceptable standards for development within the Recreation, Open Space, and Conservation Districts necessary to assure quality development and attractive local Recreation, Open Space, and Conservation areas. The development standards are supplemented, and where applicable, superseded by the special development standards described in Chapter 9.05, Chapter 9.07, and Section 9.21.040. Parking standards are provided in Chapter 9.35.

 

SECTION 9.21.030

RECREATION/OPEN SPACE/CONSERVATION DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

 

Development Standards (1)

Recreation/Open Space/Conservation Districts

 

REC

OS

CONS

(a) Minimum Lot Size (2)

10,000 sf

N/A

N/A

(b) Maximum Building Coverage

20%

10%

N/A

(c) Maximum Height (3)

31 - 35 ft (4)

2 stories

18 ft/1 story

N/A

(d) Standard Floor Area Ratio (5)

.1:1

.1:1

N/A

(e) Minimum Setbacks

 

  From Ultimate Street R/W Line

50 ft

50 ft

N/A

  From Adjoining Property Lines

25 ft

25 ft

N/A

(f) Minimum Open Space and Landscaping

80%

90%

100%

 

Footnotes for Section 9.21.030:

 

(1)      See Chapter 9.75 for definitions and illustrations of development standards.

 

(2)      Development standard applies to proposed subdivisions of land. The standards may be waived by the Planning Commission when necessary to accommodate the parcel configuration for an integrated community development.

 

(3)      The maximum height limit shall not apply to lighting standards providing illumination for recreational fields or parking facilities.

 

(4)      Subject to the design and measurement criteria in Section 9.05.110(b)(4).

 

(5)      A maximum FAR of .2:1 may be permitted in accordance with Section 9.05.210.

 

N/A — Development standard not applicable to this zoning district.

 

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-21, 12/13/94)

 

9.21.040 Special Development Standards.
(a)    Accessory Uses and Structures. Accessory buildings and structures are subject to the same height and setback requirements described for primary buildings and structures in Section 9.21.030, except as modified by Section 9.05.080, Maximum Projections into Required Yard Areas.

(b)    Design Compatibility. Every new building or structure addition to an existing building or structure and site improvement shall result in a unified site design and architectural style that creates compatibility and an enhanced relationship.

        The primary design objective in the recreation, open space, and conservation districts is to convey and achieve a sense and presence of public open space. Design within the District should strive to achieve visual, and where appropriate, physical public access. Where appropriate, the site should be lushly landscaped. Signage within the District should be clear but subdued and clearly indicate the use of a particular site.

(c)    “Art-in-Public-Places” Program. All new development projects located in the zoning districts described in this Chapter are subject to the provisions of the “Art-in-Public-Places” Program as described in Section 9.05.240.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-13, 8/23/94)

Chapter 9.23 TRANSPORTATION CORRIDOR DISTRICT
9.23.010 Intent and Purpose.
        The Transportation Corridor (TC) District includes land within the public rights-of-way for streets, highways, rail lines and other transportation corridors and facilities that are part of the General Plan Circulation Element. Railroad rights-of-way shall be deemed to be in the TC district and shall be permitted to be used solely for the purpose of accommodating tracks, signals, other operative devices, and the movement of rolling stock. The District also includes open space areas adjacent to or included in the rights-of-way, public or private parking areas, and transit facilities. The District designates these major components of the City’s circulation system and ensures these components are an efficient and aesthetic part of the community. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.23.020 Permitted Uses, Accessory Uses, Temporary Uses, and Conditional Uses.
(a)    Several classes of uses are allowed in the Transportation Corridor district. Each of these classes must promote the transportation character of the district. These classes of uses are:

(1)    Permitted Use — allowed by right if no discretionary review is required.

(2)    Accessory Use — allowed by right if accessory to a permitted or conditional use.

(3)    Temporary Use — allowed on a temporary basis in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 9.39.

(4)    Conditional Use — allowed subject to the approval of a Conditional Use Permit in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 9.65.

(5)    Prohibited Use — not allowed in the Transportation Corridor district.

(b)    The following Table lists the classification of allowable uses in Transportation Corridor district. Any use not expressly allowed is prohibited.

 

SECTION 9.23.020(b)

TRANSPORTATION CORRIDOR DISTRICT

 

LAND USES

TC

 Roads, Streets and Highways

P

 Transportation Uses

C

 

LEGEND:

 

 

P = Permitted Use

P* = Permitted Use subject to special use standards (see Chapter 9.07)

C = Conditional Use

C* = Conditional Use subject to special use standards (see Chapter 9.07)

T = Temporary Use

T* = Temporary Use subject to special use standards (see Chapter 9.39)

X = Prohibited Use

A = Accessory Use

 

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.23.030 Development Standards.
        The following general development standards Table provides the minimum acceptable standards for development within the Transportation Corridor District necessary to assure quality development. The development standards are supplemented, and where applicable, superseded by the special development standards described in Chapter 9.05, Chapter 9.07, and Section 9.23.040. Parking standards are provided in Chapter 9.35.

 

SECTION 9.23.030

TRANSPORTATION CORRIDOR DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

 

Development Standards (1)

TC

(a) Minimum Lot Size (2)

5,000 sf

(b) Maximum Lot Coverage

10%

(c) Maximum Height (3)

31 - 35 ft (4) 2 stories

(d) Standard Floor Area Ratio (5)

.1:1

(e) Minimum Setbacks

 

  From Ultimate Street R/W Line

10 ft

  From Adjoining Property Lines

10 ft

(f) Minimum Open Space and Landscaping

15%

 

Footnotes for Section 9.23.030:

 

(1)      See Chapter 9.75 for definitions and illustrations of development standards.

 

(2)      Development standard applies to proposed subdivisions of land. The standards may be waived by the Planning Commission when necessary to accommodate the parcel configuration for an integrated commercial development.

 

(3)      Maximum height may be exceeded as necessary for utility poles, traffic signal towers, and other accessory structures that are related to the principal uses in the district.

 

(4)      Subject to the design and measurement criteria in Section 9.05.110(b)(4).

 

(5)      A maximum FAR of .2:1 may be permitted in accordance with Section 9.05.210.

 

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-21, 12/13/94)

 

9.23.040 Special Development Standards.
        The Special Development Standards contained in this section apply to lots outside the travel way of transportation corridors.

(a)    Accessory Uses and Structures. Accessory buildings and structures are subject to the same height and setback requirements described for primary buildings and structures in Section 9.23.030 except as modified by Section 9.05.080, Maximum Projections into Required Yard Areas.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

Chapter 9.25 DANA POINT HARBOR DISTRICT
9.25.010 Dana Point Harbor Revitalization Plan and District Regulations.
        The land use and development regulations for this area are contained in the Dana Point Harbor Revitalization Plan and District Regulations included as Appendix C of the Dana Point Zoning Code. (Amended by Ord. 06-08, 9/27/06; Ord. 10-02, 2/22/10; Ord. 11-03, 7/25/11)

Chapter 9.26 TOWN CENTER DISTRICT
9.26.010 Town Center District and Regulations.
(a)    The land use and development regulations for this area are contained in the Dana Point Town Center Plan adopted by reference as Appendix E of the Dana Point Zoning Code, as amended by the 2015 Town Center Initiative (“the Act”) approved by the voters in the June 2016 municipal election. This Act may be amended or rescinded only by a vote of the people. These provisions shall apply to all Town Center projects seeking building permits or entitlements.

(b)    A maximum limit of three (3) stories and forty (40) foot height, plus the required setbacks and step backs shall be strictly applied. Encroachments beyond the maximum height limit are strictly limited to required mechanical equipment and chimneys and may not exceed forty-two (42) inches.

(c)    Professional business/office uses are preferred uses on the second and third floors of all new construction in the Town Center area.

(d)    All parking requirements of Dana Point Municipal Code Section 9.35.080, subsection (e) shall be strictly enforced for each use within a building, including requirements for guest spaces for residential units which cannot be shared with retail requirements. In the Town Center area, parking spaces for residences shall be provided on site; no reduction of required parking spaces shall be granted for bicycle spaces; no credit for parking spaces on public property shall be given.

(e)    All off-street loading facility standards of Dana Point Municipal Code Section 9.35.090 shall be strictly enforced for loading spaces in the Town Center area. Loading spaces shall be provided on site or located along public streets only when lost public parking spaces are provided on site beyond other applicable parking requirements.

(f)    Review Process for New Projects. The City shall provide the public with relevant project material for any proposed project in the Town Center area (including, but not limited to, building plans, elevations, site maps, story poling dates, staff reports, and parking analysis) on the City’s official website, two (2) weeks prior to any study sessions, public meetings, Planning Commission meetings, or City Council meetings.

(g)    Requested variances for projects shall be supported by evidence that the underlying conditions meet the statutory requirements of Dana Point Municipal Code Section 9.67.050. The Dana Point City Attorney shall provide a formal legal opinion for each requested variance in the Town Center area certifying whether the conditions of Section 9.67.050 are fully met and whether evidence supports granting the variance.

(h)    If there are any conflicts between subsections (b) to (g) and the details within the Dana Point Town Center Plan, subsections (b) to (g) in total and separately shall be the governing requirements.

(Added by Ord. 06-17, 12/13/06; amended by Ord. 08-08, 6/17/08; Res. 16-07-05-01, June 2016 special election)

Chapter 9.27 COASTAL OVERLAY DISTRICT
9.27.010 Intent and Purpose.
        The Coastal Overlay (CO) District preserves and protects the coastal resources within Dana Point, and implements the California Coastal Act (Division 20 of the Public Resources Code) and the General Plan coastal policies which constitute the Land Use Plan portion of the certified Local Coastal Program for the City of Dana Point. The CO District is an overlay district which shall be combined with any other zoning district that lies within the Coastal Zone of the City of Dana Point. A Coastal Development Permit, subject to the standards of the specific zoning designation is required for all “development”, as defined in Section 9.75.040. Procedures and regulations in Chapter 9.61 “Administration of Zoning”, Chapter 9.69 “Coastal Development Permit” and this Chapter constitute additional minimum standards for all development within the Coastal Zone. In the Coastal Overlay District, the standards in this Chapter shall take precedence over other standards in the Zoning Code. The standards in this Chapter shall be applied in a manner which is most protective of coastal resources and public access. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 97-05, 9/9/97)

 

9.27.020 Permitted, Accessory and Conditional Uses.
        Permitted, accessory, temporary and conditional uses within the Coastal Overlay district are the same uses as those allowed within the underlying base zoning districts, with the exceptions listed below. Refer to Chapter 9.69 for Coastal Development Permit requirements.

(a)    Beach area development in areas other than the Residential Beach Road 12 (RBR 12) and Residential Beach Road Duplex 18 (RBRD 18) Districts, is limited to public lifeguard towers, public restrooms, public piers, shoreline protective works, public access structures, campgrounds, beach concessions, and recreational equipment;

(b)    The diking, filling, or dredging of open coastal waters, wetlands, estuaries, and lakes shall be permitted where there is no feasible less environmentally damaging alternative and where feasible mitigation measures have been provided to minimize adverse environmental effects, and shall be limited to the following:

(1)    New or expanded port, energy, and coastal-dependent industrial facilities, including commercial fishing facilities.

(2)    Maintaining existing, or restoring previously dredged, depths in existing navigational channels, turning basins, vessel berthing and mooring areas, and boat launching ramps.

(3)    In wetland areas only, entrance channels for new or expanded boating facilities; and in a degraded wetland, identified by the Department of Fish and Game pursuant to subdivision (b) of Section 30411 of the California Coastal Act as amended, for boating facilities if, in conjunction with such boating facilities, a substantial portion of the degraded wetland is restored and maintained as a biologically productive wetland. The size of the wetland area used for boating facilities, including berthing spaces, turning basins, necessary navigation channels, and any necessary support service facilities, shall not exceed 25 percent of the degraded wetland.

(4)    In open coastal waters, other than wetlands, including streams, estuaries, and lakes, new or expanded boating facilities and the placement of structural pilings for public recreational piers that provide public access and recreational opportunities.

(5)    Incidental public service purposes, including but not limited to, burying cables and pipes or inspection of piers and maintenance of existing intake and outfall lines.

(6)    Mineral extraction, including sand for restoring beaches, except in environmentally sensitive habitat areas.

(7)    Restoration purposes.

(8)    Nature study, aquaculture, or similar resource dependent activities.

(c)    Coastal bluffs are limited to public coastal access or public park structures, bluff repair, and erosion control projects and structures that may include retaining and non-retaining walls, fences, and landscaping.

(d)    Environmentally sensitive habitat areas shall be protected against any significant disruption of habitat values, and only uses dependent on those resources shall be allowed within those areas.

(e)    Any use or development in conflict with the General Plan coastal policies shall not be allowed.

(f)    Public Recreation. Salt Creek County Beach Park shall be a public park which is primarily geared towards passive recreational use. Limited active recreational use or educational use may be permitted provided the use is temporary, as defined in Coastal Commission guidelines for temporary events;

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 97-05, 9/9/97)

 

9.27.030 Development Standards.
        In addition to the development standards for the base zoning districts described in Chapters 9.09-9.25, the following standards apply to all applicable projects within the CO District.

(a)    Coastal Access.

(1)    The purpose of this section is to achieve the basic state goals of maximizing public access to the coast and public recreational opportunities, as set forth in the California Coastal Act; to implement the public access and recreation policies of Chapter 3 of the Coastal Act; and to implement the certified land use plan of the Local Coastal Program which is required by Section 30500(a) of the Coastal Act to include a specific public access component. In achieving these purposes, the provisions of this subsection shall be given the most liberal construction possible so that public access to the navigable waters shall always be provided and protected consistent with the goals, objectives and policies of the California Coastal Act and Article X, Section 4, of the California Constitution.

(2)    Definitions.

(A)   New Development. For purposes of implementing the public access requirements of Public Resources Code Section 30212, the City of Dana Point certified land use plan, including Land Use Element Policy 3.12, and of this ordinance, “new development” includes “development” as defined in Section 9.75.040 of this zoning code except the following:

1.     Structures destroyed by natural disaster. The replacement of any structure, other than a public works facility, destroyed by a disaster; provided that the replacement structure conforms to applicable existing zoning requirements, is for the same use as the destroyed structure, does not exceed either the floor area, height, or bulk of the destroyed structure by more than 10%, and is sited in the same location on the affected property as the destroyed structure. As used in this section, “disaster” means any situation in which the force or forces which destroyed the structure to be replaced were beyond the control of the owners.

2.     Demolition and Reconstruction. The demolition and reconstruction of a single-family residence; provided that the reconstructed residence shall not exceed either the floor area, height or bulk of the former structure by more than 10 percent, and that the reconstructed residence shall be sited in the same location on the affected property as the former structure.

3.     Improvements. Improvements to any structure which do not change the intensity of its use, which do not increase either the floor area, height or bulk of the structure by more than 10 percent, which do not block or impede access, and which do not result in a seaward encroachment by the structure.

4.     Repair and Maintenance. Repair or maintenance activity which, pursuant to Public Resources Code Section 30610, requires no permit unless the activity will have an adverse impact on lateral public access along the beach.

5.     Reconstruction and Repair. The reconstruction or repair of any seawall; provided that the reconstructed or repaired seawall is not seaward of the location of the former structure. As used in this section, “reconstruction or repair” of a seawall shall not include replacement by a different type of structure or other modification in design or construction which results in different or greater impacts to shoreline resources than those of the existing structure.

(B)   The five (5) types of coastal public access (lateral, bluff top, vertical, trail, and recreational) are defined in Section 9.75.030 of this Zoning Code.

(C)   Character of Accessway Use.

1.     Pass and repass. Refers to the right of the public to walk and run along an accessway. Because this use limitation can substantially restrict the public’s ability to enjoy adjacent publicly owned tidelands by restricting the potential use of lateral accessways, it will be applied only in connection with vertical access or other types of access where the findings required by Sections 9.27.030(a)(5) and 9.27.030(a)(5)(D) establish that the limitation is necessary to protect natural habitat values, topographic features (such as eroding bluffs), or privacy of the landowner.

2.     Passive recreational use. As used in this section, “passive recreational use” refers to the right of the public to conduct activities normally associated with beach use, such as walking, swimming, jogging, sunbathing, fishing, surfing, picnicking, but not including organized sports, campfires, or vehicular access other than for emergencies or maintenance.

3.     Active recreational use. As used in this section, “active recreational use” refers to the right of the public to conduct the full range of beach-oriented activities, not including horseback riding and use of motorized vehicles unless specifically authorized.

(3)    Applicability.

(A)   Access Required. As a condition of approval and prior to issuance of a permit or other authorization for any class of new development as identified in Sections 9.27.030(a)(3)(A)1. through 9.27.030(a)(3)(A)4. below, except as provided in Section 9.27.030(a)(3)(B), an offer to dedicate an easement (or other legal mechanism pursuant to Section 9.27.030(a)(4)(J)2. for one or more of the types of access identified in Sections 9.27.030(a)(2)(D)1. through 9.27.030(a)(2)(D)5. shall be required and shall be supported by findings required by Sections 9.27.030 (a)(5)(A) through 9.27.030(a)(5)(C); provided that no such condition of approval for coastal access shall be imposed if the analysis required by Sections 9.27.030(a)(5)(A)1. through 9.27.030(a)(5)(A)4. establishes that the development will not adversely affect, either individually or cumulatively, the ability of the public to reach and use public tidelands and coastal resources or that the access dedication requirement will not alleviate the access burdens identified.

1.     New development on any parcel or location specifically identified in the certified land use plan or in the LCP zoning districts.

2.     New development between the nearest public roadway and the sea.

3.     New development on any site where there is substantial evidence of a public right of access to the sea acquired through use or a public right of access through legislative authorization.

4.     New development on any site where trail, blufftop access or other recreational access is necessary to mitigate impacts of the development on public access.

(B)   Exceptions. Section 9.27.030(a)(3)(A) above shall apply to all new development except in the following instances:

1.     Projects excepted from the definition of “new development” in Section 9.27.020(a)(2).

2.     Where findings required by Sections 9.27.030(a)(5)(A) and 9.27.030(a)(5)(B) establish any of the following:

a.     Public access is inconsistent with the public safety, military security needs, or protection of fragile coastal resources; or

b.     Adequate access exists nearby.

(C)   Exceptions identified in Section 9.27.030(a)(3)(B) shall be supported by written findings required by Section 9.27.030(a)(5)(C) of this Chapter.

(4)    Standards For Application Of Access Conditions. The public access required pursuant to Section 9.27.030(a)(3)(A) shall conform to the standards and requirements set forth in Section 9.27.030(a)(4) herein.

(A)   Lateral Public Access (Minimum Requirements).

1.     A condition to require lateral access as a condition of approval of a coastal development permit (or other authorization to proceed with development) pursuant to Section 9.27.030(a)(3)(A) shall provide the public with the permanent right of lateral public access and passive recreational use along the shoreline (or public recreational area, bikeway, or blufftop area, as applicable); provided that in some cases controls on the time, place and manner of uses may be justified by site characteristics including sensitive habitat values or fragile topographic features, or by the need to protect the privacy of residential development located immediately adjacent to the accessway.

2.     Active recreational use may be appropriate in many cases where the development is determined to be especially burdensome on public access. Examples include cases where the burdens of the proposed project would severely impact public recreational use of the shoreline, where the proposed development is not one of the priority uses specified in Public Resources Code Section 30222 and the policies of the certified land use plan, where active recreational uses reflect the historic public use of the site, where active recreational uses would be consistent with the use of the proposed project, and where such uses would not significantly interfere with the privacy of the landowner. In determining the appropriate character of public use, findings shall be made on the specific factors enumerated in Section 9.27.030(a)(5)(B). Lateral access shall be legally described as required in Section 9.27.030(a)(4)(G).

(B)   Vertical Public Access (Minimum Requirements).

1.     A condition to require vertical public access as a condition of approval of a coastal development permit (or other authorization to proceed with development) pursuant to Section 9.27.030(a)(3)(A) shall provide the public with the permanent right of access, either (1) located in specific locations identified in the certified Local Coastal Program for future vertical access, or (2) located in a site for which the City of Dana Point has reviewed an application for a development permit and has determined a vertical accessway is required pursuant to the access and recreation policies of the Coastal Act or the applicable provisions of the Local Coastal Program.

2.     A condition to require vertical access as a condition of approval of a coastal development permit (or other authorization to proceed with development) pursuant to Section 9.27.030(a)(3)(A) shall provide the public with the permanent right of vertical access and be limited to the public right of passive recreational use unless another character of use is specified as a condition of the development. In determining whether another character of use is appropriate, findings shall be made on the specific factors identified in Section 9.27.030(a)(5)(B).

3.     Each vertical accessway shall extend from the road to the shoreline (or bluff edge) and shall be legally described as required in Section 9.27.030(a)(4)(G). The access easement shall be a minimum of 10 feet wide. If a residential structure is proposed, the accessway should not be sited closer than 10 feet (or another distance if specified in the certified land use plan) to the structure.

(C)   Bluff Top Access (Minimum Requirements).

1.     A condition to require public access along a bluff top as a condition of approval of a coastal development permit (or other authorization to proceed with development) pursuant to Section 9.27.030(a)(3)(A) shall provide the public with the permanent right of scenic and visual access from the bluff top to the public tidelands; provided that in some cases controls on the time, place and manner of uses may be justified by site characteristics including sensitive habitat values or fragile topographic features, or by the need to protect the privacy of residential development located immediately adjacent to the accessway.

2.     The bluff top access shall be limited to passive recreational use and coastal viewing purposes unless another character of use is specified as a condition of development. In determining the appropriate character of use findings shall be made on the specific factors identified in Section 9.27.030(a)(5)(B).

3.     Each bluff top accessway shall be described in the conditions of approval of the coastal development permit as an area beginning at the current bluff edge extending 25 feet inland, or an area which allows for 50 years of bluff erosion, or another standard determined to be necessary for public safety and/or geologic stability, whichever results in the greatest width of the bluff top accessway. However, the accessway shall not extend any closer than 10 feet from an occupied residential structure. Due to the potential for erosion of the bluff edge, the condition shall include a mechanism that will cause the accessway to be adjusted inland as the edge recedes. Any permanent improvements should be set back from the accessway by a distance derived by multiplying the annual rate of blufftop retreat by the life expectancy in years of the permanent improvements.

4.     The accessway shall be legally described as required in Section 9.27.030(a)(4)(G), with the furthest inland extent of the area possible referenced as a distance from a fixed monument in the following manner:

        “Such easement shall be [insert appropriate distance as described in Section 9.27.030(a)(4)(C)3. above] feet wide located along the bluff top as measured inland from the daily bluff edge. As the daily bluff top edge may vary and move inland, the location of this right-of-way will change over time with the then current bluff edge, but in no case shall it extend any closer than [specify distance] feet from [specify a fixed inland point, such as for example the centerline of the nearest public road].”

(D)   Trail Access (Minimum Requirements). A condition to require public access as a condition of approval of a coastal development permit (or other authorization to proceed with development) required pursuant to Section 9.27.030(a)(3)(A) shall provide the public with the permanent right of access and active recreational use, either (1) along a designated alignment of a coastal recreational path or trail in specific locations including those identified in the certified LCP for implementation of trail access, or (2) in locations where it has been determined that a trail access is required to link recreational areas to the shoreline or provide alternative recreation and access opportunities pursuant to the access and recreation policies of the LCP and Coastal Act, consistent with other provisions of this chapter; provided that in some cases controls on the time, place and manner of uses may be justified by site characteristics including sensitive habitat values or fragile topographic features, or by the need to protect the privacy of residential development located immediately adjacent to the accessway. In determining if another character of use is appropriate, findings shall be made on the specific factors enumerated in Section 9.27.030(a)(5)(B). The trail access shall be legally described as required by Section 9.27.030(a)(4)(G).

(E)   Recreational Access (Minimum Requirements). A condition to require public recreational access as a condition of approval of a coastal development permit required pursuant to Section 9.27.030(a)(3)(A) shall provide the public with the permanent right of access and use within a designated recreational access area. Conditions required pursuant to this section shall specify the location and extent of the public access area. The form and content should take the form of requirements in Sections 9.27.030(a)(4)(A), 9.27.030(a)(4)(B), 9.27.030(a)(4)(C), and 9.27.030(a)(4)(D) as applicable. The accessway shall be legally described as required in Section 9.27.030(a)(4)(G).

(F)    Protection of Historic Public Use.

1.     Substantial Evidence Determination. Substantial evidence that the area used by the public has been impliedly dedicated shall be determined based on evidence of all of the following:

a.     The public must have used the land for a period of five years or more as if it were public land,

b.     Without asking for or receiving permission from the owner,

c.     With the actual or presumed knowledge of the owner,

d.     Without significant objection or bona fide attempts by the owner to prevent or halt the use, and

e.     The use must be substantial, rather than minimal, and

f.      The applicant must not have demonstrated that the law has prevented the property from being impliedly dedicated.

2.     Siting and Design Requirements. Development shall be sited and designed in a manner which does not interfere with or diminish any public right of access which may have been established based on historic public use. Only when site constraints are so severe that siting of the accessway or recreational use area in its historic location would significantly impair the proposed development and alternative development siting is not feasible, development may be sited in the area of public right of access based on historic use provided that the applicant provides an equivalent area of public access or recreation to and along the same destination and including the same type and intensity of public use as previously existed on the site. Mechanisms for guaranteeing the continued public use of the area or equivalent area shall be required in accordance with Sections 9.27.030(a)(4)(A) through 9.27.030(a)(4)(E) above.

3.     Minimum Requirements. An access condition shall not serve to extinguish or waive public prescriptive rights. In permits where evidence shows the possibility of such prescriptive rights, the following language shall be added to the access condition:

        “Nothing in this condition shall be construed to constitute a waiver of any prescriptive rights which may exist on the parcel itself or on the designated easement.”

(G)   Legal Description of an Accessway (Recordation).

1.     An access dedication required pursuant to Section 9.27.030(a)(3)(A) shall be described in the condition of approval of the permit in a manner that provides the public, the property owner, and the accepting agency with the maximum amount of certainty as to the location of the accessway. As part of the condition of approval, easements shall be described as follows:

a.     for lateral access: along the entire width of the property from the mean high tide line to (as applicable): the toe of the bluff, the toe of the seawall, or other appropriate boundary such as structural and patio stringlines as described in Section 9.09.040(a)(1) of this Zoning Code (the Residential Beach Road 12 (RBR 12) and Residential Beach Road Duplex 18 (RBRD) Zoning Districts).

b.     for blufftop access or trail access; extending inland from the bluff edge or along the alignment of a recreational trail.

c.     for vertical access: extending from the road to the shoreline (or bluff edge). A privacy buffer provided pursuant to Section 9.27.030(a)(4)(I) shall be described, as applicable.

 

2.     Prior to the issuance of the coastal development permit, the landowner shall execute and record a document in a form and content acceptable to the Director of Community Development, consistent with provisions of Section 9.27.030(a)(6), irrevocably offering to dedicate to a public agency, non-profit organization, or private association approved by the Coastal Commission an easement for a specific type of access as described in Section 9.27.030(a)(2)(D) and a specific character of use as described in Section 9.27.030(a)(2)(E), as applicable to the particular condition.

3.     The recorded document shall provide that the offer to dedicate shall not be used or construed to allow anyone, prior to acceptance of the dedication, to interfere with any rights of public access acquired through use which may exist on the property.

4.     The recorded document shall include legal descriptions of both the applicant’s entire parcel and the easement area and a map to scale. The offer shall be recorded free of prior liens and any other encumbrances which the Coastal Commission [or local agency authorized by the Commission] determines may affect the interest being conveyed. The offer to dedicate shall run with the land in favor of the People of the State of California, binding all successors and assignees, and shall be irrevocable for a period of 21 years, such period running from the date of recording.

(H)   Management Plan (Minimum Requirements). A management plan may be required in conjunction with a dedication of public access in any case where there is substantial evidence of potential conflicts between public access use and other uses on or immediately adjacent to the site. Examples include access in areas of sensitive habitats, agricultural resources, or significant hazards, or adjoining residential neighborhoods or military security areas. The plan shall be prepared by the accepting agency and approved by the City of Dana Point prior to the opening of the access to public use. Where applicable, the plan should specify management controls on time and intensity of use, standards for privacy buffers, and requirements for maintenance of aesthetic values through such measures as litter control.

(I)    Privacy Buffers (Minimum Requirements). Separation between a public accessway and adjacent residential use may be provided when necessary to protect the landowner’s privacy or security as well as the public’s right to use of the accessway. Any such buffer shall be provided within the development area. Access should not be sited closer to any residential structure than the distance specified in the certified LUP amendment, or where there is no distance specified, no closer than 10 feet. The buffer can be reduced where separation is achieved through landscaping, fences or grade separation.

(J)    Implementation.

1.     A dedicated accessway shall not be required to be opened to public use until a public agency, non-profit organization, or private association approved in accordance with Section 9.27.030(a)(4)(G) agrees to accept responsibility for maintenance and liability of the access, except in cases where immediate public access is implemented through a deed restriction.

2.     In any case where the size and character of a development would impose very substantial burdens on public access, such as a large resort development on the shoreline, and where the applicant has the capacity to operate and maintain the accessway or recreation area, a deed restriction may be required instead of an offer to dedicate in order to assure immediate public use of the area and maintenance of the area by the applicant and successors in interest. In any such case, all other applicable provisions of this ordinance shall apply.

3.     Access facilities constructed on access easements (e.g., walkways, paved paths, boardwalks, etc.) should be no wider than necessary to accommodate the numbers and types of users that can reasonably be expected. Width of facilities can vary for ramps or paved walkways, depending on site factors such as the need for privacy buffers, public safety needs, and the need to protect natural resource areas from overuse.

(K)   Title Information. As a requirement for any public access condition, prior to the issuance of the permit or other authorization for development, the applicant shall be required to furnish a title report and all necessary subordination agreements. Title insurance may also be required where easements are being granted. The amount of insurance shall reflect the estimated cost to acquire an equivalent accessway or recreational use elsewhere in the vicinity. All offers shall be made free of all encumbrances which the approving authority pursuant to Section 9.27.030(a)(4)(G) determines may affect the interest being conveyed. If any such interest exists which could erase the access easement, it must be subordinated through a written and recorded agreement.

(5)    Required Findings And Supporting Analysis For Public Access Dedications.

(A)   Required Overall Findings. Written findings of fact, analysis and conclusions addressing public access must be included in support of all approvals, denials or conditional approvals of projects between the first public road and the sea (whether development or new development) and of all approvals or conditional approvals of projects (whether development or new development) where an access dedication is included in the project proposal or required as a condition of approval. Such findings shall address the applicable factors identified by Section 9.27.030(a)(5)(B) and 9.27.030(a)(5)(C) and shall reflect the specific level of detail specified, as applicable. Findings supporting all such decisions shall include:

1.     A statement of the individual and cumulative burdens imposed on public access and recreation opportunities based on applicable factors identified pursuant to Section 9.27.030(a)(5)(B). The type of affected public access and recreation opportunities shall be clearly described.

2.     An analysis based on applicable factors identified in Section 9.27.030(a)(5)(B) and 9.27.030(a)(5)(C) of the necessity for requiring public access conditions to find the project consistent with the public access provisions of the Coastal Act.

3.     A description of the legitimate governmental interest furthered by any access condition required.

4.     An explanation of how imposition of a public access dedication requirement alleviates the access burdens identified and is reasonably related to those burdens in both nature and extent.

(B)   Required Project-Specific Findings. In determining any requirement for public access, including the type of access and character of use, the City of Dana Point shall evaluate and document in written findings the factors identified in Sections 9.27.030(a)(5)(B)1. through 9.27.030(a)(5)(B)4. below, to the extent applicable. The findings shall explain the basis for the conclusions and decisions of the City of Dana Point and shall be supported by substantial evidence in the record. If an access dedication is required as a condition of approval, the findings shall explain how the dedication will alleviate or mitigate the adverse effects which have been identified and is reasonably related to those adverse effects in both nature and extent. As used in this section, “cumulative effect” means the effect of the individual project in combination with the effects of past projects, other current projects, and probable future projects, including development allowed under applicable planning and zoning. The following factors shall be analyzed:

1.     Project Effects On Demand For Access And Recreation:

a.     Identification of existing and open public access and coastal recreation areas and facilities in the regional and local vicinity of the development.

b.     Analysis of the project’s effects upon existing public access and recreation opportunities.

c.     Analysis of the project’s cumulative effects upon the use and capacity of the identified public access and recreation opportunities, including public tidelands and beach resources, and upon the capacity of major coastal roads from subdivision, intensification or cumulative buildout.

d.     Projection of the anticipated demand and need for increased coastal access and recreation opportunities for the public.

e.     Analysis of the contribution of the project’s cumulative effects to any such projected increase.

f.      Description of the physical characteristics of the site and its proximity to the sea, tideland viewing points, upland recreation areas, and trail linkages to tidelands or recreation areas.

g.     Analysis of the importance and potential of the site, because of its location or other characteristics, for creating, preserving or enhancing public access to tidelands or public recreation opportunities.

2.     Shoreline Processes (for accessways on sites subject to wave action, such as beachfront and coastal blufftop accessways):

a.     Description of the existing shoreline conditions, including beach profile, accessibility and usability of the beach, history of erosion or accretion, character and sources of sand, wave and sand movement, presence of shoreline protective structures, location of the line of mean high tide during the season when the beach is at its narrowest (generally during the late winter) and the proximity of that line to existing structures, and any other factors which substantially characterize or affect the shoreline processes at the site.

b.     Identification of anticipated changes to shoreline processes and beach profile unrelated to the proposed development.

c.     Description and analysis of any reasonably likely changes, attributable to the primary and cumulative effects of the project, to wave and sand movement affecting beaches in the vicinity of the project; the profile of the beach; the character, extent, accessibility and usability of the beach; and any other factors which characterize or affect beaches in the vicinity.

d.     Analysis of the effect of any identified changes of the project - alone or in combination with other anticipated changes - will have upon the ability of the public to use public tidelands and shoreline recreation areas.

e.     The rate of blufftop erosion due to wave action as the base of the bluff.

4.     Physical Obstructions: Description of any physical aspects of the development which block or impede the ability of the public to get to or along the tidelands, public recreation areas, or other public coastal resources or to see the shoreline.

5.     Other Adverse Impacts On Access And Recreation:

a.     Description of the development’s physical proximity and relationship to the shoreline and any public recreation area.

b.     Analysis of the extent to which buildings, walls, signs, streets or other aspects of the development, individually or cumulatively, are likely to diminish the public’s use of tidelands or lands committed to public recreation.

c.     Description of any alteration of the aesthetic, visual or recreational value of public use areas, and of any diminution of the quality or amount of recreational use of public lands which may be attributable to the individual or cumulative effects of the development.

(C)   Findings for Projects Involving Historic Public Use/Prescriptive Rights:

1.     Where an issue as to the existence of public prescriptive rights has been raised during the course of reviewing a coastal development permit application, one of the following findings shall be made:

a.     Substantial evidence does not warrant the conclusion that public prescriptive rights exist;

b.     Substantial evidence of public prescriptive rights exist, but development will not interfere with those rights;

c.     There is an unresolved controversy as to the existence of public prescriptive rights which requires denial of a coastal development permit because of interference with those rights.

d.     There is an unresolved controversy as to the existence of public prescriptive rights, but the applicant’s dedication of a public access protects the rights of the public and allows an agreement to accept the actual dedication in exchange for giving up the contested claim of implied dedication.

2.     In determining any requirement for public access based on historic public use/prescriptive rights, including the type of access and character of use, the City of Dana Point shall evaluate and document in written findings the factors identified in Sections 9.27.030(a)(5)(C)2.a. through 9.27.030(a)(5)(C)2.e. below, to the extent applicable. The findings shall explain the basis for the conclusions and decisions of the City of Dana Point and shall be supported by substantial evidence in the record. If an access dedication is required as a condition of approval, the findings shall explain how the dedication will alleviate or mitigate the adverse effects which have been identified and is reasonably related to those adverse effects in both nature and extent. As used in this section, “cumulative effect” means the effect of the individual project in combination with the effects of past projects, other current projects, and probable future projects, including development allowed under applicable planning and zoning. The following factors shall be analyzed:

a.     Evidence of use of the site by members of the general public for a continuous five-year period (such use may be seasonal).

b.     Evidence of the type and character of use made by the public (vertical, lateral, blufftop, etc. and for passive and/or active recreational use, etc.).

c.     Identification of any agency (or person) who has maintained and/or improved the area subject to historic public use and the nature of the maintenance performed and improvements made.

d.     Identification of the record owner of the area historically used by the public and any attempts by the owner to prohibit public use of the area, including the success or failure of those attempts.

e.     Description of the potential for adverse impact on public use of the area from the proposed development (including but not limited to, creation of physical or psychological impediments to public use).

(D)   Required Findings For Public Access Exceptions. Any determination that one of the exceptions of Section 9.27.030(a)(3)(B) applies to a development shall be supported by written findings of fact, analysis and conclusions which address all of the following:

1.     The type of public access potentially applicable to the site involved (vertical, lateral, bluff top, etc.) and its location in relation to the fragile coastal resource to be protected or the public safety concern which is the basis for the exception, as applicable.

2.     Unavailability of any mitigating measures to manage the type, character, intensity, hours, season or location of such use so that fragile coastal resources or public safety, as applicable, are protected.

3.     Ability of the public, through another reasonable means, to reach the same area of public tidelands as would be made accessible by an accessway on the subject land.

(E)   Findings For Management Plan Conditions. Written findings in support of a condition requiring a management plan for regulating the time and manner or character of public access use must address the following factors, as applicable:

1.     Identification and protection of specific habitat values including the reasons supporting the conclusion that such values must be protected by limiting the hours, seasons, or character of public use.

2.     Topographic constraints of the development site.

3.     Recreational needs of the public.

4.     Rights of privacy of the landowner which could not be mitigated by setting the project back from the accessway or otherwise conditioning the development.

5.     The requirements of the possible accepting agency, if an offer of dedication is the mechanism for securing public access.

6.     Feasibility of adequate setbacks, fencing, landscaping, and other methods as part of a management plan to regulate public use.

(6)    Section 9.69.080(b) contains standards for the review of recorded documents for access.

(7)    Public Access in Private Development. The hotel originally known as the Ritz Carlton Laguna Niguel at the time it opened for business, located on the promontory situated above Salt Creek County Beach Park, shall be operated as a hotel facility open to the general public and shall not be converted to a private resort facility. Existing public access through the hotel site, and signage visible to the public acknowledging the public access, shall be preserved and maintained.

(b)    Wetland Resources. To protect and maintain the City’s coastal wetland resources, a minimum 100-foot buffer area around all identified wetlands shall be provided as part of all allowable development within or adjacent to wetlands, unless both the California Department of Fish and Game and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service provide a written determination that a lesser buffer will provide adequate protection.

(1)    To minimize the disturbance to a wetland from adjacent development, the following minimum requirements shall be incorporated into the design of a buffer area:

(A)   Fences and/or natural barriers shall be provided to control the entry of humans and non-wetlands animal species into the wetland. The buffer shall also provide for visual screening in those cases where resident or migratory wetland species are particularly sensitive to human impacts. Development adjacent to wetlands shall be sited and designed to avoid excessive light or noise, where feasible. The use of walls, berms and other barriers shall be considered where excessive artificial light or noise is unavoidable.

(B)   Buffers shall be designed, where necessary, to help minimize the effects of erosion, sedimentation, and pollution arising from urban and industrial activities. Any pollution control devices within the buffer area shall be maintained.

(C)   Buffers shall provide habitat for species residing in the transitional zone between wetlands and uplands. The design of buffers should consider the movement of food and energy between habitats as well as the life cycles of organisms that feed or reproduce in the wetland but generally reside outside the wetland. Any revegetation work in the buffer area shall use native species from local sources.

(2)    Uses Within Buffer Areas. Necessary pollution control devices and passive recreational uses shall be allowed within buffer areas but only if it can be shown that these uses will not have significant adverse impacts on the wetland ecosystem or the buffer’s function as described in the above criteria. These uses shall be limited to bird watching, walking, jogging, and bike riding, and may include the construction of paths and interpretive signs and display. Any paths constructed shall minimize adverse impacts to plants and animals in the buffer area.

(c)    Development Adjacent to Coastal Bluffs. Development adjacent to coastal bluffs shall minimize hazards to owners, occupants, property, and the general public; be environmentally sensitive to the natural coastal bluffs; and protect the bluffs as a scenic visual resource. The minimum setback from the bluff edge of a coastal bluff shall be established by the underlying zoning district. However, in no case shall the minimum setback be less than 25 feet or one which provides for 50 years of erosion, whichever is most restrictive.

        In addition, should the geotechnical report indicate bluff stabilization is required to ensure proposed development is safe from a threat of erosion and bluff failure for fifty years, additional setbacks will be required. Any approved slope stabilization measures shall be the least environmentally damaging feasible alternative and shall be designed to minimize alteration of the bluffs and be subordinate to the natural character of the bluffs.

        Development setbacks from coastal bluff edges may not be the same due to varying geologic conditions and environmental conditions. The following provisions detail the items required for filing, the means by which coastal bluff edges are measured, criteria for review, development standards, and the potential development that may be permitted within the coastal bluff setback area.

(1)    Coastal Bluff Edge Measurement.

(A)   The applicant shall provide an aerial photograph and contour map of the site clearly delineating the current coastal bluff edge, existing topography and the outline of the development proposed.

(B)   The applicant shall provide a geotechnical report, prepared within one year of the date of the application submittal, which specifically addresses the coastal bluff edge and delineates the bluff edge on a graphic exhibit on both the grading plan and site plan. The report shall specifically address the methodology used to support the conclusions of the report.

(C)   The Director of Community Development and Director of Public Works or their designee shall conduct an on-site survey of the property and compare the geotechnical report’s conclusions with that of actual on-site terrain and bluff top patterns.

(2)    Criteria For Review. At a minimum, the following will be required for each application for development adjacent to coastal bluff edges:

(A)   Development plans shall be prepared and wet stamped by a State Certified Engineering Geologist knowledgeable in coastal engineering and engineering geology.

(B)   A geotechnical report shall address the factors which directly or indirectly cause, promote, or encourage bluff erosion or failure either on site or on adjacent properties, and the measures to control these factors. The report shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following information:

1.     Bluff geometry, site topography, and any other condition which may affect the site.

2.     Historic, current, and foreseeable bluff erosion. A minimum of fifty (50) years of historic erosion and fifty (50) years of future erosion should be analyzed.

3.     Geologic conditions including, but not limited to, soils, sediment, bedrock, drainage patterns, and structural features such as fault lines and joints. Soils borings to bedrock and the limits and depth of alluvial removal shall be addressed to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works.

4.     Evidence of past and potential landslides and the implication of such conditions on the structural integrity of the proposed development as well as the proposed development’s potential effect on landslide activity.

5.     Impact of construction activity on the stability of the site and adjacent area. This shall include, but not be limited to, remedial grading, the impact of grading machinery, or other vibration inducing factors on the bluff stability.

6.     Ground and surface water conditions or variations caused by the development, such as the alteration in surface/subsurface drainage, irrigation systems, and proposed drains and subdrains.

7.     Mitigation measures proposed to be used to ensure minimized erosion problems during and after construction.

8.     Any other facts that might affect slope stability, including but not limited to the effects of marine erosion on coastal bluffs, and related mitigation measures for potential impacts.

9.     Any proposed development, either main structures or minor development, shall be addressed in the report. Said structures and development shall be evaluated with respect to impact on the stability of the bluff to ensure that structures and development are reasonably safe from failure and erosion given a minimum 50-year physical life.

10.   Any other information as deemed necessary by the Director of Community Development or Director of Public Works.

11.   A bibliography of all information sources, including, but not limited to, dates of site visits.

(3)    Development Standards.

(A)   Drainage. All surface and subsurface run-off shall be directed to a public street or an approved drainage facility to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works. Transportation of said run-off may require area drains, roof drains, reductions in grading, appropriate pumping mechanisms, and other similar measures. Where feasible, said run-off shall be directed to sewer systems rather than storm drains which lead directly to the ocean.

(B)   Landscaping. All landscaping shall be native or drought tolerant which minimizes irrigation requirements, and reduce potential slide hazards due to over watering. Irrigation and the use of turf grass, ice plant and similar shallow-rooted plants within the bluff setback shall be specifically prohibited on blufftop developments. Landscaping shall be maintained and installed so as to ensure that, during growing stages as well as at maturity, the landscaping will not obstruct public views.

(4)    Requirements for Setback Deviation. A State Licensed Civil Engineering Geologist shall prepare a site specific geotechnical and soils report to address and explain any proposed deviation from the minimum setbacks from the coastal bluff edge in the Zoning Map, and the Draft Dana Point General Plan Coastal Erosion Technical Report dated July 11, 1990. The report shall include:

(A)   An explanation and calculation of the deviations, if any, in the setback from the coastal bluff edge.

(B)   If caissons are not recommended, the report shall explain why caissons are not needed. If caissons are recommended in the report, the following additional information shall be provided:

1.     Indicate the angle of repose.

2.     Depth of caisson required for the structure and limits of caissons.

(C)   Requirements for Setback Deviation. Should an analysis of the geotechnical report conclude that a greater or lesser setback may be necessary than that required by this Code, the Planning Commission can make a finding that it is in the interest of the public safety to approve an additional or lesser setback as recommended. However, in no case shall a setback of less than 25 feet or less than 50 years of bluff erosion, whichever is most restrictive, be permitted.

(5)    Permitted Development within the Coastal Bluff Edge Setback. Precautions are required to ensure that the integrity of the bluff is not threatened. Development within the coastal blufftop setback area shall minimize landform alteration, be subordinate to the natural character of the bluff, and is limited to structures that may include retaining and non-retaining walls, fences, and drought-tolerant landscaping which conform to the setback requirements of this Chapter. Swimming pools and sunken spas are prohibited within the setback area. Additional setbacks shall be required if recommended in a geotechnical report submitted for the minor development.

Minor development and improvements are defined as:

(A)   Those generally not requiring a building or grading permit and not attached to the main structure; and

(B)   Those developments which protect natural resources or ensure public safety such as fences and low walls.

        A Coastal Development Permit pursuant to Chapter 9.69 shall be required prior to any minor development. Minor development may only be approved if the approved geotechnical reports support such development and conclude that the development will not have an impact on bluff stability. All minor development shall be environmentally sensitive to the natural bluff line and public view.

        Grading on the coastal bluff shall be kept to a minimum. Raising of the natural grade shall be limited to that level needed to provide a maximum of one (1) percent of fall to the existing top of curb in the street in order to facilitate piping of all bluff drainage to the street by gravity.

        A study which details the potential impact of any proposed grading on the coastal bluff may be required at the discretion of the Director of Community Development or the Director of Public Works as the circumstances of the individual lot warrant. The study shall be prepared to address the impacts identified by the City to the satisfaction of the Director of Community Development and/or the Director of Public Works.

(6)    Development at the Base of Coastal Bluffs. Development proposed at the base of coastal bluffs shall be required to submit appropriate geotechnical reports which provide a detailed assessment of the ultimate stability of the bluffs above the subject site. The report(s) shall document the ultimate profile (section) of the bluff face, delineate the buildable portion of the site and shall include recommendations for adequate protective structures for the project as well as recommendations for alternatives which do not require landform alteration of the bluff face nor bluff stabilization. The report(s) shall address all topics relevant to the geologic condition of the subject site and adjacent bluffs and shall be prepared to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works. Proposals for shoreline protective devices at the base of coastal bluffs shall be consistent with the requirements of Section 9.27.030(f) below.

(7)    Development on the face of Coastal Bluffs. New private staircases, the replacement of fifty percent (50%) or more of existing private staircases, or additions to/expansion of existing private staircases, which descend down bluff faces shall be prohibited. Public staircases down bluff faces shall only be permitted if geologic instability would not result, if landform alteration would be minimized, and the staircase would be visually subordinate to the natural character of the bluff face.

(d)    Environmentally Sensitive Habitat Areas.

(1)    Environmentally sensitive habitat areas shall be protected against any significant disruption of habitat values, and only uses dependent on those resources shall be allowed within those areas.

(2)    Development adjacent to an environmentally sensitive habitat area (ESHA) shall be required to submit a biological assessment which shall include, at a minimum, a survey of the types and quantities of sensitive species present in the ESHA, the impacts of the development on the ESHA, alternatives to the development, and mitigation measures for unavoidable impacts on the ESHA resulting from the development. Evaluations of the development’s impact to the ESHA shall be sought from appropriate state and federal resources agencies.

(e)    Grading. Grading activity shall be conducted in a manner that minimizes landform alteration and erosion and ensures geologic stability and structural integrity.

(1)    Landform Alteration.

(A)   Man-made slopes shall be designed so that they can be conveniently maintained so as to minimize erosion, slope failure and unsightly conditions.

(B)   Man-made slopes shall be designed to resemble natural terrain where feasible, with a minimum of long, flat, inclined plane surfaces and acute angles.

(C)   Man-made slopes shall be no steeper than two (2) feet horizontal to one (1) foot vertical.

(2)    Erosion Control. Appropriate mitigation measures shall be employed, including but not limited to prompt revegetation of graded areas with similar types of vegetation which previously existed on-site prior to the commencement of grading activities, and avoiding grading during the rainy season from October 15 through April 15.

        Each building pad at or above street level shall drain directly to the street. Where any lot is designed in such a manner that it will not drain with a minimum one percent (1%) grade directly to a street or common drainage facility, it shall be designed in a manner that will conform to the following criteria:

(A)   Lots shall be designed in such a manner that man-made slopes are not subject to sheet flow or concentrated runoff from either the same or an adjacent lot. All slopes shall be protected from surface runoff by berms, interceptor ditches, or similar measures.

(B)   All water flowing off man-made slopes shall be constrained within an approved drainage device.

(f)    Shoreline Protective Devices. Seawalls, revetments, and other such shoreline protective devices or construction that alters natural shoreline processes shall be permitted only if non-structural alternatives are found to be infeasible, and when required to serve coastal-dependent uses or to protect existing structures or public beaches in danger from erosion, and when designed to eliminate or mitigate adverse impacts on local shoreline sand supply. Existing marine structures or shoreline protective devices causing water stagnation contributing to pollution problems and fish kills should be phased out or upgraded where feasible. Any shoreline protective device which may be permitted shall be placed so that no part of a new shoreline protective device is built further onto the beach than a line drawn between the nearest adjacent corners of the nearest adjacent shoreline protective devices.

        Seawalls in the northern portion of the Capistrano Bay District private community along Beach Road (north of Pines Park located in the inland bluffs above the community), when permitted in accordance with the other requirements of this Chapter, shall have a scour blanket consisting of rip-rap stone placed at the seaward toe of the seawall to minimize beach erosion.

(g)    Water Quality. All drainage facilities shall be designed to carry surface runoff to the nearest practical street or storm drain approved by the City and/or other appropriate governmental agency as the proper place to deposit such waters. Where feasible, structural and non-structural Best Management Practices including, but are not limited to, first flush diversion, detention/retention basins, infiltration trenches/basins, porous pavement, oil/grease separators, street sweeping, and grass swales, and other measures as may be required by State water quality agencies, shall be implemented. All drainage improvements intended or required to convey storm runoff shall be designed and installed or constructed in accordance with the applicable National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System requirements.

(h)    Fire Hazards. Fuel modification within environmentally sensitive habitat areas shall be minimized to the extent feasible. Fuel modification plans shall, where feasible, employ selective thinning by hand rather than mass clear-cutting within environmentally sensitive habitat areas.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94; Ord. 97-05, 9/9/97; Ord. 99-05, 4/27/99)

Chapter 9.29 PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY DISTRICT
9.29.010 Purpose and Intent.
        The Planned Residential Development Overlay (PRDO) District provides a method to allow deviation to zoning district standards to create superior designs for residential development. To achieve this, a PRDO District establishes zoning requirements that are in addition to, in combination with, or in place of the underlying residential base zoning requirements in Chapter 9.09 of this Code. The PRDO district requires exceptional design features, and sensitive and enhanced site planning to produce an integrated and stable residential development which is compatible and enhances existing and planned surrounding land uses.

        The PRDO district allows flexibility for development to achieve additional public, common or private open spaces; minimize environmental impact and achieve a superior living environment and implementation of the General Plan. Planned Residential Development projects must conform with the density limitations, parking, open space, and other minimum or maximum standards of the underlying residential zoning district, except as otherwise described in this Chapter. Planned Residential Development projects must conform with the requirements of all applicable overlay districts.

        The regulations of the Planned Residential Development Overlay District are intended to only apply to Planned Residential Developments that are proposed after the effective date of this Code. Residential developments physically existing prior to the effective date of this Code, but which are not currently identified as a Planned Residential Development by this Chapter, could be identified as a Planned Residential Development. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.29.020 Permitted Uses, Accessory Uses, Temporary Uses and Conditional Uses.
        Permitted, accessory, temporary and conditional uses within the Planned Residential Development Overlay District are the same as those allowed within the applicable underlying base residential zoning districts. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.29.030 Procedure and Submittal Requirements.
        The procedure for establishing the Planned Residential Development Overlay District to any site shall be in accordance with zoning amendments in Chapter 9.61. Application for the Planned Residential Development Overlay District does not modify the underlying base zoning district(s) until a Site Development Permit and a Planned Residential Development District for the site are adopted. An application for a Planned Residential Development Overlay shall include:

(a)    A detailed explanation of surrounding, existing, and planned land use and why the proposed overlay district achieves a development that meets the highest standards of the General Plan, creating a more desirable living environment in the surrounding area.

(b)    A proposed Zoning Map at one (1) inch = five hundred (500) feet indicating the base zoning for the area and showing the letters `PRD’ with a space for the PRD number for the site within parentheses followed by the base zoning. This map shall also show the zoning districts for one thousand (1,000) feet surrounding the site.

(c)    All the proposed changes to the base zoning requirements.

(d)    An application for a Site Development Permit which also clearly shows the existing standards and how the proposed Planned Residential Development Overlay District deviates from them.

(e)    A schematic Site Plan complying with the existing zoning regulations to allow the Planning Commission an opportunity to compare and evaluate the benefits of the proposed Planned Residential Development.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.29.040 Adoption Requirements.
        The Ordinance adopting the approval of a Planned Residential Development Overlay shall contain the following:

(a)    Language which clearly identifies all the modifications to the base zoning district requirements. Only those standards clearly and expressly modified by the Ordinance approving the PRDO District shall be effective.

(b)    Language which clearly references the Site Development Permit for the project.

(c)    Language which clearly indicates the modification to the Zoning Map and the inclusion of all the PRDO standards as an appendix within the Zoning Code.

(d)    The findings included in an ordinance to adopt a Planned Residential Development Overlay District shall be as follows:

(1)    That the proposal will result in an integrated, compatible development which will be consistent with the General Plan and in harmony with existing and proposed development in the surrounding neighborhood.

(2)    That the proposal will result in a project that is clearly superior to what would be developed in accordance with the regulations of the base zoning district.

(3)    That the unique development standards proposed are not contrary to the public health, safety, and general welfare.

(4)    That the proposal exceeds the development standards of the base zoning district and provides improved use of common areas, open space, and off-street parking facilities.

(5)    That the proposal is consistent with the intent of the underlying zoning designation.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.29.050 Development Standards Modified by Planned Residential Development Overlay District.
        The following development standards of Chapter 9.09 may be modified through the approval of a Planned Residential Development Overlay District:

        —    Minimum lot size

        —    Minimum lot width

        —    Minimum lot depth

        —    Maximum lot coverage

        —    Minimum front yard setback

        —    Minimum side yard setback

        —    Minimum rear yard setback

        —    Minimum garage setback

        —    Maximum floor area ratio

        The location and configuration of individual lots within a project site shall be determined by the Planned Residential Development Overlay Standards and implemented by an approved Site Development Permit for the entire Planned Residential Development Overlay District. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.29.060 Planned Residential Development Standards.
        In addition to the development standards of the base zoning district described in Chapter 9.09 and other applicable provisions of this Code, new Planned Residential Development Overlay Districts shall meet the following standards:

(a)    Minimum Area for a Planned Residential Development. The area of a Planned Residential Development shall be a clearly definable geographical area subject to the approval of the Planning Commission.

(b)    Maximum Lot Coverage. The overall building coverage in a Planned Residential Development shall not exceed that of the base zoning district.

(c)    Maximum Density. The maximum density shall be less than or equal to the maximum density of the base zoning district.

(d)    Minimum Open Space. The minimum open space standards of the base zoning district shall be exceeded by a Planned Residential Development.

(e)    Building and Development Location. For Planned Residential Developments, building and development location need not satisfy the minimum regulations of the underlying zoning district, except those regulations relating to shorelines, coastal bluffs, or other overlay district regulations, or those required by the City Building Code, or by other requirements necessary to mitigate environmental impact and satisfy specific safety requirements associated with physical conditions of the individual building site. Actual development locations, distances between development or buildings, distances from streets and distances from other features will be identified by an approved Site Development Permit as referenced by the Planned Residential Development Overlay District.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.29.070 Notification.
        Title reports for dwelling units shall include notification that the unit is within a Planned Residential Development and is subject to the PRDO and the Site Development Permit requirements. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.29.080 Existing Planned Residential Developments.
        An index detailing the locations and development standards of all Planned Residential Developments acknowledged by this Code is contained in the appendix. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

Chapter 9.31 FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY DISTRICT*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 19-01. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 9.31.010 Intent and Purpose.
        The three (3) Floodplain Overlay (FP) districts protect the public health, safety, and general welfare from flood hazards by assuring proper use and development.

        The FP-1 district is applied to areas shown as “floodway” areas on the FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), as “floodway” on the other areas in which the City has determined that a floodway exists.

        The FP-2 district is applied to “areas inundated by 100 year flood” which are shown as “A,” “A1” through “A30,” “AO,” “AH,” “A99,” and “M” on FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Maps and areas in which the City has determined to be a special flood hazard area.

        The FP-3 district is applied to coastal areas subject to wave action, which are specifically shown as “AE,” “E,” “VE,” “V,” and “V1” through “V30” on the FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Maps and areas in which the City has determined to be a coastal high hazard area.

        The Floodplain Overlay districts are overlay districts which may be combined with any other zoning district. The floodplain overlay districts provide use, development, and permit requirements that are applied in addition to the underlying zoning district and the requirements of other overlay districts. In the event of conflicting provisions between the underlying district and the overlay districts, the more restrictive requirements shall prevail.

        The purposes of the Floodplain Overlay Districts include:

(a)    The Floodplain Overlay districts and the flood hazard areas of the City of Dana Point are subject to periodic inundation which may result in loss of life and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.

(b)    These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and velocities and when inadequately floodproofed, elevated, or otherwise protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.

(c)    It is the purpose of this Chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:

(1)    To protect human life and health;

(2)    To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;

(3)    To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;

(4)    To minimize prolonged business interruptions;

(5)    To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone, and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;

(6)    To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood blight areas;

(7)    To ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and

(8)    To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions on the property.

(d)    In order to accomplish its purposes, this Chapter includes methods and provisions for:

(1)    Restricting or prohibiting uses within the Floodplain Overlay Districts which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards or which result in damaging increases in erosion or flood heights or velocities;

(2)    Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;

(3)    Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood waters;

(4)    Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage; and,

(5)    Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.31.020 General Provisions.
(a)    Lands to Which this Chapter Applies. This Chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards, areas of flood-related erosion hazards, and areas of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) hazards within the jurisdiction of the City of Dana Point.

(b)    Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard. The areas of special flood hazards, areas of flood-related erosion hazards, and areas of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) hazards identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or the Federal Insurance Administration in a scientific and engineering report entitled “Flood Insurance Study” for Orange County, California, and incorporated areas dated September 15, 1989, and February 5, 1992, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) and all subsequent revisions are hereby adopted by reference and incorporated in this Chapter. This Flood Insurance Study is on file at the City of Dana Point. This Flood Insurance Study is the minimum area of applicability of this Chapter and may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow implementation of this Chapter and which are recommended to the City Council by the Floodplain Administrator.

(c)    Compliance. No structure or land shall be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this Chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this Chapter by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein shall prevent the City Council from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.

(d)    Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. This Chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this Chapter and another Ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.

(e)    Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this Chapter, all provisions shall be:

(1)    Considered as minimum requirements;

(2)    Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and

(3)    Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under State Law.

(f)    Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. The degree of flood protection required by this Chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This Chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards, areas of flood-rated erosion hazards, and areas of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) hazards, or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This Chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City of Dana Point, any officer or employee thereof, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this Chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.31.030 Permitted, Accessory, Temporary, and Conditional Uses.
(a)    The following uses are permitted in the Floodplain Overlay districts provided they are in compliance with the applicable provisions of this Chapter:

(1)    Public flood control and utility facilities;

(2)    Commercial extraction related to flood control purposes;

(3)    Accessory uses and structures which may be required by this Chapter.

(b)    Other permitted, accessory, temporary and conditional uses shall be allowed as set forth in the underlying base zoning district, except as specifically prohibited or regulated by this Chapter.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.31.040 Prohibited Uses and Structures.
        The following uses and structures are specifically prohibited in the Floodplain Overlay Districts:

(a)    Structures and uses which would increase flood elevations during the occurrence of a base flood.

(b)    Landfills, excavations, and grading or the storage of materials and equipment that would result in any diversion or increase in erosion, flood levels, or hazards to people or property, except as may be necessary for the periodic clearing of the mouth of San Juan Creek which incorporate appropriate protections for coastal resources.

(c)    Storage or disposal of floatable substances or materials, or of chemicals, explosives, or toxic materials.

(d)    FP-3 District only:

(1)    The use of fill for structural support of structures or decks.

(2)    The placement of mobilehomes, except in an approved mobilehome park or subdivision.

(3)    Seawalls, revetments, and shoreline ocean protective devices or construction that alters natural shoreline processes, unless required to serve coastal-dependent uses or to protect existing structures or public beaches in danger from erosion, and only when positioned, designed and constructed to eliminate adverse impacts on local shoreline sand supply as provided for in Section 9.27.030(f) of this Zoning Code. Seawalls, revetments, and other shoreline protective devices or construction that alters natural shoreline processes shall only be permitted as a last resort protective device for coastal areas. Shoreline protective devices need not be subject to the elevation requirements of the FP-3 district.

(4)    Swimming pools and spas below the base flood elevation.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 97-05, 9/9/97)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 9.31.050 Administration.
(a)    Site Development Permit Required. A Site Development Permit according to Chapter 9.71 of this Code shall be obtained before construction or development begins within any area of special flood hazards, areas of flood-related erosion hazards, or areas of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) hazards established in or pursuant to Section 9.31.020. Application for a Site Development Permit shall be made on forms furnished by the Director of Community Development and may include, but not be limited to:

(1)    Plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevation of the area in question; existing and proposed structures; structure occupancy, topography, landscape and hardscape, drainage and utility facilities, and the storage of materials;

(2)    A certificate from a registered civil engineer stating that the information in the application is correct;

(3)    Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor including the basement of all structures; in Zone AO, AE, or VE, V, and V1 through V30, elevation of highest adjacent grade and proposed elevation of lowest floor of all structures;

(4)    Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure will be floodproofed;

(5)    All appropriate certifications listed in Section 9.31.050 of this Chapter;

(6)    Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; and

(7)    A statement that the standards in Section 9.31.060 have been satisfied.

(b)    Director of Community Development. The Director of Community Development is hereby appointed to administer and implement this Chapter by granting or denying Site Development Permits in accordance with this Code. Appeals are covered in Section 9.31.070(a). The duties and responsibilities of the Director of Community Development shall include, but not be limited to:

(1)    Permit Review. Review all development permits to determine that:

(A)   The permit requirements of this Chapter have been satisfied;

(B)   All other required State and Federal permits have been obtained;

(C)   The site is reasonably safe from flooding;

(D)   The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying capacity of areas where base flood elevations have been determined but a floodway has not been designated. For purposes of this Chapter, “adversely affects” means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated development which will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one (1) foot at any point.

(E)   For the FP-3 District, the development satisfies the design criteria of the Coastal Floodplain Development Study.

(2)    Use of Other Base Flood Data. When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 9.31.020, the Director of Community Development shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a Federal, State, or other source, in order to administer this Chapter. Any such information shall first be submitted to the City Council for adoption.

(3)    Alteration or Relocation of Watercourses. Whenever a watercourse is to be altered or relocated, the Director of Community Development shall:

(A)   Notify adjacent communities and the California Department of Water Resources prior to such alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration;

(B)   Require that the flood carrying capacity of the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained.

(4)    Maintain Certifications. Obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available as needed:

(A)   The certification required in Section 9.31.060(a)(3)(A) (floor elevations);

(B)   The certification required in Section 9.31.060(a)(3)(B) (elevations in areas of shallow flooding);

(C)   The certification required in Section 9.31.060(a)(3)(C)3 (elevation or floodproofing of non-residential structures);

(D)   The certification required in Section 9.31.060(a)(3)(D) or 9.31.060 (a)(3)(D)2 (wet floodproofing standard);

(E)   The certified elevation required in Section 9.31.060(c)(2) (subdivision standards);

(F)    The certification required in Section 9.31.060 (e)(1) (floodway encroachments); and

(G)   The information required in Section 9.31.060(f)(6) (coastal high hazard construction standards).

(5)    Interpretations. Make interpretations, where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards, areas of flood-related erosion hazards, or areas of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) hazards, for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions. Any person contesting such interpretation may appeal as provided in Section 9.31.070.

(6)    Remedy Violations. Take action to remedy violations of this Chapter as specified in Section 9.31.020 (c) herein.

(7)    Act on Site Development Permits. Approve, conditionally approve, or deny Site Development Permits.

(c)    Nonconforming Uses and Structures in the Floodplain Overlay Districts. Any use or structure lawfully existing on any premises that is made nonconforming by the application of this Chapter, or by any amendment of this Chapter, shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 9.63, Nonconforming Uses and Structures, except as follows:

(1)    Any nonconforming structure located outside the coastal zone may be expanded, enlarged, reconstructed or structurally altered without conforming to the standards of this Chapter, provided that such expansion, enlargement, reconstruction or structural alteration does not constitute a substantial improvement. Any substantial improvement to a nonconforming structure shall be subject to all the regulations of this Chapter.

(2)    Any nonconforming structure located outside the coastal zone which sustains substantial damage shall be subject to all the regulations of this Chapter.

(3)    The following regulations shall apply to nonconforming uses and structures located in Floodplain Overlay Districts in the coastal zone:

(A)   No nonconforming use or structure shall be enlarged, expanded, reconstructed or structurally altered, with the limited exception of a one-time, ten percent (10%) square footage improvement that may be allowed on the inland side or within the sideyard setback areas of an existing residence, unless the entire structure is made to conform with the development standards contained in this Chapter (excepting the provisions contained in subsections (c)(1) and (c)(2) above). In addition, that work done in any period of twelve (12) months on ordinary alterations or replacement of walls, fixtures or plumbing not exceeding ten percent (10%) of the value of the building, as determined by the Director of Community Development, shall be permitted provided that the cubical contents of the building, as it existed at the time this subsection or amendments thereto take effect, are not increased.

(B)   If any nonconforming use or structure shall be destroyed or damaged to any extent by flood or wave action or accident, then said use or structure and the land on which said use or structure was located or maintained shall be allowed up to a fifty percent (50%) building valuation increase without any change in the structure’s footprint once in a twelve month period. (Coastal Act/30600(e)).

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 97-05, 9/9/97; Ord. 99-05, 4/27/99)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 9.31.060 Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction.
(a)    Standards of Construction. In all areas of special flood hazards, the following standards are required:

(1)    Anchoring.

(A)   All new constructions and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.

(B)   All manufactured homes shall meet the anchoring standards of Section 9.31.060(d).

(2)    Constructions Materials and Methods.

(A)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.

(B)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.

(C)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.

(D)   Within Zones A, AH, AO, AE, or VE, adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes shall be installed to guide flood waters around and wary from proposed structures.

(3)    Elevation and Floodproofing.

(A)   New construction and substantial improvement of any structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the base flood elevation. Nonresidential structures may meet the standards in Section 9.31.060(a)(3)(C). Upon the completion of the structure of the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, such structure shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor and verified by the City Building Inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification shall be provided to the Director of Community Development.

(B)   New construction and substantial improvement of any structure in Zone AO or A shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated about the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM, or at least two (2) feet if no depth number is specified. Nonresidential structures may meet the standards in Section 9.31.060(a)(3)(C). Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, such structure shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor and verified by the City Building Inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification shall be provided to the Director of Community Development.

(C)   Nonresidential construction shall either be elevated in conformance with Section 9.31.060 (a)(3)(A) or 9.31.060(a)(3)(B) or shall conform to the following requirements together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities:

1.     Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantial impermeable to the passage of water;

2.     Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydronamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and

3.     Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the standards of this Subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the Director of Community Development.

(D)   New construction and substantial improvements of any structure with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:

1.     Either a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screen louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters; or

2.     Be certified to comply with a local floodproofing standard approved by the Federal Insurance Administration.

(E)   Manufactured homes shall also meet the standards in Section 9.31.060 (d).

(b)    Standards for Utilities.

(1)    All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to eliminate or minimize infiltration of flood water into the system and discharge from systems into flood waters.

(2)    On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment or contamination during flooding.

(c)    Standards for Subdivisions.

(1)    All preliminary subdivision proposals shall identify the flood hazard area and the elevation of the base flood.

(2)    All final subdivision plans shall provide the elevation of proposed structure(s) and pads. If the site is filled above the base flood, the final pad elevation shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor and provided to the Director of Community Development.

(3)    All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.

(4)    All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.

(5)    All subdivisions shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards.

(d)    Standards for Manufactured Homes. All new and replacement manufactured homes and additions to manufactured homes shall:

(1)    Be elevated so that the lowest floor is at or above the base flood elevation; and

(2)    Be securely anchored to a permanent foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.

(e)    Floodways. Lands located within an Area of Special Flood Hazard established in Section 9.31.020(b) are designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply:

(1)    Encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development shall be prohibited unless certification by a registered professional engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that the encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.

(2)    If Section 9.31.060(e)(1) is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Section 9.31.060.

(f)    Coastal High Hazard Areas. Within coastal high hazard areas established in Section 9.31.020(b), the following standards shall apply:

(1)    All new construction and substantial improvements shall be elevated on adequately anchored pilings or columns and securely anchored to such pilings or columns so that the lowest horizontal portion of the structural members of the lowest floor excluding the pilings or columns is elevated to or above the base flood elevation.

(2)    All new construction shall be located on the landward side of the reach of mean high tide.

(3)    All new construction and substantial improvements shall have the space below the lowest floor free of obstructions or constructed with breakaway walls. Such temporarily enclosed space shall not be used for human habitation.

(4)    Fill shall not be used for structural support of structures or decks.

(5)    Man-made alteration of sand dunes which would increase potential flood damage is prohibited.

(6)    The Director of Community Development shall obtain and maintain the following records:

(A)   Certification by a registered engineer or architect that the proposed structure complies with Section 9.31.060(f)(1).

(B)   The elevation (relation to mean sea level) of the bottom of the lowest structural member of the lower floor (excluding pilings or columns) of all new and substantially improved structures and whether such structures contain a basement.

(7)    Satisfy the design criteria of the Coastal Floodplain Development Study and provide the required wave calculations prepared by a qualified registered Civil Engineer experienced in coastal engineering.

(8)    Decks shall be constructed to meet the following criteria:

(A)   Wood and raised concrete decks shall be constructed and adequately anchored on caissons or piles installed below the scour elevation and shall be designed by a structural Civil Engineer to withstand the forces of breaking waves and uplift forces to the satisfaction of the Building Official.

(B)   Concrete decks constructed on existing ground do not require caissons or pile systems.

(C)   All decks shall be designed to allow wave run-up to go over and under the deck without obstructions.

(9)    Accessories, such as awnings, patio covers, or trellises, shall be adequately anchored and constructed on caisson or pile footing installed below the scour elevation.

(10)  Spas shall be constructed to allow wave run-up under the spa without obstructions. Swimming pools and spas located below the base flood elevation are prohibited.

(11)  The standards for seawalls, revetments, and other shoreline protective devices or construction that alters natural shoreline processes are contained in Section 9.31.040(d)(3) and in Section 9.27.030(f)

(12)  Garages may be constructed at the existing beach elevation and below the base flood elevation if they are anchored on pilings or columns and designed with breakaway panel walls. Subterranean garages are prohibited.

(g)    Mudslide (i.e., Mudflow)-Prone Areas.

(1)    The Director of Community Development shall review permits for proposed construction or other development to determine if it is located within a mudslide area.

(2)    Permits shall be reviewed to determine whether the proposed development is reasonably safe from mudslide hazards. Factors to be considered in making this determination include, but are not limited to:

(A)   The type and quality of soils;

(B)   Evidence of ground water or surface water problems;

(C)   The depth and quality of any fill;

(D)   The overall slope of the site; and

(E)   The weight that any proposed development will impose on the slope.

(3)    Within areas which have mudslide hazards, the following requirements shall apply:

(A)   A site investigation and further review shall be made by persons qualified in geology and soils engineering;

(B)   The proposed grading, excavation, new construction, and substantial improvements shall be adequately designed and protected against mudslide damages;

(C)   The proposed grading excavation, new constructions, and substantial improvements do not aggravate the existing hazard by creating either on-site or off-site disturbances; and

(D)   Drainage planting, watering, and maintenance shall not endanger slope stability. Erosion-Prone Areas.\

(1)    The Director of Community Development shall require permits for proposed construction and other development within all flood-related erosion-prone areas as known to the City.

(2)    Such permits shall be reviewed to determine whether the proposed site alterations and improvements will be reasonable safe from flood-related erosion and will not cause flood-related erosion hazards or otherwise aggravate the existing hazard.

(3)    If a proposed construction or development is found to be in the path of flood-related erosion or would increase the erosion hazard, such construction or development shall be relocated or adequate protective measures shall be taken to avoid aggravating the existing erosion hazard.

(4)    Within Zone “E” on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps, a setback is required for all new development from the ocean, lake, bay, riverfront, or other body of water to create a safety buffer consisting of a natural vegetative or contour strip. This buffer shall be designated according to the flood-related erosion hazard and erosion rate, in relation to the anticipated “useful life” of structures, and depending upon the geologic, hydrologic, topographic, and climatic characteristic of the land. The buffer may be used for suitable open space purposes such as for agricultural, forestry, outdoor recreation, and wildlife habitat areas, and for other activities using temporary and portable structures only. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 97-05, 9/9/97)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 9.31.070 Exception Procedure
(a)    Appeal Board.

(1)    The City Council of the City of Dana Point shall hear and decide appeals from the requirements of this Chapter.

(2)    The City Council shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirements, decision, or determination made by the Director of Community Development in the enforcement and administration of this Chapter.

(3)    In acting upon such appeals, the City Council shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in this Chapter, and:

(A)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;

(B)   The danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;

(C)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;

(D)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the City;

(E)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;

(F)    The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;

(G)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;

(H)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;

(I)    The safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;

(J)    The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site; and

(K)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems and streets and bridges.

(4)    Generally, exemptions may be issued for new constructions and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, provided Sections 9.31.070(a)(3)(A) through 9.31.070(a)(3)(K) have been fully covered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the exemption increases.

(5)    Upon consideration of the factors of Section 9.31.070(a)(3) and the purposes of this Chapter, the City Council may attach such conditions to the granting of exemptions as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this Chapter.

(6)    The Director of Community Development shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any exemptions to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.

(b)    Conditions for Exemption.

(1)    Exemptions may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration of structures listed in the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to other conditions set forth herein.

(2)    Exemptions shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.

(3)    Exemptions shall only be issued upon a determination that the exemption is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.

(4)    Exemptions shall only be issued if the Zoning Map includes property within a Floodplain Overlay District of that property does not meet the purpose and intent for that district. The determination to exempt a property shall be based on a study of topographic and design flood elevation contours on the subject property and on such additional information as he finds necessary or appropriate.

(5)    Exemptions shall only be issued if flood protection or floodproofing work adequate to protect against the design flood, and in compliance with City and other applicable flood control and flood protection standards and policies, has been completed. The finding of exemption shall confirm that any stream, channel, storm drain, or landfill improvements fully offset flood surface elevations established by the applicable map and that, if the property is included on a Flood Insurance Rate Map or a Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, all such flood protection or flood control work has been approved by the appropriate Federal agency and the property removed from the floodplain designation on such maps.

(6)    Exemptions shall only be issued upon:

(A)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;

(B)   A determination that failure to grant the exemption would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and

(C)   A determination that the granting of an exemption will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.

(7)    Exemptions may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that the provisions of Sections 9.31.070(b)(1) through 9.31.070(b)(4) are satisfied and that the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety.

(8)    Any applicant to whom an exemption is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor elevation below the regulatory flood elevation and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. A copy of the notice shall be recorded by the Floodplain Board in the Office of the County of Orange County Recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

Chapter 9.33 SPECIFIC PLAN DISTRICT
9.33.010 Intent and Purpose.
        The purpose of the Specific Plan (SP) District is to provide for the orderly, systematic, detailed, and enhanced implementation of the General Plan for designated areas of the City. Preparation and processing of Specific Plans shall be in accordance with the applicable provisions of State Law and this Chapter. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.33.020 Specific Plan District Initiation.
        The City Council shall identify those portions of the City where application of the Specific Plan District is appropriate. The City Council shall initiate the preparation of all Specific Plans. At the discretion of the City Council, specific plans may be prepared by the City or by persons representing affected property owners. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.33.030 Cost of Preparation and Processing.
        When the City Council finds that a specific plan is an appropriate method of planning for the future development of property and implementing the General Plan, the cost for preparation of the specific plan shall be borne by such property owner. The method for determining costs of preparation and making payment shall be as specified in a resolution adopted at the time of initiation of the specific plan and the final amounts shall be fixed upon adoption of the Specific Plan. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.33.040 Procedure for Establishing the Specific Plan District.
        The procedure to establish a Specific Plan District shall be those described in Section 9.61.070 of this Code. Establishment of the Specific Plan District before the adoption of the Specific Plan prohibits the issuance of grading permits, building permits, or land use permits, unless such permits or entitlements are for the restoration or remedial maintenance and do not in any way predispose land use or development, prior to the adoption of a Specific Plan. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.33.050 Specific Plan Adoption.
        A Specific Plan shall be adopted by the City Council in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 9.61 of this Code. Adoption shall be by Ordinance, however, the non-regulatory portions of the Specific Plan may be adopted by Resolution. Adoption of the Specific Plan shall include findings by the City Council that the Specific Plan is consistent with, and provides for the orderly, systematic, and specific implementation of the General Plan. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.33.060 Specific Plan Requirements.
        Adoption of the Specific Plan shall include amendment of the Zoning Map to identify the Specific Plan area and its corresponding Specific Plan number, and inclusion of the Specific Plan as an appendix to the Zoning Code. Where the Specific Plan specifically addresses changes in the Zoning Code, the Specific Plan shall supersede those land use regulations applicable to the subject property, including the previously adopted ordinances, standards, and guidelines. Specific plans may either supplement or supersede all land use regulations applicable to the subject property including all previously adopted ordinances, standards and guidelines.

(a)    Scope of Specific Plan. Each specific plan ordinance shall include the specific land uses, standards and criteria necessary for the development, maintenance, and use of the subject property, in compliance with the policies and programs of the General Plan. Each Specific Plan shall clearly specify how and to what extent the plan is to improve upon, supplement or supersede any adopted ordinances, regulations, and standards. Where not otherwise specifically referenced and addressed by a Specific Plan, all adopted ordinances, regulations, standards, and guidelines of the City of Dana Point are applicable.

                Each Specific Plan shall include standards and a financing program for the installation of public facilities and utilities, schools, flood control and transportation facilities, and other public and private improvements and facilities related to the specific plan. Each Specific Plan shall address the applicable portions of the California Government Code related to the preparation of a Specific Plan.

(b)    Designation on Zoning Map. Adoption of a Specific Plan shall include adoption of an appropriate zoning map amendment according to Chapter 9.61 of this Code. Each Specific Plan shall be numbered and named. The zoning map shall not indicate zoning for the area within the Specific Plan, but shall show the letters “SP” within a circle and applicable application number. Thereafter, all land use, development and improvements shall conform to the provisions of the adopted Specific Plan.

(c)    Inclusion of Specific Plan Text and Maps. Adoption of a Specific Plan shall include the incorporation of the Specific Plan text and maps as an appendix to the Zoning Code.

(d)    Reference of Specific Plan Text and Maps. Adoption of a Specific Plan shall include the incorporation by reference of the Specific Plan in Section 9.33.080 of this Chapter.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.33.070 Amendments.
        Any Specific Plan may be amended or replaced by the same procedure as the Specific Plan is adopted. Prior to adoption of the repeal of a Specific Plan, the City Council shall find that the Specific Plan is no longer necessary, and no longer provides for the orderly and systematic implementation of the General Plan. The adoption of a repealing ordinance shall include provisions for the immediate application of appropriate zoning to the area covered by the repealed Specific Plan. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.33.080 Adopted Specific Plans.
        As of the date of this Zoning Code, the following Specific Plans have been adopted by the City of Dana Point. Complete Specific Plans are provided as a separate appendix to this Code.

 

Adopted Specific Plans

SP Number
and Name

Zoning Code
Appendix

City Council
Resolution #

SP91-01
Monarch Beach Resort

D

92-02-25-3

 

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

Chapter 9.35 ACCESS, PARKING AND LOADING*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 18-01 and 18-07. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


9.35.010 Intent and Purpose.
        The access, parking, and loading regulations ensure that all land uses provide safe access and on-site circulation along with adequate off-street parking and loading facilities. The regulations also ensure that the use of land does not negatively affect the safety, use of, or vehicular circulation within public rights-of-way.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.35.020 Applicability.
(a)    The minimum standards of this section shall apply to all proposed land uses, buildings, and structures.

(b)    The minimum standards of this section shall also apply to all proposed additions, enhancements and changed modifications to existing land use structures. At the time a building or structure is added onto, enlarged, or modified, parking and loading spaces shall be provided for both the existing units and the modified or enlarged portions so as to conform to provisions of this Chapter.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.35.030 Site Plan and Building Permit Required.
(a)    A site plan shall be submitted for all required parking facilities. The plan shall consist of a detailed layout of the existing and proposed parking facilities, including the site, grades, drainage, utilities, all structures, landscaping, parking stalls, drive aisles, and ingress and egress drives. The plan shall be accurately and thoroughly dimensioned. The site plan shall be submitted and reviewed in conjunction with any application for a permit required by Chapters 9.65, 9.67, 9.69, or 9.71, subdivisions of land pursuant to Title 7 or building permits pursuant to Title 8.

(b)    Permits in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Dana Point Municipal Code shall be obtained prior to the development of any access, parking, or loading facilities.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 9.35.040 General Provisions.
(a)    Accessibility/Useability.

(1)    Required access, parking and loading facilities shall be made available and permanently maintained for access, parking and loading for the permitted and intended use(s).

(2)    Required off-street parking stalls shall be designed, located, constructed and maintained so as to be fully and independently usable and accessible at all times.

(3)    Required off-street parking facilities, and driveways providing access to such facilities, shall not be used for any purpose which at any time would preclude the use of the area for the temporary storage of motor vehicles, except as may be permitted through approval of a temporary site development permit.

(4)    Inoperable motor vehicles shall not be parked in driveways or carports.

(b)    Exclusivity of Facilities. Unless otherwise provided through an approved discretionary permit, no owner or tenant shall lease, rent or otherwise make the required off-street parking stalls unavailable to the intended users. The joint use of parking and loading stalls may be permitted subject to the approval of a Site Development Permit pursuant to Chapter 9.71., and as provided for by Section 9.35.060(c)(3).

(c)    Encroachment into Right-of-Way Prohibited. Land within the right-of-way of a proposed street or highway, or within the planned ultimate right-of-way on a street or highway proposed to be widened, shall not be used to provide required off-street parking and loading facilities.

(d)    Parking Facility Development Standards.

(1)    Paving Materials. All required access, parking, and loading spaces shall be paved with:

(A)   Decorative paving, concrete, or asphalt-type surfacing as per City standards and requirements for all non-residential parking facilities.

(B)   Decorative paving or concrete for all driveways, parking areas, parking maneuvering areas, and parking stalls providing access and parking for all newly constructed single family detached and attached residential projects.

(2)    Lighting. Lighting of outdoor parking areas shall be designed and maintained in a manner to prevent glare or direct illumination from intruding into any off-site areas. Lighting fixtures shall be provided in accordance with the following specifications for:

(A)   Uncovered access, parking and loading areas: The following minimum lighting requirements shall apply to all common uncovered parking facilities.


General Use Areas

High Use Areas

Footcandles (Minimum on Pavement)

Footcandles Uniformity Ratio (Average/Min)

Footcandles (Average on Pavement)

Footcandles Uniformity Ratio (Average/Min)

 

 

 

 

.4

4:1

1

3:1

 

                As determined by the Director of Community Development, high use areas include: vehicular entries and exits, parking accessways, pedestrian areas, passenger loading areas, areas of higher intensity vehicular movement; areas of concentrated pedestrian and vehicular movement, and where added security is desired.

(B)   Covered access, parking and loading areas: The following minimum lighting requirements shall apply to all parking structures:

 

Parking Structure Lighting Standards (in Footcandles)

Area

Day

Night

General and pedestrian areas

5

5

Ramps, aisles, and corridors

10

7

Parking storage areas

4

4

Entrance areas

60

7

Elevator areas, walkways and cashiers booths

20

20

Stairwells

30

20

 

(3)    Landscaping Requirements. Parking lot landscaping should be designed and installed to comply with the applicable provisions contained in the Urban Design Guidelines.

(e)    Garage Setbacks. The vehicular entry to a garage must be located at least twenty (20) feet from:

(1)    The back edge of the existing or ultimate sidewalk, whichever is further from the centerline of the street; or

(2)    Five (5) feet from the back edge of the existing or ultimate curb line, whichever is further from the centerline of the street, where there is no sidewalk; or

(3)    The property line if it is less than five (5) feet from the existing or ultimate curb line where there are no sidewalks, whichever is closest to the garage.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94; Ord. 94-21, 12/13/94; Ord. 03-07, 4/9/03)

 

9.35.050 Access.
(a)    Roadways.

(1)    Access to Circulation Element Roadways.

(A)   Wherever access to parking is from a secondary arterial of two (2) lanes, or higher rated roadway designated on the Circulation Element of the General Plan, parking stalls and parking maneuvering areas shall be designed so that vehicles enter the roadway traveling in a forward direction.

(B)   Vehicular access to roadways designated on the Circulation Element of the General Plan will be permitted only in accordance with the driveway locations and access design specifically approved by the Director of Public Works.

(2)    The width of roadways providing access to parking facilities for all residential projects, including attached or detached single family or multiple family dwellings, shall be in accordance with the following standards, unless otherwise approved by the Director of Public Works:

 

Number of Dwelling Units Accessed by Roadway

Curb-to-Curb Roadway Width
for Access on Streets With:

 

No Parking

Parking on One Side

Parking on Two Sides

1 — 20 units

less than 28 feet

28 feet

36 feet

21 — 50 units

28 feet

28 feet

36 feet

51 — 120 units

28 feet

30 feet

40 feet

121 + units

28 feet

30 feet

40 feet

 

        Access to residential and commercial property can be provided from an alley.

(3)    Access to on-street parking stalls is direct from the traffic lanes of the public right-of-way. The inclusion of on-street parking is restricted in accordance with the following street width standards:

 

Curb-to-Curb Street Width

Parking Allowed

Less than 28¢

None, unless in bays outside the curb-to-curb width. Bays may include either perpendicular or parallel stalls.

> 28¢ but < 36¢

Parallel stalls on one side only

36¢ or more

Parallel stalls on both sides

 

(4)    A five (5) foot sidewalk along at least one side of the roadway is required.

(5)    On private roadways, sidewalks may be deleted if alternative pedestrian circulation is provided and approved subject to a Site Development Permit. In approving a Site Development Permit that includes the deletion of required sidewalks, the Planning Commission must make the following finding: that a safe and adequate alternative pedestrian circulation system has been provided.

(b)    Driveways. Driveways are intended to provide access from public roadways to private, off-street parking facilities. Entry driveways provide direct ingress or egress from a street, alley or public right-of-way to a parking aisle, internal driveway or parking maneuvering area. Internal driveways provide interior circulation between parking aisles. Except as is customary in single-family residential districts, no parking is permitted in an entry driveway and no parking stall shall take direct access from any driveway. In multiple family residential and non-residential districts, neither entry driveways or internal driveways may provide direct access to any parking stall.

(1)    Location of Driveway on a Corner Lot. When a building site abuts two (2) intersecting streets and a driveway or multiple driveways are proposed, the driveway shall be located on the street frontage that allows the driveway to be farthest from the intersection of the two (2) streets, and on the street that carries the least volume of traffic. If one of the intersecting streets is a Circulation Element roadway, the driveway shall be located on the other street subject to approval by the Director of Public Works.

(2)    Driveway Spacing.

(A)   All Driveways. Driveways shall be located a minimum of four (4) feet apart. In addition, the space between driveways shall not exceed eight (8) feet unless the space is at least twenty-two (22) feet. This standard shall apply only to the development of new subdivisions and, where feasible, to the installation of new driveways in areas of existing development.

(B)   Driveway spacing standards for non-residential land uses and residential land uses with five (5) or more dwellings shall be as follows:

1.     The centerline of a driveway shall be a minimum of one hundred ten (110) feet away from the centerline of any other driveway as measured along the ultimate right-of-way lines of an abutting street; and

2.     The centerline of a driveway shall be a minimum of two hundred (200) feet away from the centerline of any other street opening. In the Neighborhood Commercial and Residential Districts, the minimum distance between the centerline of a driveway and the centerline of any other street opening may be reduced to one hundred fifty (150) feet subject to approval of the Director of Public Works.

(C)   If the standards of Subsections (b)(2)(A) and (b)(2)(B) of this Section cannot be achieved, a minimum distance of twenty-two (22) feet, as measured along the ultimate property line, may be provided subject to the approval of the Director of Public Works.

(3)    Driveway Grades, Unless Otherwise Approved By the Director of Public Works.

(A)   Entry Driveways.

1.     Four (4) or Less Residential Dwellings. Whenever access is taken from a street, alley, or driveway to off-street parking serving four (4) or less dwelling units, the driveway shall have a maximum grade of ten (10) percent, measured along the driveway centerline, for a distance of not less than ten (10) feet from the ultimate street, alley, or driveway right-of-way line and fifteen (15) percent thereafter. Exhibit 9.35-1 illustrates these specifications.

2.     Non-Residential Land Use or Five (5) or More Residential Dwellings. Whenever access is taken from a street, alley or driveway to an off-street parking area serving non-residential land use or five (5) or more dwelling units, the driveway shall have a maximum grade of plus fifteen (15) percent or minus two (2) percent, measured from the street, alley or driveway grade along the driveway centerline for a distance of not less than eighteen (18) feet from the ultimate street, alley, or driveway right-of-way line. If the driveway is constructed below the street elevation, adequate drainage facilities to avoid flooding shall be provided. Exhibit 9.35-1 illustrates these specifications.

 

EXHIBIT 9.35-1

MAXIMUM ENTRY DRIVEWAY GRADES



 

3.     If any entry drive exceeds fifty (50) feet in length, the first eighteen (18) feet of the access may not exceed an eight (8) percent grade.

(B)   Internal Driveways. Driveways located beyond eighteen (18) feet from the ultimate right-of-way line of a street, alley, or driveway which provides vehicular access within the interior of a parking area are internal driveways and shall have a maximum slope of plus twenty (20) percent or minus twenty (20) percent. When the slope of an internal driveway exceeds plus or minus ten (10) percent, the internal driveway design shall include transitions on each end, no less than eight (8) feet in length, which have gradients equal to one-half (1/2) the slope of the ramp. If the driveway is constructed below the street elevation, adequate drainage facilities to avoid flooding shall be provided. Exhibit 9.35-2 illustrates these specifications.

 

EXHIBIT 9.35-2

INTERNAL DRIVEWAY GRADES

 



 

(4)    Driveway Widths.

(A)   Residential Driveways.

1.     The minimum driveway width between the public right-of-way and parking stall maneuvering area shall be as follows, unless otherwise approved by the Director of Public Works:

 

Number of Dwelling Units

One-Way Circulation

Two-Way Circulation

1 (1)

10 feet

10 feet

2 - 4 (2)

12 feet

20 feet

5 - 19 (3)(4)

14 feet

24 feet

20 +

14 feet

28 feet

 

(1)        A single family residence driveway shall be paved to a minimum of ten (10) feet in width from access street or alley to the parking stall maneuvering area.

(2)        Except when a wider width is required for parking stall maneuvering area according to this Chapter or as required by the Director of Public Works for a transition to a driveway approach.

(3)        Where a one (1) stall garage has an interior width in excess of ten (10) feet and a garage door wider than eight (8) feet, the driveway width may be reduced by up to two (2) feet.

(4)        Where a two (2) stall garage has a garage door at least sixteen (16) feet wide, the parking stall maneuvering area width may be reduced by up to two (2) feet.

 

2.     Limit on Residential Driveways. For all residential uses, the driveway must lead directly to a garage, carport, or other approved parking facility. The number of permitted driveways shall be one (1) per fifty (50) feet of lot frontage, or fraction thereof, not to exceed a total of two (2) driveways.

(B)   Non-Residential Driveways.

1.     A one-way driveway shall have a minimum width of fifteen (15) feet unless it is a fire lane which requires a minimum width of twenty (20) feet. Where one-way driveways exist, pavement graphics and directional signage and arrows shall be provided. If the driveway is more than one hundred fifty (150) feet long, a fire apparatus turning radii may be required.

2.     The width of a two-way driveway from any roadway shall be designed in accordance with the following standards, unless otherwise approved by the Director of Public Works:

 

Project Size (by Number of Parking Stalls)

Minimum Driveway Width

1 — 100 parking stalls

28 feet

101 — 350 parking stalls

32 feet

351 + parking stalls

35 feet

 

(with curb returns)

 

 

(5)    Driveway Lengths.

(A)   Residential Uses.

1.     Providing Access to a Garage.

a.     Single Family Detached and Attached. A driveway with a minimum length of twenty (20) feet, as measured from the back of sidewalk, five (5) feet from the back of the existing or ultimate curb where there is no sidewalk, or property line if it is less than five (5) feet from the existing or ultimate curb line where there are no sidewalks to the parking stall or parking stall maneuvering area, whichever is closest. Exhibit 9.35-3 illustrates this requirement.

 

EXHIBIT 9.35-3
RESIDENTIAL DRIVEWAY TO A GARAGE

 



 

b.     Single Family Detached on Lots Which Are Both Shallow and Narrow (Less than Fifty (50) Feet Wide and One Hundred (100) Feet Deep). A driveway with a minimum length of five (5) feet and a maximum length of nine (9) feet, measured from the back of sidewalk or back of curb where there is no sidewalk to the parking stall or parking maneuvering area, whichever is further. An automatic garage door opener and roll-up garage door, kept in operating condition, shall be used on garages located on such lots.

2.     Providing Access to a Parking Structure or Uncovered Parking. The length of driveways providing access to a parking structure or to any area of uncovered parking shall be in accordance with the following standards:

 

Number of Dwelling Units Served

Minimum Driveway Length

1 — 19 dwelling units

20 feet

20 — 49 dwelling units

30 feet

50 + dwelling units

40 feet

 

 

(B)   Non-Residential Uses or Five (5) or More Residential Dwellings.

1.     The length of a driveway from any roadway shall be designed in accordance with the following standards as measured from the ultimate right-of-way to the first intersecting parking aisle, internal driveway or parking stall:

 

Project Size

Minimum Internal Driveway Length

Primary Driveway

Secondary Driveway

1 — 50 parking stalls

Subject to Director
of Public Works

Subject to Director
of Public Works

51 — 100 parking stalls

20 feet

20 feet

101 — 200 parking stalls

30 feet

20 feet

201 — 350 parking stalls

50 feet

40 feet

351 — 450 parking stalls

70 feet

50 feet

451 + parking stalls

90 feet

60 feet

 

2.     Driveways from non-Circulation Element roadways shall be not less than twenty (20) feet in length as measured from the ultimate public right-of-way.

(6)    Driveway Widths. The width of any driveway from any roadway shall be designed in accordance with the following standards, unless otherwise approved by the Director of Public Works:

 

Project Size

Minimum Driveway Width

0 — 100 parking stalls

28 feet

101 — 350 parking stalls

32 feet

351 + parking stalls

35 feet with curb returns

 

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by 94-09, 5/24/94; Ord. 03-07, 4/9/03; Ord. 06-02, 4/12/06; Ord. 11-02, 2/28/11)

 

9.35.060 Parking Requirements.
(a)    Parking Facilities.

(1)    Parking Aisles. A parking aisle is a paved area designed to provide access to parking stalls.

(2)    Parking Stall Maneuvering Area. A parking stall maneuvering area is the paved area behind a parking stall that allows a vehicle to back out and enter a parking aisle or driveway. Parking stall maneuvering areas many times are also parking aisles of public rights-of-way. For example, a parking stall maneuvering area for the garage of a typical single family detached home is the driveway and public street.

(3)    Parking Stall. An area intended for the temporary parking of motor vehicles.

(4)    Parking Structure. A parking structure is either an above-ground, below-ground, or at-grade parking facility which is partially enclosed and which contains structural elements, such as columns or other supports, to create a multi-level parking facility.

(b)    Access to Parking Facilities. Vehicular access to off-street parking facilities shall be provided in accordance with the following provisions:

(1)    Fully accessible, adequate, and safe ingress and egress shall be provided between a parking area and a street, highway, alley or driveway as determined by the Director of Public Works.

(2)    Where feasible, required parking facilities shall be designed so as to allow vehicular access to other areas of the parking facility or adjacent parking facilities without entering the public right-of-way.

(3)    Except for single family detached or attached projects of four (4) units or less, access facilities shall be arranged so that any vehicle can leave the parking area and enter into an adjoining vehicular right-of-way traveling in a forward direction.

(4)    When a parking aisle containing seven (7) or more stalls dead ends, a turnaround area shall be provided which allows a vehicle entering the dead end parking aisle to exit the dead end parking aisle in a forward direction to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works. The insertion or positioning of a landscape finger in a dead end

 

        parking aisle with more than seven (7) parking stalls in it will not eliminate the requirement for a turnaround. For 90° parking from a dead end parking aisle, the last parking stall for the aisle shall be deleted and designated as a turnaround area. Any required garage, covered parking stall, or parking stall located more than one hundred (100) feet from the street or highway from which access is taken, and served by a driveway or parking aisle less than twenty (20) feet wide, shall have an adjacent vehicle turnaround area with a minimum size equal to a standard nine (9) foot by eighteen (18) foot parking stall. The turnaround area shall be located so that it can physically accommodate a vehicular turnaround without excessive vehicular movements, subject to approval by the Director of Public Works. Larger turnaround areas may be required to accommodate larger vehicles as deemed necessary by the Director of Public Works.

(5)    Tandem parking is prohibited, except as indicated below, subject to the approval of a minor conditional use permit:

(A)   For duplexes, pursuant to Section 9.35.080(e)(4) and Exhibit 9.35-10; or

(B)   For “employee only” parking areas of existing commercial structures; or

(C)   For valet parking areas of existing commercial structures.

(D)   Minor Conditional Use Permits may only be issued under subsections (B) and (C) above, when the Director of Community Development can make the following findings:

1.     That the proposed type of tandem parking (employee or valet) is appropriate for the proposed use; and

2.     That surrounding properties will not be adversely affected by the proposed tandem parking facilities; and

3.     That adequate off-street (or acceptable on-street) parking for the patrons of the business will be available for the proposed use; and

4.     That appropriate conditions have been imposed to address the maintenance and safety of the tandem parking area.

5.     That the proposed use demonstrates unusually high quality, character and/or exhibits characteristics which are highly consistent with community objectives as stated in a specific General Plan goal(s) or policy(ies).

6.     That the tandem parking program includes provisions for periodic monitoring and reporting to identify any issues associated with the program and to adjust the program as necessary to address any such issues.

        Pedestrian access through off-street parking facilities shall be provided in accordance with the following provisions:

(6)    Parking lots with eighty (80) or more uncovered parking stalls shall be designed to incorporate a safe and identifiable pedestrian circulation system which links the on-site parking lot and the off-site pedestrian circulation to the on-site structure(s)/uses. The system shall be provided in accordance with the following criteria:

(A)   The pedestrian linkage should be designed so as to be readily evident to the pedestrian as the safest pathway to the on-site use or structure. Vertical elements such as lighting, trees, arbors, or porticos may be used to enhance identification of the linkage.

(B)   The pedestrian linkage should be routed and designed so as to provide maximum integration with the required parking lot landscaping and the maximum degree of separation between pedestrian and vehicular circulation.

(C)   The pedestrian linkage shall be physically separated from vehicular circulation aisles except as necessary to provide a perpendicular crossing of such an aisle. Where the linkage crosses any vehicular circulation aisle, special treatments, including lights, signage, or enhanced pavement treatments such as pavers or brickwork, shall be provided to identify the crosswalk.

(c)    Location of Parking and Loading Facilities.

(1)    Location of Residential Parking Stalls.

(A)   Required parking facilities for residential districts shall be located on the same lot or parcel of land as the use the parking facilities are intended to serve. The facilities shall be conveniently and safely located on the site, required parking to be within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the primary entrance to a dwelling unit. Required parking facilities provided by a given project shall be used exclusively for parking purposes by that project or residence, and shall not be leased, sold, or utilized by other projects or entities.

                By approval of a Variance pursuant to Chapter 9.67, the Planning Commission may approve alternate parking facilities when it finds vehicular access to a garage, carport, or other required automobile storage space on the same lot or parcel of land is not possible from any street, highway, or alley. Such restrictions to access may be due to topographical or other physical conditions. Access may be so difficult to achieve that to require such access may be determined unreasonable in the opinion of the Planning Commission.

(B)   Covered and Assigned Stalls.

1.     Covered and assigned stalls within a garage shall be located on-site and at least twenty (20) feet from the ultimate right-of-way, except for lots which are both shallow and narrow (less than fifty (50) feet wide and one hundred (100) feet deep) and duplexes on narrow lots which may be set back in accordance with Section 9.05.190 or Section 9.35.080(e).

2.     Covered and assigned stalls within a parking structure shall be located on-site and within one hundred (100) feet of the dwelling unit they serve.

3.     Covered and assigned stalls shall be designated as to the dwelling unit to which they are assigned on all plans submitted for permits. The plans shall show how the assigned stalls are designated.

(C)   Uncovered and Unassigned Stalls. Uncovered and unassigned stalls shall be located on-site and within two hundred (200) feet of the dwelling units they serve, and shall be marked “visitor parking.”

(2)    Location of Non-Residential Parking Stalls. Required parking for non-residential uses shall be located:

(A)   On the same lot or parcel of land as the use which the facilities serve; or

(B)   On an adjoining lot or parcel of land under the same ownership as the lot supporting the use the parking facilities serve, provided that the adjoining lot is merged with the property containing the primary use for which the parking is required; or

(C)   On a lot or parcel of land separated only by an alley (twenty (20) feet wide or less) from the lot or parcel supporting the use the parking facilities serve, provided:

1.     That said lots or parcels are under the same ownership; and

2.     That said lots or parcels would be contiguous if not separated by the alley; and

3.     That direct vehicular and pedestrian passage between said lots or parcels would be possible if the alley were vacated; and

4.     That the parking is located not more than two hundred (200) feet from the property it is intended to serve; or

5.     That the parking and vehicular access on said lots or parcels can be designed to ensure safe pedestrian movement between the parking and the property containing the primary use it is intended to serve.

6.     That the lots or parcels are bound for the purpose of development by a covenant for easement pursuant to Chapter 9.45.

(D)   On a non-adjacent lot on the same block as the lot supporting the use the parking facilities serve, provided that the non-adjacent lot is under the same ownership.

(E)   Required parking for non-residential uses may be located on residentially designated lots or parcels subject to the requirements described above through approval of a Conditional Use Permit pursuant to Chapter 9.65.

(3)    Joint Use of Parking Facilities. Multiple uses on multiple building sites may establish joint use parking facilities within one or more parking areas located within such multiple building sites, provided the following requirements are met:

(A)   A detailed joint use parking plan shall be approved by a Site Development Permit issued by the Director of Community Development pursuant to Chapter 9.71. The plan shall show and explain all parking facilities, uses and structures that will use the parking and the pedestrian access from the parking facilities to the uses and structures.

(B)   The boundary of the parking facilities shall be within three hundred (300) feet of the uses they serve and connected to the site by an attractive and adequate pedestrian path or sidewalk to the satisfaction of the Director of Community Development.

(C)   Adequate assurance, to the satisfaction of the Director of Community Development, shall be provided to guarantee that required parking will continue to be maintained in compliance with applicable provisions of this Chapter. This assurance shall be recorded in the office of the Orange County Recorder on all properties utilizing the joint use parking facilities.

(4)    Shared Parking Program. A shared parking program is the shared use of an on-site common parking facility between various land uses according to a program that assures adequate parking is continually provided.

Approval of a shared parking program shall be by:

(A)   A minor Conditional Use Permit approved by the Director of Community Development pursuant to Chapter 9.65 if the shared parking program meets City parking requirements according to the standards of subsection 3 below; or

A Conditional Use Permit approved by the Planning Commission pursuant to Chapter 9.65 for all other proposed shared parking programs.

(B)   Findings for approval of a shared parking program shall be that the shared parking program provides a reasonable, accountable, and enforceable means for all uses to share common parking and that the City’s minimum requirements assure parking demand is continually met.

(C)   The property owner shall submit the shared parking program to the Director of Community Development for review and approval. The shared parking program shall include:

1.     Written verification from property owner and tenants and all future property owners know of and will comply with the requirements of the shared parking program; and making known the shared parking program to all future property owners, tenants, and government agencies.

2.     A site plan showing all parking spaces, building square footage and tenant spaces.

3.     A shared parking matrix(s) with the following information:

a.     The number of parking stalls available on-site (parking supply).

b.     Project building and tenant addresses.

c.     Gross square footage of all building and tenant spaces.

d.     The name, type of use, and the days and hours of operation for each tenant.

e.     The number of parking stalls required by this Chapter for each tenant based on each tenant’s gross square footage and type of use.

f.      The hourly parking demand for all tenants on: Weekdays (M—F), Saturday, Sunday.

g.     The comparison between hourly parking demand and the parking supply which shows hourly parking demand will not exceed hourly parking supply according to this Chapter.

4.     Written acknowledgement from the property owner and tenants that shared parking is contingent upon the efficient implementation of the shared parking program by the property owner and the tenant, and that if the shared parking program is not implemented efficiently as determined by the Director of Community Development, the City shall have the right to deny issuance of tenant improvements or other permits for use or development on the site.

5.     After signing any lease agreement with future tenants, or purchase agreement with a future owner, the owner shall submit an updated shared parking program to the Director of Community Development for review and approval. The submittal shall indicate the new tenant or property owner, the tenant’s required parking, and agreement with the Shared Parking Program as evidenced through a signed letter. The submittal shall be accompanied with a services fee in an amount equal to the hourly billing rate of a Planning Technician for one (1) hour, according to the most current “City of Dana Point — Schedule of Service Fees.” The City of Dana Point may withhold permits of any kind for the site until such documentation and fee is provided, reviewed, and approved.

(d)    Required Grades. Parking stalls, loading spaces, parking aisles, and parking stall maneuvering areas shall have a minimum grade of one-half (0.5) percent for concrete and one (1) percent for all other types of pavement; and a maximum grade of two (2) percent for retail commercial and five (5) percent for all other uses. Said grade may be measured across the parking space and the abutting parking aisle in any direction. Exhibit 9.35-4, on the following page, illustrates these requirements.

 

EXHIBIT 9.35-4

REQUIRED PARKING FACILITY GRADES



 

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94; Ord. 95-14, 7/25/95)

 

9.35.070 Dimensions of Parking Facilities.
(a)    Parking Aisles. Parking aisles, interior circulation drives, and other maneuvering areas shall have minimum dimensions, as specified in the following table.

 

 

Minimum Parking Aisle Width

Parking Stall Orientation to
Parking Aisle

One-Way
Circulation

Two-Way
Circulation

Parallel

14 feet

24 feet

45°

14.5 feet

24 feet

60°

17 feet

24 feet

90°

24 feet

24 feet

 

(b)    Parking Stall Maneuvering Areas. Parking stall maneuvering areas for access into and out of parking stalls shall be as wide as the parking stall or parking stalls and as long as follows:

(1)    Garages — twenty-four (24) feet of unobstructed pavement measured from the garage door.

(2)    Parking structures — twenty-four (24) feet of unobstructed pavement measured from the open end of the parking stall.

(3)    Uncovered parking — twenty-four (24) feet of unobstructed pavement measured from the open end of the parking space.

(c)    Parking Stalls.

(1)    General Design Provisions.

(A)   Parking Stall Delineation. Each parking stall, except for a parking stall within a single family garage, shall be clearly marked with double striping having a minimum width of four (4) inches centered around the minimum parking stall width. The outside dimension of the double striping shall not exceed sixteen (16) inches. Exhibit 9.35-5 illustrates this provision.

 

EXHIBIT 9.35-5

REQUIRED PARKING STALL DELINEATION



 

(B)   Parking Stall Curbing and Wheel Stops. A continuous six (6) foot by six (6) foot concrete curb shall be provided for any uncovered parking stall adjacent to a pedestrian walkway, accessway or driveway, landscape planter, street or alley, as illustrated in Exhibit 9.35-6, to ensure that vehicles will not encroach into these areas. Limited encroachment of a parking stall into landscape planters or pedestrian walkways is permitted pursuant to Section 9.35.070(c)(2)(C).

                Wheel stops are discouraged in favor of concrete curbing with landscaping or sidewalk extending two (2) feet into the parking stall. Wheel stops should only be used to protect buildings, walls, pedestrians, or landscaping from contact by motor vehicles when there is no alternative measure of protection.

 

EXHIBIT 9.35-6

CURBING AND WHEEL STOPS



 

(2)    Minimum Parking Stall Dimensions.

(A)   General Stall Dimensions. All parking stalls shall be designed to meet the following minimum dimensional standards, as illustrated in Exhibit 9.35-7:

 

 

 

Standard
Parking Stalls (1)

Handicapped
Parking Stalls (1)

 Uncovered Stalls In a Parking Lot -

 

 

  Parallel:

8¢ x 22¢

14¢ x 22¢ (2)

  45, 60 or 90 degree:

9¢ x 18¢

14¢ x 18¢ (2)

 Covered Stalls Inside a Garage or Carport -

10¢ x 20¢

14¢ X 20¢ (2)

 Covered Stalls Inside a Parking Structure -

 

 

  Parallel:

8¢ x 22¢

14¢ x 22¢ (2)

  45, 60 or 90 degree:

9¢ x 18¢

14¢ x 18¢ (2)

 

(1)      Excepting stalls in the garage of a single family residence, when a parking stall abuts a building, fence, support column or other vertical obstruction which would interfere in any way with access to a motor vehicle, the required width of the stall shall be increased by two (2) feet.

(2)      One (1) in every eight handicapped parking stalls, and always at least one handicapped stall, shall have a minimum dimension of seventeen (17) feet by eighteen (18) feet (nine (9) foot wide parking stall and eight (8) foot wide access area by eighteen (18) feet deep) and shall have appropriate signage designating the stall “van accessible.”

 

        All parking stalls shall maintain unobstructed vertical clearance in accordance with the provisions of Section 9.35.070(c)(2)(B).

 

EXHIBIT 9.35-7

PARKING AISLE AND PARKING STALL DIMENSIONS



 

(B)   Unobstructed Vertical Clearance. Unobstructed vertical clearance means the area above the parking stall that is clear of any overhead intrusions such as structural supports, conduits, pipelines, signage or lighting fixtures. Such intrusions and overhead storage compartments may be permitted within the required unobstructed vertical clearance area along the wall, within the first three (3) feet at the head of the stall subject to the approval of the Director of Community Development. Exhibit 9.35-8 illustrates the requirements and exceptions for unobstructed vertical clearance.

 

EXHIBIT 9.35-8

UNOBSTRUCTED VERTICAL CLEARANCE



 

(C)   Parking Stall Encroachment. When the head of a parking stall abuts a landscape planter or pedestrian walkway, the depth of the stall may be reduced by up to two (2) feet subject to the following provisions:

                In either condition, the parking stall shall be provided with curbing that will limit vehicle encroachment to a maximum of two (2) feet.

                For encroachment into landscaped areas, planting material in the encroachment area shall be of a type that does not normally grow above six (6) inches tall with routine maintenance. The depth of encroachment should be limited so that the remaining portion of landscaped area will satisfy the minimum required planter width referenced in Section 9.35.040(d)(3). The portion of the landscaped area that is encroached upon shall not be included in the calculation for minimum parking lot landscaping requirements.

                For encroachment into pedestrian walkways, the amount of encroachment shall be limited so that the remaining portion of the walkway will be of an appropriate width to provide adequate pedestrian circulation.

                Exhibit 9.35-9 illustrates the requirements and limitation for parking stall encroachments.

 

EXHIBIT 9.35-9

PARKING STALL ENCROACHMENTS



(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; Ord. 94-21, 12/13/94; Ord. 03-07, 4/9/03)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 9.35.080 Minimum Number of Required Parking Stalls.
(a)    Calculation of Minimum Parking Requirements. The requirement for a use not specifically mentioned in subsection (e) shall be the same as for a specified use which has the most similar traffic or parking generation characteristics. The Director of Community Development shall determine what constitutes similar traffic or parking generation characteristics. When the calculation of required parking stalls results in a fractional number, the number of required stalls shall be rounded up to the next whole number when the fraction is equal to or greater than .5 and may be rounded down to the next whole number when the fraction is less than .5. The number of required stalls shall be adequate to service the proposed use. Notwithstanding the table in subsection (e) below, the Director of Community Development may require additional parking stalls. Subsection (e) specifies the number of off-street parking stalls required for specific uses.

(b)    Calculation of Gross Floor Area. Where required parking calculations are based on gross floor area, gross floor area shall be calculated by measuring to the exterior of the building walls. The following areas shall be included in the calculation:

(1)    Restrooms, closets and storage or mechanical rooms;

(2)    Exterior patios which are intended to be occupied;

(3)    Elevator shafts and stairwells (may be counted once);

        The following areas may be excluded from the calculation:

(4)    Interior building floor space which is devoted to parking, circulation, access driveways to subgrade parking or landscaping;

(5)    Exterior breezeways, hallways and balconies.

(c)    Handicapped Parking. The following table establishes the number of handicapped parking stalls required:

 

Total Number of Parking Stalls in

Minimum Number of Required

Parking Lot or Garage

Handicapped Parking Stalls

1 — 25

1

26 — 50

2

51 — 75

3

76 — 100

4

101 — 150

5

151 — 200

6

201 — 300

7

301 — 400

8

401 — 500

9

501 — 1000

2% of total stalls

1001 and over

20, plus 1 for each 100 or

 

fraction thereof over 1001 stalls

 

(d)    Allowance for Bicycle Stalls. For projects with a minimum parking requirement of fifty (50) or more parking stalls, up to eight (8) percent of the required stalls may be provided as bicycle stalls in a properly secured and located rack.

(e)    Minimum Number of Required Stalls by Use. The minimum amount of parking provided for each use in a project shall be in accordance with the following ratios:

 

SECTION 9.35.080(E)

MINIMUM NUMBER OF REQUIRED PARKING STALLS BY USE

 

Residential Uses

Use

Required Number of Stalls

(1)      Age Restricted Single or Multiple Family Project

Same as single-family and multiple family listed above

(2)      Convalescent Hospital

1 stall for every 4 beds plus parking for on-site employee housing

(3)      Duplex

4-car garage (with minimum 40′ x 20′ interior floor space) and one additional stall per duplex. The requirement for the additional stall may be waived with the approval of a minor Site Development Permit provided the project satisfies the required findings detailed in Section 9.71.050.

(4)      Duplex on lot less than 50′ wide

Two (2) covered and assigned parking stalls within a garage per dwelling units; or

 

 

Two (2) covered and assigned parking stalls within a garage for one dwelling unit; and one covered and assigned parking stall within a garage and one uncovered tandem stall for the second dwelling unit, subject to the approval of a minor Conditional Use Permit by the Planning Commission and in accordance with the following standards:

 

 

a. Prior to issuance of building permits, the recordation of a tandem parking agreement and management plan with the title for the property shall be provided to the satisfaction of the Director of Community Development.

 

 

b. Prior to issuance of Certification of Occupancy, at least one 24-inch box tree shall be planted in the front yard setback or other alternative decorative paving and landscaping to screen the street views.

 

 

c. The setback and design of the garage and the driveway shall provide adequate articulation and structural details to the garages and front elevation. This design could incorporate dimensions specified in Exhibit 9.35.10.

(5)      Fraternity, Sorority or Rooming House

1 unassigned stall per bedroom, plus 2 covered and assigned stalls for the resident manager

(6)      Granny Flat

1 covered (non-tandem)

(7)      Mobilehome Park

1 covered and assigned stall, plus 1/2 visitor stall per d.u.

(8)      Multiple family units (including Timeshares):

Stalls per Unit:

 

 

 

Covered (1)

Uncovered (1)

Visitor

 

 

 

 

 

 

1 bedroom or less

1.0

0.5

0.2

 

2 bedrooms

1.0

1.0

0.2

 

3 bedrooms

2.0

0.5

0.2

 

more than 3 bedrooms

2.0

0.5 (2)

0.2

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(1)

Covered stalls shall be assigned; uncovered stalls shall not be assigned.

 

 

(2)

Plus 0.5 uncovered stall per additional bedroom in excess of 3.

(9)      Senior Citizen Housing Complex

1 covered and assigned stall, plus 1/2 guest stall per dwelling unit, plus 1 stall for the resident manager

(10)    Senior Congregate Care Facilities

1.25 stalls per unit (may be reduced to .67 stall per unit subject to Conditional Use Permit to reflect presence of special transportation services or other unique characteristics)

(11)    Single-family, attached

Two (2) assigned and covered parking stalls within a garage or parking structure, plus .3 stalls unassigned per dwelling unit.

(12)    Single-family, detached:

 

 

up to 5 bedrooms

2 stalls in a garage

 

6 bedrooms and more

2 stalls in a garage + 1 covered for every two bedrooms over 4 bedrooms

 

 

(13)    Single-family, detached on shallow or narrow lots

Two (2) assigned and covered stalls within a garage per dwelling; or

 

(less than 50 feet wide and 100 feet deep)

Two (2) assigned and covered stalls within a garage (setback 5 to 9 feet) per dwelling. The garage must be equipped with a garage door opener and a roll-up garage door.

 

SECTION 9.35.080(e)
MINIMUM NUMBER OF REQUIRED PARKING STALLS BY USE
(continued)

 

Community Uses

Use

Required Number of Stalls

(14)    Church, chapel, religious facility, cemetery, mortuary, public assembly

1 stall/3 fixed seats (or 72² of bench seating), or 1 stall/25 SF-GFA where there are no fixed seats

(14)(a) Emergency Shelters

1 stall/10 beds/persons

(15)    College or University

1 stall/employee, plus 1 stall/2 students based on maximum student capacity

(16)    Convalescent Hospital, Rest Homes or Sanitariums

1 stall/3 beds, plus if employee residence facilities are provided onsite, additional parking in accordance with applicable residential requirements

(17)    Day Care and Nursery Schools

1 stall/2 employees, plus 1 stall/5 children, based on facility capacity

(18)    Elementary Schools and Junior High Schools

1.5 stalls/classroom, plus 1 stall/5 fixed seats in auditorium, gymnasium or similar public assembly facility

(35 SF = 5 fixed seats)

(19)    High Schools

1.5 stalls/classroom, plus 1 stall/3 students based on maximum student capacity

(20)    Hospitals and Medical Centers (providing acute      care, clinical, surgical, teaching, research and office      services)

2 stalls/patient bed or 1 stall/300 SF-GFA, whichever is greater

(21)    Libraries

1 stall/200 SF-GFA

(22)    Museums, Art Galleries

1 stall/250 SF-GFA

(23)    Public Utility Facilities

1 stall/2 employees in the largest shift, plus 1 stall for each vehicle used in connection with the use

(24)    Theaters:

 

Movie — Multiple Screen

1 stall/4 seats, plus 10 stalls for employees

Movie — Single Screen

1 stall/4 seats, plus 6 stalls for employees

Live Performance

1 stall/4 fixed seats

(25)    Trade School, Business School or Adult Education

1 stall/1.5 people based on maximum number of students and staff, or 1 stall/35 SF of GFA

(26)    Union Halls, Lodges and Clubs

1 stall/50 sq. ft. of gross floor area

Industrial Uses

Use

Required Number of Stalls

(27)    General Manufacturing and Processing Uses (not including buildings used exclusively for warehouse purposes)

1 stall/400 SF of industrial/manufacturing area, plus 1 stall/250 SF of office use, plus 1 stall/1,000 SF of warehouse area

(28)    Mini-Storage Warehouse

1 stall/2,000 SF-GFA

(29)    Recreational Vehicle and Boat Storage

5 stalls or, 1 stall/10,000 SF of storage area, whichever is greater

(30)    Research and Development

1 stall/250 SF-GFA

(31)    Warehouses (used exclusively for storage)

1 stall/1,500 SF of warehouse area, plus 1 stall/250 SF of office use

 

SECTION 9.35.080(e)
MINIMUM NUMBER OF REQUIRED PARKING STALLS BY USE
(continued)

 

Office Uses

Use

Required Number of Stalls

(32)    Business and Professional Office (except medical)

1 stall/300 SF-GFA

(33)    Financial Services (banks, savings and loans, credit unions)

1 stall/250 SF-GFA

(34)    Medical and Dental Office

1 stall/150 SF-GFA

(35)    Veterinary Office

1 stall/200 SF-GFA

Commercial Uses — Retail and Service

Use

Required Number of Stalls

(36)    Art Galleries

1 stall/500 SF-GFA

(37)    Automobile/Truck/RV Sales

1 stall/400 SF indoor GFA plus 1 stall/4,000 sf outdoor retail area

(38)    Automotive Service and Repair

2 stalls, plus 3 stalls/service bay (service bays do not count as stalls)

(39)    Bed and Breakfast

2 covered and assigned stalls, plus 1 stall/guest room

(40)    Car Wash

6 stalls per tunnel (plus additional stacking and drying areas as necessary to match capacity)

 

 

(41)    Furniture Stores

1 stall/500 SF-GFA

(42)    General Retail:

          Individual use on a separate lot

          Multi-tenant with less than 25,000 SF-GFA

          Multi-tenant with more than 25,000 SF-GFA

 

1 stall/300 SF-GFA

1 stall/220 SF-GFA1

1 stall/250 SF-GFA1

 

1 If restaurant space occupies more than 20% of the total GFA, or if an individual restaurant contains more than 2,000 SF, then additional parking stalls shall be provided for all restaurant space above the 20% or the 2,000 SF, whichever is greater. The additional parking shall be calculated at the applicable restaurant rate.

(43)    Laundromat

1 stall/3 washing machines

(44)    Outdoor Sales, including Lumber Yards, and
     Salvage Yards

1 stall/1,000 SF gross outdoor retail area, plus additional parking as required for indoor sales area, service facilities and other uses

(45)    Plant Nurseries

 

1 stall/1,000 SF indoor GFA, plus 1 stall/2,000 SF gross outdoor retail areas

(46)    Resorts, Hotels and Motels

1 stall/guest room plus additional parking as required for accessory use

(47)    Restaurants:

          Dine-in (< 4,000 SF-GFA):

          4,000 SF-GFA+:

          Fast Food:

          Take-Out:

          Outdoor dining areas in excess of 16 seats:

 

1 stall/100 SF-GFA

40 stalls, plus 1 stall/50 SF-GFA above 4,000 sf-GFA

10 stalls, or 1 stall/50 SF-GFA, whichever is greater

1 stall/250 SF-GFA

1 stall for 150 SF of entire outdoor dining area

(Note: Outdoor seating areas with 16 or less seats need not provide additional parking)

Commercial Recreation Uses

Use

Required Number of Stalls

(48)    Self Service Car Wash

2.5 stalls/wash bay (wash bays do not count as stalls)

(49)    Arcades, Pool Halls and Bingo Halls

1 stall/150 SF-GFA

(50)    Bowling Alley

4 stalls/lane, plus other uses calculated separately

(51)    Dance Halls

1 stall/7 SF dance floor

(52)    Driving Range

1 stall/tee, plus other uses calculated separately

(53)    Golf Courses (Regulation and Pitch and Putt)

9 stalls/hole, plus other uses calculated separately

(54)    Gyms, Spas and Health Clubs

1 stall/100 SF-GFA

(55)    Handball and Racquetball Courts

3 stalls/court, plus other uses calculated separately

(56)    Miniature Golf

1.5 stalls/hole, plus other uses calculated separately

(57)    Skating Rink - Ice or Roller

1 stall/100 SF of rink, plus other uses calculated separately

(58)    Swimming Pool - Commercial

10 stalls, or 1 stall/1,000 SF of lot area, plus 1 stall/2 employees, whichever is greater

(59)    Tennis Courts

3 stalls/court plus other uses calculated separately

 

          Footnotes for Section 9.35.080(e):

 

          d.u. = dwelling unit                    SF = square feet               GFA = gross floor area

 

 

EXHIBIT 9.35-10

OPTIONAL DUPLEX PARKING ARRANGEMENT



(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94; Ord. 94-21, 12/13/94; Ord. 96-10, 8/13/96; Ord. 03-07, 4/9/03; Ord. 10-06, 5/24/10)

 

9.35.090 Loading Facility Standards.
        Off-street loading facilities shall be provided for all commercial, office, industrial, mixed use and warehousing land uses. The following provisions shall apply to all required loading facilities.

(a)    Location. Loading facilities shall be located on the same site as the use or building served; or within one hundred (100) feet of the use or building served, as approved by a Site Development Permit approved by the Director of Community Development according to Chapter 9.71. Such off-site loading facilities shall provide a covenant for easement in accordance with Chapter 9.45. Loading facilities shall not in any way block vehicular movement to or from a street, driveway, drive aisle, or parking stall. Loading facilities shall be located so that they may be accessed and utilized without maneuvering in the public right-of-way.

(b)    Minimum Dimensions. The minimum dimensions for any required loading space shall be ten (10) feet wide and twenty-five (25) feet long, with fourteen (14) feet of unobstructed vertical clearance.

(c)    Number of Loading Spaces Required. A minimum number of loading spaces shall be required for all commercial, industrial, office and warehouse uses as follows:


Building Size (SF-GFA)

Minimum Number of Loading Spaces

Less than 10,000 sf

None Required

10,001 — 20,000 sf

1 space

20,001 — 50,000 sf

2 spaces

50,001 sf or more

3 spaces

 

(d)    Turning Radius. Access to all loading areas shall have an adequate turning radius to enable vehicles to maneuver without backing into a Circulation Element roadway or to access the loading area without backing into the area from a Circulation Element roadway.

(e)    Screening. All loading spaces shall be screened from adjacent residential zoning districts and uses by landscaping no less than six (6) feet in height.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.35.100 Combined Parking and Loading Facilities.
(a)    For Uses on Separate Lots or Parcels. Required parking facilities may be provided collectively for two or more buildings or uses located on separate contiguous lots or parcels of land, provided that the combined parking and loading facilities meet or exceed all minimum requirements for the buildings or uses. Combined parking and loading facilities shall provide a covenant for easement in accordance with Chapter 9.45.

(b)    For Separate Uses on the Same Lot or Parcel. In instances where two or more uses are located on the same parcel of land, all parking and loading facilities, shall equal the sum total requirements for all the various individual uses calculated separately.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 9.35.110 Alternatives to Parking and Loading Standards.
        The City recognizes that many uses and sites are unique and that certain components of parking and loading may be tailored to better comply with these standards based on factors such as awkward site shape and unique types or combinations of uses. As such, the City may consider modifications to certain provisions of the parking and loading standards to achieve safe and adequate parking and loading facilities, subject to the review and approval by the Planning Commission.

(a)    Procedures for Alternative Standards. Alternative standards for certain elements of parking and loading standards may be permitted subject to the approval of the appropriate application as follows:

(1)    A minor Conditional Use Permit shall be required for a shared parking program utilizing the City’s model program, as outlined in Section 9.35.060(c)(4).

(2)    A major Conditional Use Permit shall be required for a shared parking program not utilizing the City’s model program.

 

(3)    A Site Development Permit shall be required for any modification to:

(A)   The location, height and/or amount of landscaping in the parking area; or

(B)   The setback of a parking area from property lines; or

(C)   The required driveway “throat” length, drive aisle width and accessway width; or

(D)   Number of loading spaces required; or

(E)   Lighting standards.

(4)    A Variance shall be required for any modification to the number of parking stalls. Per Government Code Section 65906.5, Variances for reduced parking may be granted in order that some or all parking spaces be located off-site, or that in-lieu fees or facilities be provided.

(b)    Alternative Parking Standard Findings. Alternative parking and loading standards may be approved provided the Planning Commission makes the following findings:

(1)    Conditional Use Permits:

(A)   That the applicable parking and loading requirements are excessive or inappropriate due to either the nature of the specific use(s) involved or because of special circumstances applicable to the site; and

(B)   That the proposed parking and loading facilities, as conditioned, comply with the intent and purpose of the parking and loading regulations.

(C)   That the provisions of the proposed shared parking program are reasonable, accountable and enforceable.

(2)    Site Development Permits:

(A)   That the proposed modifications to the parking and loading standards result in a project which is of a superior design quality and functionality as compared to the project which could have been built under the existing regulations; and

(B)   That the proposed parking and loading facilities, as conditioned, comply with the intent and purpose of the parking and loading regulations.

(3)    Variances:

(A)   That there are special circumstances applicable to the subject property which, when the applicable parking and loading regulations are strictly applied, deprive the subject property of privileges enjoyed by other property in the vicinity and subject to the same parking and loading regulations; and

(B)   That approval of a Variance for the subject property will not constitute a grant of special privileges which are inconsistent with the limitations placed upon other properties in the vicinity and subject to the same parking and loading regulations, when the specified conditions are complied with.

(C)   That approval of the Variance will be an incentive to, and a benefit for, the nonresidential development (Government Code Section 65906.5).

(D)   That approval of the Variance will facilitate access to the nonresidential development by patrons of public transit facilities, particularly guideway facilities (Government Code Section 65906.5).

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 03-07, 4/9/03)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 9.35.120 Parking Structure Design Standards.
        Parking structures, including underground or subterranean structures, shall require a Site Development Permit and shall be designed to meet the following standards and guidelines:

(a)    Minimum Driveway Width. Any driveway providing access to a parking structure shall have a minimum width of twenty-eight (28) feet. If a toll or fee booth is located in the driveway area, the driveways on either side of the booth shall have a minimum width of fourteen (14) feet. A sidewalk with a minimum width of six (6) feet shall be provided adjacent to the entrance driveway.

(b)    Maximum Parking Aisle Length. Three hundred (300) feet shall be the maximum length of a parking aisle without being intersected by another parking aisle or driveway.

(c)    Location of Support Columns. The edge of structure support columns shall be located a minimum of two (2) feet and a maximum of four (4) feet from the parking aisle and shall not be located within the area of a parking stall.

(d)    Increase in Parking Stall Width. When the side of any parking stall abuts a building, fence, wall, support column or other obstruction which would interfere in any way with access to a motor vehicle, the width of the stall shall be increased to at least eleven (11) feet.

(e)    Internal Circulation. Where possible, the internal circulation of vehicles in a parking structure shall be designed to flow in a counter-clockwise direction.

(f)    Minimum Floor Heights. The minimum height from the floor to the lowest ceiling structure, support beam, or overhead fixture, such as a conduit, pipeline, signage, lighting, or any other obstruction mounted on the ceiling shall be:

(1)    Eight (8) feet two (2) inches for areas providing access to handicap parking; or

(2)    Eight (8) feet for all other parking areas; or

(3)    As determined by the Director of Public Works for areas providing access to loading areas.

(g)    Parking Structure Setbacks. The setbacks for the exterior walls of any underground or subterranean parking structure shall not encroach into the minimum above grade building setbacks unless approved through the Site Development Permit process pursuant to Chapter 9.71. In no case may the setback for an underground or subterranean parking structure be less than three (3) feet.

        All underground or subterranean parking structures permitted by a Site Development Permit to have lesser setbacks than the minimum above grade building setback shall be designed to have adequate soil depth above the parking structure to ensure healthy tree and landscape growth based on the evaluation and recommendation of a licensed landscape architect.

        Where an underground or subterranean parking structure is proposed in an area with sensitive or unstable soils, the minimum setback of the parking structure shall be based on the evaluation and recommendations of a licensed geotechnical engineer.

(h)    Integral Design. Parking structures should be designed as an integral component of the coordinated site plan and architectural theme.

(i)     Interior Treatment. The interior treatment of a parking structure shall be of a light color. The treatment shall include a coordinated interior sign program designed to identify parking levels and locate stairwells, elevators, phones, exits and other interior features. Parking structures shall have an attractive interior treatment pursuant to the Urban Design Guidelines.

(j)     Parking Floor and Ramp Grades. The parking areas of sloped floor parking structures shall not exceed a grade of five (5) percent as measured across the width of a 90 degree parking stall. The grade of a straight internal ramp shall not exceed fifteen (15) percent. The grade of a circular ramp shall not exceed twelve (12) percent as measured at the outside ramp wall.

(k)    Ramp Transitions. All ramps shall be provided with transition zones at the top and bottom of the ramp. Ramps with a grade of ten (10) percent or less shall have a transition zone at least eight (8) feet in length. Ramps with a grade of greater than ten (10) percent shall have transition zones at least twelve feet twelve (12) feet in length. The grade of a transition zone shall not exceed 1/2 the grade of the ramp it serves.

(l)     Ramp Widths. A straight one-way ramp shall be at least fourteen (14) feet in width. A two-way ramp shall be at least twenty-four (24) feet in width. The minimum outside wall radius of a circular ramp shall be thirty-six (36) feet.

(m)   Elevators. Parking structures of three stories or more shall incorporate at least two passenger elevators. Additional elevators are required for a structure accommodating 500 or more parking stalls subject to approval by the Director of Community Development.

(n)    Lighting. Adequate lighting shall be provided for all parking structures in accordance with the following provisions:

 

Areas:

Required Lighting:

 Entrances and Exits

50 footcandles

 Stairways

20—50 footcandles

 Cashiering/Security Areas

20 footcandles

 Travel Lanes and Ramps

10 footcandles

 Elevators

10 footcandles

 Parking Areas

3—5 footcandles

 

(o)    Mirrors for Sight Distance. Blind corners shall be provided with viewing mirrors maintained in a position and condition to provide adequate sight distance.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

Chapter 9.37 SIGNS AND ADVERTISING DEVICES*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 18-01 and 18-07. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


9.37.010 Intent and Purpose.
        The intent of this Chapter is:

(a)    To recognize that the primary purpose of signage is to identify, locate, and encourage businesses and events.

(b)    To encourage well designed consistent signage that is pleasing in appearance and compatible with community character while providing latitude for a variety of signage.

(c)    To eliminate potential traffic and safety hazards to motorists and pedestrians.

(d)    To maintain the attractiveness of the community and to enhance the character of the City as a place in which to live, work, play, and visit.

(e)    To promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens and business community of the City through quality sign standards.

(f)    To promote a high quality business environment by assuring signage is complementary to the City’s urban design.

        The purpose of the provisions of this Chapter is to provide a reasonable and equitable system for regulation of the location, size, type, content, illumination, and number of signs, integrated as a part of the Zoning Code as set forth by this Chapter. (Added by Ord. 91-17, 11/26/91; amended by Ord. 94-03, 1/11/94)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 9.37.020 Definitions.
(a)    “A” Definitions.

        Advertising Device — Any object, person, or animal including but not limited to banners, balloons, statues, flags, pennants, lights, portable signs, signs or landscaping, used to attract attention for the purpose of drawing attention to a site or promoting the sale of goods or services.

        A-Frame Sign — A sign generally not securely attached or fixed to the ground or to a permanent structure used as a stationary advertising device and usually supported by two upright sign faces (also known as a “sandwich board”).

        Aggregate Area — The total area of sign and/or advertising device surface.

        Alteration — Any change of copy, sign face, color, size, shape illumination, position, location, construction, or support of any sign or advertising device.

        Animated Sign — A sign designed and constructed to attract attention through the movement of the whole or any part of the sign.

        Area of Sign (for):

        Attached Sign — Sign area for an attached sign shall be considered the entire area within which a single continuous perimeter of not more than eight (8) straight lines enclose the extreme limits of any writing, representation, emblem, or any figure or similar character together with any material or color forming any integral part of the display or used to differentiate such sign against which it is placed. Necessary supports or uprights on which the sign may be placed are excluded unless supports or uprights are designed in such a manner as to form an integral background or part of the display. When a sign has two or more faces, the area of all faces shall be included in determining the area of the sign except where two such faces are placed back to back. When a five (5) foot space or greater is provided between two advertising devices, sign area shall be calculated as two separate signs (Exhibit 9.37-1).

        Detached Sign — Sign area for a detached sign shall be considered the entire area within which a single continuous perimeter of not more than eight (8) straight lines enclose the extreme limits of representation, emblem, or figure or similar characters. Necessary supports or uprights shall be excluded from sign area unless such uprights are designed in such a manner so as to form an integral part of the background or display. When a sign has two or more faces, the area of all faces shall be included in determining the area of the sign except where two such faces are placed back to back (see Exhibit 9.37-2).

        Attached Sign — Any sign or advertising device attached to a structure or building other than a freestanding pole, flag, or monument sign.

        Awning — See Canopy.

 

EXHIBIT 9.37-1
AREA OF ATTACHED SIGNS



          Sign area = length x width or area calculated within not more than eight straight lines.

 

EXHIBIT 9.37-2
AREA OF DETACHED SIGNS



 

        Sign area = area within not more than eight straight lines.

 

(b)    “B” Definitions.

        Balloon — A spherical, flexible, non-porous bag or similar object capable of being filled with air or gas such as helium.

        Banner — A sign usually constructed of cloth, paper, or other lightweight material used for the purposes of advertising a business, organization, service, product, or event.

        Bench — A seat usually located upon or adjacent to the public right-of-way for the purpose of persons resting and which is capable of displaying a sign or advertising device.

        Billboard — A freestanding or attached outdoor advertising sign capable of having interchangeable messages (generally related to off-site advertising).

        Building Identification Sign — A sign which contains only the name of a building and/or the address of the building.

(c)    “C” Definitions.

        Campaign Sign — Campaign sign usually refers to a political sign but may include any advertising device or sign, not otherwise prohibited by this Section, which is designed to influence the passage or defeat of any measure on the ballot or designed to influence the voters with respect to the nomination, election, defeat, or removal of a candidate from public office at any national, state, or local election.

        Canned Monument Sign — A freestanding sign supported by a sign structure with an acrylic, fiberglass, plastic or bare aluminum face, or material that exhibits a reflection similar to these materials.

        Canopy — A fixed structure of any material projecting from and connected to a building, column, or post or supported by a frame extending from a building and/or posts.

        Canopy Sign — Any form of advertising or illumination attached, painted, or constructed for a canopy.

        Center — A center can be commercial, industrial, or professional use, consisting of one or more buildings sharing common facilities such as off-street parking, access, or landscaping. In each case, a center will consist of two or more retail stores or businesses, but may not necessarily be under a single ownership.

        Center Identification Sign — Any freestanding sign which identifies the name or address or directs attention to a center but that does not identify an individual business or activity and which does not contain trademarks, tradenames, logos, symbols, or any form of art that can be construed as a name of a single business.

        Changeable Copy Sign — An advertising device which is capable of changeable text or graphics, regardless of method of attachment, which advertises events, services, or products.

        Civic Activity Sign — A bulletin board or other similar advertising device incident to places of worship, hospitals, libraries, museums, and other similar public or non-profit institutions.

        Construction Sign — A temporary sign on the premises listing the development, architect, engineer, planner, contractor, or other person or firm participating in the development, construction or financing of a development.

(d)    “D” Definitions.

        Detached Sign — Any freestanding sign or advertising device used to attract attention, including pole, flag and monument signs.

        Directional Sign — Any on-site freestanding, non-flashing sign which is designed, erected, and maintained to serve as a public convenience in directing pedestrian and vehicular traffic, but not used for the purpose of advertising uses and activities on site.

(e)    “E” Definitions.

        Eave Line — That part of a roof which projects over or meets the wall.

        Electric Sign — Any sign utilizing electricity to illuminate its surface.

        Electronic Message Sign — A directly illuminated sign which presents variable advertising message displayed by electronically controlled lighting pattern against a contrasting background, and which may be programmed to change the message display periodically.

        Externally Illuminated Sign — An electric sign designed and constructed to display artificial light for the purpose of advertisement or identification, including but not limited to exposed neon signs.

(f)    “F” Definitions.

        Facade — The entire building front including the parapet.

        Fascia — A broad well defined horizontal member of color or material having the form of a flat band between the top of a wall and the eaves of a roof. The area used for identification over the front of a shop.

        Flag — Cloth or other lightweight material of distinctive size, color, and design, used as a symbol, standard, signal, emblem, or a device used to attract attention.

        Flag Sign — A permanent freestanding sign with its advertising device suspended by a post and beam support.

        Flashing Sign — Any electric sign which intermittently flashes on and off, changes in intensity, or creates the illusion of flashing in any manner.

        Freestanding Sign — A sign that is not attached to any building, but is securely attached and fixed to the ground.

        Frontage, Building — The lineal measurement of a building facade which fronts on a street, landscaped area, and/or a parking area and is used to determine the maximum sign area and number of signs permitted for a given use.

        Frontage, Street — The linear measurement of a lot along a public or private right-of-way but not including the lineal measurement along an alley, railroad, beach, freeway, or parking lot.

        Fuel Price Identification Sign — A permanent sign, usually of a monument type, containing the prices and grades of fuel for sale at an automobile service station.

        Future Facility Sign — A temporary sign denoting sale, lease, or rental of a site that is under construction.

        Future Tenant Sign — A temporary sign denoting center name, tenant name, and type of use for a site that is constructed.

(g)    “G” Definitions.

        Garage Sale Sign — A temporary sign announcing the limited sale, from a private resident, of goods, furniture, clothing, or other similar articles.

(h)    “H” Definitions.

        Height of Sign — Sign height is calculated by measuring the vertical distance from the uppermost point of the sign to the ground directly beneath.

        Historical Sign — A sign, which because of its character, age, or influence, is of historic significance to the community.

(i)     “I” Definitions.

        Identification Sign — A sign which serves to identify only the name, address, or trade of a business and sets forth no other advertising.

        Illegal Sign — A sign not permitted or exempted by this Code.

        Inflatable Sign — See Balloon.

        Interior Sign — A sign located within the inside of a business which is not visible from any area outside the building which is open to the public.

Internally Illuminated Sign — An electric sign whose source of illumination is not visible to the viewer.

(j)     “J” Definitions.

        None.

(k)    “K” Definitions.

        Kiosk — A freestanding, round or multiple-sided structure whose main purpose is to display signs or information.

(l)     “L” Definitions.

        Linear Frontage — The horizontal measurement of a building face or site.

        Logo — A name, symbol, feature, or trademark that represents a business, enterprise, group, or activity.

(m)   “M” Definitions.

        Major Tenant — Any tenant in a multi-tenant commercial center which either: occupies thirty (30) percent or more of the leasable square footage of the center; or has 5 or more locations in the region, state or nation.

        Marquee — A permanent structure attached to and supported by a building and projecting over public or private right-of-way usually using changeable copy.

        Mansard — A roof system having a steep slope, normally on all building sides, often used to screen roof top equipment.

        Menu Board Sign — Sign displaying food items sold on the premises.

        Mixed-Use Districts — Areas with land use and zoning designations for which both residential and non-residential uses are the primary permitted uses.

        Monument Sign — A freestanding sign directly supported by a sign structure that is not narrower than the display surface of the sign.

        Multi-Tenant Identification Sign — A single sign identifying each tenant or business individually.

        Mural — A display or illustration painted on a building or wall within public view.

(n)    “N” Definitions.

        Neon Sign — An electric sign consisting of gas-filled tubing exposed to view.

        Nonconforming Sign — A sign, billboard, or other advertising device which does not conform to the sign regulations as set forth in this Section or applicable zone or land use district.

        Non-Residential Districts — Areas with land use and zoning designations for which commercial, industrial or recreational uses are the primary permitted uses.

(o)    “O” Definitions.

        Off-Site Sign — Any sign which is not located on the business or activity site it identifies or advertises.

        On-Site Sign — Any sign which directs attention to an occupancy, business, service, or activity conducted, sold, or offered upon the premises where the sign is located.

(p)    “P” Definitions.

        Parapet — A low wall, railing, or screen to protect the edge of a platform or roof.

        Pole Sign — Except for a flag sign, a freestanding sign directly supported by a sign structure that is narrower than the display surface of the sign.

        Political Sign — Political signage usually refers to campaign signs, but may include any sign, not otherwise prohibited by this Section, pertaining to the conduct of government in general.

        Portable Sign — Any sign not designed to be permanently attached to a building or permanently anchored to the ground.

        Projecting Sign — A sign which projects from a wall more than six (6) inches.

        Public/Quasi-Public Uses — Uses of a community-serving nature such as civic centers, churches, parks, hospitals, schools, etc.

        Pump Sign — Signs displayed upon service station gas pumps for the purpose of advertising the sale of products incidental to the sale of gas and oil or other automobile service provided on the premises.

(q)    “Q” Definitions.

        None.

(r)    “R” Definitions.

        Real Estate Sign — A sign advertising the sale, lease, or rental of the premises on which the sign is located and maintained, excluding construction, future facility, and future tenant signs.

        Residential Districts — Areas with land use and zoning designations for which residential uses are the primary permitted uses.

        Roof — The upper covering of a building for weather protection or any architectural feature resembling the covering in design or material.

        Roof Sign — Any sign which is erected, constructed, or maintained on or above a roof system, roof line, or parapet of any building.

(s)    “S” Definitions.

        Sandwich Board — See A-Frame Sign.

        Service Station — A lot or a portion of a lot used for the servicing of motor vehicles including gas stations.

        Sign — Any structure, object, display verbiage, illustration, emblem, and/or logo used to direct or attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business, service, or event. A sign may include, but is not limited to, words, numbers, symbols, posters, pictures, and other objects or characters similar in nature used to attract attention.

        Sign Program — A program intended to provide incentive, latitude, and variety in order to achieve aesthetically appealing and compatible signage for shopping and professional office centers and industrial parks with two or more occupants. A sign program may also be applicable for a single business proposing two or more signs.

        Sign Structure — The supports, uprights, braces, cables, framework, and display surface of a sign.

        “Snipe” Sign — Any sign made of cloth, paper, cardboard, poster material, plastic, metal or other material affixed to or upon fences, posts, trees, buildings, people, or other structures or surfaces usually found off-site.

(t)     “T” Definitions.

        Temporary Sign — Any sign constructed of paper, cloth, canvas, fabric, cardboard, or other materials, including but not limited to flags, streamers, pennants, banners, and balloons, not intended for permanent display.

        Time and Temperature Device — A device that displays the time or temperature whether or not it displays any advertising or establishment identification.

        Transportation Shelter — A structure constructed for the use of persons waiting for transportation.

(u)    “U” Definitions.

        Under-Canopy Sign — A pedestrian-oriented sign which is perpendicular to the building and the pedestrian path, and is suspended from, or projects from the wall below a canopy or covered arcade. An Under-Canopy sign does not project beyond the canopy or covered arcade.

(v)    “V” Definitions.

        Vehicle Mounted Sign — Any sign or advertising device attached to any vehicle for the purposes of advertisement.

(w)   “W” Definitions.

        Wall Sign — Any sign or advertising device permanently attached to a building. A sign attached to a parapet shall be considered a wall sign.

        Window Sign — Any sign exposed to public view, attached, painted, posted, or displayed, either permanently or temporarily, on or within one (1) foot of the interior or exterior surface of a window.

(x)    “X” Definitions.

        None.

(y)    “Y” Definitions.

        None.

(z)    “Z” Definitions.

        None.

        Exhibits 9.37-3 through 9.37-9 depict many of the sign types described above and in the Permitted    Sign Matrix, Section 9.37.150(a) through 9.37.150(f).

 

EXHIBIT 9.37-3

SIGN TYPES



 

EXHIBIT 9.37-4

SAMPLE SIGN LOCATION ELEVATION



EXHIBIT 9.37-5

DIRECTIONAL SIGNS



EXHIBIT 9.37-6

CENTER/TENANT IDENTIFICATION SIGNS

(FREESTANDING)



 

EXHIBIT 9.37-7

TEMPORARY FUTURE FACILITIES SIGN



EXHIBIT 9.37-8

TEMPORARY CONSTRUCTION SIGN



 

EXHIBIT 9.37-9

TEMPORARY SIGNS



(Added by Ord. 91-17, 11/26/91; amended by Ord. 94-03, 1/11/94; Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94; Ord. 01-06, 10/9/01; Ord. 03-09, 4/23/03)

 

9.37.030 Administration and Enforcement.
        The Director of Community Development or his authorized designee shall have the authority to enforce all the provisions of this Chapter and the applicable provisions of the City of Dana Point Municipal Code.

        Sign permits shall be reviewed in the following manner:

(a)    Administrative Approval. Sign applications deemed by the Community Development Department to be in substantial compliance with Dana Point Sign Guidelines may be approved administratively by the Director of Community Development or his authorized designee.

(b)    After review of the Dana Point Sign Guidelines, if the Director of Community Development or his authorized designee determines that the sign application is not in conformance with the said guidelines, then the sign application may be forwarded by the Director of Community Development to the Planning Commission for formal review.

(c)    If submitted to the Planning Commission, the sign application shall be processed as a Minor Site Development Permit, as shown in Section 9.71.034.

(d)    The Planning Commission may approve, deny or approve with conditions the Minor Site Development Permit for the sign application. The Planning Commission shall consider the following findings for the sign application:

(1)    Suitability of the site for the proposed sign; and

(2)    Sign design that is appropriate for the site and compatible with the character of the surrounding area.

(Added by Ord. 91-17, 11/26/91; amended by Ord. 94-03, 1/11/94; Ord. 04-01, 3/10/04)

9.37.040 Permits Required.
        No signs shall be erected, constructed, or altered except for maintenance or repair, except as provided for in this Section and unless a permit has been issued by the Director of Community Development. A separate permit shall be required for each sign or group of signs in one location. In addition to the requirements set forth in this Chapter, all applicable building and electrical permits shall be obtained in accordance with the Uniform Building Code and the Uniform Electrical Code. A tag issued by the City indicating the sign permit number shall be affixed to the sign so as to be readily visible. (Added by Ord. 91-17, 11/26/91; amended by Ord. 94-03, 1/11/94)

 

9.37.050 Permit Application.
        An application for a sign permit shall be made in writing upon forms provided by the Department of Community Development. The application shall be signed either by the owner, lessee, or authorized agent of the premises on which the sign is located.

        Permit application requirements shall include:

(a)    A completed application form.

(b)    Plans, drawn to scale, to include the following:

(1)    All sign details including sign area, dimensions, colors, materials, letter style, proposed copy, letter height and method of illumination.

(2)    A site plan indicating the location of all existing and proposed signs with sign area, dimensions, colors, materials, letter style, proposed copy, letter height, and method of illumination.

(3)    All building elevations with the proposed signs depicted on the elevations (see Exhibit 9.37-10).

(4)    A deposit/fee as required by a Resolution of the City Council.

 

 

EXHIBIT 9.37-10

SAMPLE ELEVATION REQUIRED FOR

SUBMITTAL OF PERMITS



(Added by Ord. 91-17, 11/26/91; amended by Ord. 94-03, 1/11/94)

 

 

 

9.37.060 Neon Sign Review.
        Prior to the issuance of a sign permit, neon signs shall be subject to review and approval by the Director of Community Development. The Director shall assure the neon sign is an aesthetic enhancement to the site signage, site design and surrounding area; and does not create visual incompatibility. Pursuant to this title, the Director’s decision may be appealed to the Planning Commission. (Added by Ord. 91-17, 11/26/91; amended by Ord. 94-03, 1/11/94)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 9.37.070 Sign Programs.
        The purpose and intent of a Sign Program is to integrate signs with building and landscape design into a unified architectural statement. Sign programs may also be used to consider signage alternatives for developments which have unique tenant visibility problems, such as obscured lease space or complex access patterns. A Sign Program shall be subject to the review of the design, placement, size, content, and compatibility of the proposed signage by the Planning Commission and shall be in substantial compliance with Section 9.37.150 of this Chapter.

(a)    Sign Program Required. A Sign Program shall be required for any new or upgrading center with two (2) or more tenants on a site; for any new or upgrading single enterprise which proposes three (3) or more signs on a site; for any new multiple-unit residential project (attached or detached) which proposes two (2) or more signs on the project site; or for any sign proposal deemed necessary by the Director of Community Development and in the interest of the public health, safety and general welfare. A Sign Program may also be submitted for the consideration of sign proposals which are designed to address centers with limited tenant visibility. A Sign Program may vary from the requirements of Section 9.37.150, but in no event shall any sign identified as prohibited in Section 9.37.170 be permitted.

                A Sign Program shall not be required for an existing single- or multi-tenant commercial establishment, unless initiated by the property owner and/or tenants as part of an overall aesthetic upgrading of the building or center. However, new signage for sites without a Sign Program must conform with all other provisions of this Chapter.

(b)    Application Requirements. An application for any Sign Program shall be submitted for review and approval by the Planning Commission in accordance with Chapter 9.61 of the Dana Point Zoning Code.

                Sign Program application requirements shall include:

(1)    A completed application form.

(2)    Plans, drawn to scale, including the following:

(A)   All sign details including sign area, dimensions, colors, materials, letter style, proposed copy, letter height and method of illumination.

(B)   A site plan indicating the location of all existing and proposed signs with sign area, dimensions, colors, materials, letter style, letters height and method of illumination; and definition of type of signage, such as center identification signage or tenant identification signage.

(C)   All building elevations with sign area and location depicted.

(3)    A deposit or fee as required by a Resolution of the City Council.

(4)    A letter of justification delineating how the proposed Sign Program is consistent with the intent of this Chapter.

(5)    Any other information as may be required by the Director of Community Development.

(Added by Ord. 91-17, 11/26/91; amended by Ord. 94-03, 1/11/94; Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94; Ord. 96-10, 8/13/96; Ord. 01-06, 10/9/01; Ord. 03-07, 4/9/03; Ord. 03-09, 4/23/03)

 

9.37.080 Signs Requiring a Variance.
        Any proposed sign which deviates from any development standard set forth in this Chapter, except as may be permitted through a Sign Program pursuant to Section 9.37.070, shall require approval of a Variance in accordance with Chapter 9.67 of the Dana Point Municipal Code. However, the use or establishment of a sign or device which is prohibited pursuant to Section 9.37.170 shall not be permitted by a Variance. (Added by Ord. 91-17, 11/26/91; amended by Ord. 94-03, 1/11/94; Ord. 96-10, 8/13/96)

 

9.37.090 Permit Fees.
        A sign permit and plan check fee for each sign permit shall be paid to the Community Development Department prior to the issuance of a sign permit in accordance with the schedule of fees established by a resolution of the City Council. (Added by Ord. 91-17, 11/26/91; amended by Ord. 94-03, 1/11/94)

 

9.37.100 Permit Issuance.
        The Director of Community Development shall determine whether the proposed sign and related discretionary approvals with respect to construction, location, and materials conform to all applicable City ordinances, regulations, and the provisions of this Chapter. Any permit may be revoked in accordance with Section 9.61.110 of the Dana Point Municipal Code should any of the provisions set forth in this Chapter, any provision of this Code, or other applicable regulations and ordinances be violated by the permittee. (Added by Ord. 91-17, 11/26/91; amended by Ord. 94-03, 1/11/94)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 9.37.110 Exemptions.
        The provisions and regulations of this Chapter shall not apply to the following signs, nor shall the area of such signs be counted toward the maximum allowable sign area for any premises or use.

(a)    Directional or informational signs provided they are:

(1)    Each no more than two and one-half (2½) square feet in area;

(2)    Contain no advertising message; and

(3)    Are located entirely on the business premises.

(b)    Four (4) Real Estate Open House or Garage Sale directional signs per intersection provided they are:

(1)    Each no more than four (4) square feet in area;

(2)    Contain no advertising message;

(3)    Are located entirely on private property; and

(4)    Not in excess of one per public street corner, per direction.

(c)    Signs for the convenience of the public, such as signs identifying restrooms, public telephones, walkways, and similar features or facilities, provided such signs are:

(1)    Each no more than one and one-half (1½) square feet in area;

(2)    Contain no advertising message; and

(3)    Are located entirely on the business premises.

(d)    Memorial signs on tablets or plaques (intended to convey historical connotations), including names of buildings or sites, and dates of erection when cut into or attached to the surface or the facade of the building. Said signs and size may be exempted if deemed a memorial sign by the Director of Community Development.

(e)    Signs exclusively regulated by the state, traffic or municipal signs, signs required by law, railroad crossing signs, legal notices, and emergency or danger notices; provided such signs:

(1)    Shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet in area unless otherwise specified by law;

(2)    Contain no advertising message; and

(3)    Shall not be more than one (1) sign per street frontage unless otherwise required by law.

(f)    Emergency, temporary, and non-advertising signs as may be authorized by the City Council, including City-sponsored seasonal and promotional banners.

(g)    Signs of public utility companies and private contractors indicating danger or which serve as an aid to public safety, or which show the location of underground facilities.

(h)    One (1) real estate sign per street frontage provided such sign:

(1)    Is located entirely on the property offered for sale or lease; or on private property;

(2)    Does not exceed six (6) feet in height;

(3)    Does not exceed four (4) square feet in area; and

(4)    Is removed upon the close of escrow or when the rental or lease has been accomplished, whichever event occurs first.

(i)     Street addressing, house numbers, nameplates, “No Trespassing,” “No Parking,” and other warning signs consistent with City Codes, provided the signs:

(1)    Do not exceed two and one-half (2½) square feet in area; and

(2)    Are located entirely on-site.

(j)     Signs located in the interior of any building which are not visible from any public or private right-of-way.

(k)    One of each of the following flags:

(1)    United States of America;

(2)    State of California; and

(3)    One other flag.

(4)    Additional flags and banners may be permitted pending approval of a minor Conditional Use Permit. See Section 9.65.040 for application procedures.

(l)     Temporary, removable non-illuminated, window signs with the following provisions:

(1)    The signs do not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the total exposed window area;

(2)    If maximum allowable sign area is met, window signage shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the total exposed area;

(3)    The signs complement the building and permanent signage;

(4)    Additional signage shall be subject to the provisions of Section 9.37.160;

(5)    Window signs shall complement the building and permanent signage. The use of fluorescent, day-glo, and neon colors shall be limited;

(6)    No more than three (3) signs per establishment;

(7)    Open or closed signs not to exceed four (4) square feet in area may be displayed in the window of each business establishment;

(8)    One sign, not more than one square foot, listing hours of operation may be displayed in the window of each business establishment; and

(9)    Credit card, club and association affiliation stickers not to exceed one square foot per entrance.

(m)   Traditional Christmas signs and lights within any commercial and residential zone so long as they meet City Fire Codes, do not cause a detriment to the public health, safety, or welfare, and are displayed only between November 1st and January 10th, inclusive.

(Added by Ord. 91-17, 11/26/91; amended by Ord. 94-03, 1/11/94; Ord. 01-06, 10/9/01; Ord. 04-01, 3/10/04)

 

9.37.120 Political Signs.
        Political signs, as defined in Section 9.37.020, including their supporting structures shall be permitted in all zones, provided that:

(a)    No sign shall be permitted on or to extend over any public property, public easement, or in the public right-of-way;

(b)    Political signs shall not be posted in a manner which obstructs traffic or street signs or devices. In addition, all political signs shall be posted in a manner which preserves the lines of sight as set forth in Section 9.05.090;

(c)    All political signs pertaining to a particular election shall be removed within ten (10) days after the date of the election;

(d)    The candidate, committee, or any other authorized person posting political signs shall insure that all signs include the name, address and the required committee identification number of the campaign or political organization, if any.

(e)    If the Director of Community Development finds that any political sign has been posted or is being maintained in violation of the provisions of this Section, the Director may cause said sign to be removed without prior notice. Any political sign that remains posted for more than fourteen (14) days after the election to which it pertains shall be deemed abandoned. The Director may also cause such abandoned signs and any signs which constitute an immediate peril to persons or property to be removed summarily and without prior notice.

(Added by Ord. 91-17, 11/26/91; amended by Ord. 94-03, 1/11/94; Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94)

 

9.37.130 Location and Height.
(a)    All signs, unless otherwise provided for in this Chapter, shall be erected upon the premises occupied by the person or business sought to be identified by such signs.

(b)    No sign shall be located upon or project over a public right-of-way, except projecting signs and signs promoting civic and non-profit activities sponsored by the civic and non-profit organizations subject to the review and approval of the Director of Community Development and in accordance with Section 9.37.160 (Special Use Sign Permits).

(c)    No sign shall be attached to any public utility pole or public property except non-advertising signs or public notices of public utility companies as may be required in their operations which provide service for the health and welfare of the general public or as required by any Federal or State law or agency thereof.

(d)    No sign shall be placed in such a manner that the visibility of a sign on adjacent properties is obscured as viewed from a public or private right-of-way.

(e)    No sign shall extend above the eave line or parapet of the building on which it is located, with the exception of signs located on mansard roofs of buildings without wall area for signage, provided that the sign does not exceed the roofline.

(f)    Signs shall be placed at or near the entrance to a building or site to indicate the most direct access to the business.

(g)    The maximum height of permanent detached signs is six (6) feet. The Community Development Director has the discretion to grant up to a twenty-five (25) percent increase in allowable height, if the Director finds the sign design to be extraordinarily creative and significantly contributing to the character of Dana Point and that the site characteristics warrant the additional height.

                Sign height shall be measured from the ground (finished grade) directly surrounding the sign to the top of the sign. When signs are constructed on hillsides or embankments where the sign supports are at varying lengths, height shall be measured from the horizontal mid-point of the sign. Signs may exceed the maximum height if approved in conjunction with a variance in accordance with Section 9.37.080.

(h)    Signs located within any required building setback, access intersection or street intersection area shall be located in accordance with the sight distance requirements of Section 9.05.090. No sign shall be located so as to promote a safety hazard as determined by the Director of Community Development.

(Added by Ord. 91-17, 11/26/91; amended by Ord. 94-03, 1/11/94; Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94; Ord. 01-06, 10/9/01; Ord. 03-09, 4/23/03)

 

9.37.140 Materials, Design and Construction.
(a)    All signs, with the exception of monument signs, shall be constructed of permanent materials, including but not limited to, metal, wood, acrylic or other comparable durable weatherproof materials. No material more combustible than treated wood shall be used in the construction of any permanent sign.

(b)    It is acceptable and desirable to utilize the following high quality materials and/or methods for monument signs:

(1)    Natural materials such as wood (hand carved, sand-blasted, painted or routed), stone, brick or some other natural material that is of a high quality.

(2)    Ceramic tile either painted or sand blasted.

(3)    Sign face, supports and standards trimmed with moldings and letter of similar high quality design and material.

(c)    It is not acceptable to utilize the following materials for monument signs: finished materials such as acrylic, fiberglass, plastic or bare aluminum face, or material that exhibits a reflection similar to these materials. Canned signs are not permitted.

(d)    Any sign support used in the construction of any permanent sign shall be reviewed as part of the sign application. Brackets or other structural elements that contribute to the architecture or in any way contribute to the advertisement of a business shall be calculated as part of the aggregate area of signage permitted for the site.

(e)    Design, color, and scale of the sign shall be in keeping with the design elements in the General Plan, respective Specific Plan or Planning Area, and/or with the existing and surrounding architecture.

(f)    Signs may be externally illuminated. Signs, with the exception of monument signs, may be internally illuminated. Internal illumination is from the interior of a sign, behind letters (back lighting), channel lighting, or other internal lighting source. Letter and logos may be internally lit but the sign background shall be opaque where the only portion of the signs that is illuminated is the actual letterings and/or a registered trademark or logo. Monument signs are permitted to be externally illuminated only. External illumination is located outside of the sign and is focused to illuminate the exterior of the sign. External lighting shall be designed so as not to reflect glare or visually disturb surrounding land uses or function. Illumination shall be considered excessive when it prevents the normal perception of buildings or structures beyond or in the vicinity of the sign or when it is disruptive to residential zones or any public or private right-of-way.

(g)    Sign colors and materials should be selected to be compatible with the existing building designs and should contribute to legibility and design integrity. The architectural design of the building’s facade shall be considered in selecting sign materials that complement the design.

(h)    Sign colors and materials should be selected to be compatible with the existing building designs and should contribute to legibility and design integrity.

(i)     Sign colors and materials should be selected that provide a contrast between the background color(s) and the lettering.

(j)     Colored lights shall not be used at a location or in a manner so as to be confused or construed as traffic control devices.

(k)    Light sources shall utilize energy-efficient fixtures to the greatest extent possible.

(l)     Sign removal or replacement shall ensure all brackets, poles, and other structural elements that supported the sign shall also be removed. Affected building surfaces shall be restored to match the adjacent portion of the structure.

(Added by Ord. 91-17, 11/26/91; amended by Ord. 94-03, 1/11/94; Ord. 01-06, 10/9/01; Ord. 03-09, 4/23/03)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 9.37.150 Permitted Signs.
        The following table identifies the signs permitted in each land use district. In addition to the following regulations, all signs must be in compliance with all other provisions of this Chapter.

        All signs shall be governed by the following matrix, except if specifically addressed elsewhere in this Chapter. Where contradictory, the more restrictive standards will apply. The matrix lists standards for the type, maximum number, aggregate area, maximum height of signs, and additional standards. In addition to the listed standards, each sign shall comply with the requirements set forth in each specific district or zone, and all other applicable City standards and ordinances. Consideration shall also be given to the overall appearance of the property and the surrounding neighborhood. The Planning Commission may adopt separate sign standards or provisions for specific sites or areas.

 

 

(a)    Permitted Temporary Signs in Residential Districts.

 

CLASS

TYPE

PERMIT
REQUIRED

MAXIMUM

NUMBER

AGGREGATE

AREA1

MAXIMUM

HEIGHT2

ADDITIONAL STANDARDS3

(1)             Construction Sign

Freestanding or Wall

Yes

One per building site or street frontage

32 sq. ft.

6 feet

(A)        Copy shall be limited to the name of the project and may denote firms such as architectural, engineering, or construction firms engaged in work on the site.

(B)        A legal building permit must be issued for the site prior to sign erection.

(C)        Sign shall be removed upon issuance of the first certificates of use and occupancy.

(D)        A construction and future facility sign may be permitted simultaneously as long as the total signage does not exceed 50 square feet.

(2)        Future Facility

Freestanding or Wall

Yes

One per building site or street frontage

32 sq. ft.

6 feet

(A)        Sign shall be removed prior to occupancy of 50% of the buildings on site.

(B)        Copy may include sale, lease, or rental of the property on which the sign is located in lieu of a real estate sign.

(C)        Sign permits shall be valid for one year. However, prior to expiration of time period, the City may grant an extension of not more than one year.

(D)        A future facility sign may only be permitted upon removal of a construction sign, unless the combined area of the construction and future facility signs does not exceed 50 square feet.

(3)        Open House Sign

Freestanding

No, unless proposed in conjunction with a temporary sales facility

One sign per corner per direction, plus one sign per site

4 sq. ft.

4 feet

(A)        Open house signs may be displayed only until dusk and when the property is available for inspection.

(B)             Placement shall be permitted on private property only.

(C)        Signs shall be placed so that they do not obscure and are not attached to fire hydrants, traffic signals/signs or otherwise inhibit or interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic.

(D)        No wind signs (flags, balloons) shall be displayed. However, one flag shall be permitted on site.

(4)             Remodeling Sign

Freestanding or Wall

No

One per building site

4 sq. ft.

6 feet

(A)        Copy limited to name of firm engaged in home repairs, remodels, pool installation, etc.

(B)        Sign shall be removed upon completion of work and prior to final inspection.

(5)        Real Estate Sign

Freestanding or Wall

No

One per street frontage

4 sq. ft.

6 feet

(A)        Copy may include only information relating to the sale, lease or rental of the premises on which the sign is located.

(B)        Signs shall be removed upon close of escrow or when lease or rental has been accomplished.

(6)             Garage/Yard Sale Sign

Wall, Window or Freestanding

Yes

One per intersection; maximum of four (4) signs

4 sq. ft.

4 feet

(A)             Placement shall be permitted on private property only.

(B)        See Section 4.20.010 in the Municipal Code for additional regulations related to conducting garage sales.

 

(b)    Permitted Permanent Signs in Residential Districts.

 

CLASS

TYPE

PERMIT

REQUIRED

MAXIMUM

NUMBER

AGGREGATE

AREA1

MAXIMUM

HEIGHT2

ADDITIONAL STANDARDS3

(1)        Tract Identification

Freestanding or Wall

Yes

One per street frontage or one on each side of an entrance

1 sq. ft. per lineal foot of street frontage up to 100 square feet maximum or as defined by an approved sign program

Wall: 6 feet

Freestanding: 5 feet

(A)        Signs shall be affixed to a perimeter wall or placed within a landscaped planter.

(B)        Copy shall be limited to 18 inches in height.

(C)        Location to be determined at time of sign program approval.

(D)             Freestanding signs shall be of a monument type.

(E)        Signs may be seven feet in height if height includes a two-foot high landscaped overall berm.

(2)             Rent/Leasing Identification Signage (Apartment complexes only)

Freestanding or Wall

Yes

One per complex or entrance

12 sq. ft.

Wall: Below the eave line

Freestanding:

5 feet

(A)        Signage shall be approved as part of a comprehensive sign program.

(B)        Signs may be seven feet in height if overall height includes a two-foot high landscaped berm

(3)             Directional

Freestanding or Wall

No

Minimum number necessary to provide adequate information and direction

2½ sq. ft. per sign

Wall: Below the eave line

Freestanding:

4 feet

(A)        Copy limited to directional signage as defined in this Section.

(B)        Signage to be included with a comprehensive sign program.

(4)        Site Directory
Occupant Listing (Condominium Complex)

Freestanding or Wall

Yes

One per site, or as dictated by the sign program

24 sq. ft., or as dictated by the sign program

6 feet

(A)        Signs to be approved in conjunction with the approved sign program.

 

(c)    Permitted Temporary Signs in Mixed Use and Non-Residential Districts.

 

CLASS

TYPE

PERMIT

REQUIRED

MAXIMUM

NUMBER

AGGREGATE

AREA1

MAXIMUM

HEIGHT2

ADDITIONAL STANDARDS3

(1)             Construction Sign

Freestanding or Wall

Yes

One per building or leased parcel, or one per street frontage

32 sq. ft.

6 feet

(A)        Copy shall be limited to the name of the project and may denote firms such as architectural, engineering, or construction firms engaged in work on the site.

(B)        A legal building permit must be issued for the site prior to sign erection.

(C)        Sign shall be removed upon issuance of the first certificates of use and occupancy.

(2)        Future Facility

Freestanding or Wall

Yes

One per building or street frontage

32 sq. ft.

6 feet

(A)        Sign shall be removed prior to occupancy of 50% of the buildings on site.

(B)        Copy may include sale, lease, or rental of the property on which the sign is located in lieu of a real estate sign.

(C)        Sign permits shall be valid for one year. However, prior to expiration of time period, the City may grant an extension of not more than one year.

(D)        A future facility sign may only be permitted upon removal of a construction sign, unless the combined area of the construction and future facility signs does not exceed 50 square feet.

(3)        Future Tenant

Freestanding

Yes

One per building site or street frontage

32 sq. ft.

6 feet

(A)        Only permitted in lieu of a construction/future facility sign.

(B)        Copy shall be limited to center name, tenant name, and type of use.

(C)        Sign shall be removed at time of installation of permanent sign for a single business on a separate parcel or when a comprehensive sign program is approved for a multiple tenant site.

 


CLASS

TYPE

PERMIT

REQUIRED

MAXIMUM

NUMBER

AGGREGATE

AREA1

MAXIMUM

HEIGHT2

ADDITIONAL STANDARDS3

(4)    Real Estate

Freestanding or Wall

Yes

One per street frontage

12 sq. ft.

Wall:
Below the eave line

 

Freestanding: 6 feet

(A)   Copy shall pertain only to the sale, rent, or lease of the building property.

(B)   Sign shall be removed upon close of escrow or when lease or rental has been accomplished.

(C)   Sign may only be erected in lieu of a construction and/or future facility sign.

(5)    Special Event Sign

Wall

Yes

One per site or as deemed appropriate with a special event permit

Banners not to exceed 24 sq. ft.

Below the eave line

(A)   A special event permit is required pursuant to Section 9.37.160(a), Special Use Sign Permits, and Section 9.39.070, Special Events.

(B)   Special event signs are to be removed on or before date of permit expiration.

(6)           Remodeling Sign

Freestanding or Wall

No

One per building site

4 square feet

Wall: 6 feet

Ground: 4 feet

(A)   Copy limited to name or firm engaged in repairs, remodels, installations, etc.

(B)   Signs shall be removed upon completion of work and prior to final inspection.

 

Note: See footnotes on 9.37-22.

 

 


(d)    Permitted Permanent Signs in Mixed Use and Non-Residential Districts (for Commercial Centers).

        Note: Total of all allowable signage is based on total street frontage unless otherwise noted.

 

CLASS

TYPE

PERMIT REQUIRED

MAXIMUM NUMBER

AGGREGATE AREA1

MAXIMUM HEIGHT2

ADDITIONAL STANDARDS3

(1)    Center Identification Sign

Freestanding

Yes, Minor Site Development Permit

Two:

(One freestanding sign allowed for each street frontage)

1/3 of allowable sign area for the site up to 25 square feet

Up to 25 percent of additional sign area may be granted by the Community Development Director

6 feet. See Section 9.37.130(g) (or as determined by an approved Sign Program)

(A)   Sign shall contain the name of the center (if any) and/or the name(s) of major tenant(s). Inclusion of other tenants may be permitted with an approved minor Conditional Use Permit. See Section 9.37.160(d) for development standards and Section 9.65.040 for procedures and application requirements for a minor Conditional Use Permit.

(B)   Sign may include the address of the site. Telephone numbers shall not be permitted.

(C)   A sign program may be required (see Section 9.37.070).

(D)   Sign shall be of a monument type.

(2)    Tenant Identification Sign

Wall or Window

Yes

Four:

(One sign allowed for each street frontage, parking lot frontage or interior courtyard frontage)

1 sq. ft. per lineal foot of building frontage on a public right-of-way, parking lot or interior courtyard

Below the eave line

(A)   Signs may be located on building elevations with street frontage or main public entrance.

(B)   Signs installed above the first floor may be installed adjacent to the entrance.

(C)   Two or more tenants requires approval of a Sign Program.

(D)   Under canopy signs shall be centered above a window or entrance.

(3)           Directional Signage

Freestanding or wall

No

Minimum number necessary to provide adequate information and direction

2½ square feet per sign

Wall: Below the eave Freestanding: 4 feet

(A)   Copy limited to directional signage as defined.

(B)   Signage to be included with a comprehensive sign program.

 

Note: See footnotes on Page 9.37-32.

 

 

 


(4)        Menu Board

Freestanding or Wall

Yes

One per drive through lane

20 sq. ft.

6 feet

(A)        Shall be approved as part of a comprehensive sign program.

(B)        Shall not be readily visible from any public right-of-way.

(C)        Sound shall not exceed 45 dBA at any point within 20 feet of the sign.

(D)        Shall include independent speaker pedestal or order placing/confirmation equipment.

(5)           Tenant Identification

Projecting

Yes

One:

(per tenant)

9 square feet. Shall not project more than 4-feet from the building and shall not extend beyond the curb.

7-front vertical clearance from sidewalk

(A)        Contingent upon the sign owner obtaining and maintaining in force liability insurance if the projecting sign projects or is suspended above a public right-of-way.

(B)        Projecting signs shall not be internally illuminated.

(6)           Window Sign

Affixed to window only

No

Three signs per business

25% of exposed window area. If allowable sign area is maximized, signs shall not exceed 10% of exposed window area

N/A

(A)        The signs shall complement the building and permanent signage. The use of fluorescent, day-glo, and neon colors shall be limited.

(B)        Permanent window signage shall be included in the maximum aggregate area allowed for the business.

(C)        Text of permanent window signage shall be limited to business name and brief message identifying the product or service or pertinent information.

(D)        Window signage shall conform to the provisions of Section 9.37.110(I).

 

(e)    Permitted Permanent Signs in Mixed Use and Non-Residential Districts (for Single Tenant Sites).

        Note: Total of all allowable signage is based on total street frontage unless otherwise noted.

 

CLASS

TYPE

PERMIT REQUIRED

MAXIMUM NUMBER

AGGREGATE AREA1

MAXIMUM HEIGHT2

ADDITIONAL STANDARDS3

(1)        Center Identification Sign

Freestanding

Yes, Minor Site Development Permit Required

Two:

(One freestanding allowed for each street frontage)

1/3 of allowable sign area for the site up to 25 square feet

Up to 25 percent of additional sign area may be granted by the Community Development Director

6 feet. See Section 9.37.130(g) (or as determined by an approved Sign Program)

(A)        Sign shall contain only the name and address of the tenant.

(B)        A Sign Program may be required (see Section 9.37.070).

(C)        Sign shall be a monument type.

(2)        Tenant Identification Sign

Wall Canopy, or Window

Yes

Four: (one sign allowed for each street frontage, parking lot frontage or interior courtyard frontage)

1 sq. ft. per lineal ft. of building frontage on any public right-of-way, parking lot interior courtyard

Wall: Below the eave line

(A)        Signs may be located on building elevations with street frontage or main public entrances.

(B)        Sign installed above the first floor may be installed adjacent to the entrance.

(C)        Three or more signs may require approval of a Sign Program. (See Section 9.37.070).

(D)        Under canopy signs shall be centered above a window or entrance.

(3)             Directional Signage

Freestanding

No

Minimum number necessary to provide adequate information and direction

2½ square feet per sign

Wall. Below the eave

Freestanding: 4 feet

(A)        Copy limited to directional signage as defined.

(B)        If a Sign Program is otherwise required, the directional signage shall be included.

(4)        Menu Board

Freestanding or Wall

Yes

One per drive through lane

20 sq. ft.

6 feet

(A)        Shall be approved as part of a comprehensive sign program.

(B)        Shall not be readily visible from any public right-of-way.

(C)        Sound shall not exceed 45 dBA at any point within 20 feet of the sign.

(D)        Shall include independent speaker pedestal or order placing/confirmation equipment.

(5)        Tenant Identification

Projecting

Yes

One: (per tenant)

9 square feet. Shall not project more than 4-feet from the building and shall not extend beyond the curb.

7-foot vertical clearance from sidewalk

Contingent upon the sign owner obtaining and maintaining in force liability insurance if the projecting sign projects or is suspended above a public right-of-way.

Projecting signs shall not be internally illuminated.

(6)             Window Sign

Affixed to window only

No

Three signs per business

25% of exposed window area. If allowable sign area is maximized, signs shall not exceed 10% of exposed window area

N/A

(A)        The signs shall complement the building and permanent signage. The use of fluorescent, day-glo, and neon colors shall be limited.

(B)        Permanent window signage shall be included in the maximum aggregate area allowed for the business.

(C)        Text of permanent window signage shall be limited to business name and brief message identifying the product or service or pertinent information.

(D)        Window signage shall conform to the provisions of Section 9.37.110(I).

 

(f)    Special Sign Requirements for Service Stations.

 

CLASS

TYPE

PERMIT REQUIRED

MAXIMUM NUMBER

AGGREGATE AREA1

MAXIMUM HEIGHT2

ADDITIONAL STANDARDS3

(1)             Identification Sign

Freestanding

Yes

One per site

20 square feet if sign contains only identification and no changeable copy panels for pricing. If price information is incorporated in the identification sign, the total square footage may be 32 square feet.

4 feet

(A)        Service stations with an associated convenience store shall be limited to a 20 square foot identification sign.
(B)        Signs shall be located within a landscape planter and may not be located closer than five (5) feet to the property line.

(2)        Fuel Price Information

Freestanding

Yes

One per street frontage

12 square feet per sign

4 feet

(A)        Price signs shall advertise fuel prices only and no other products available.

(B)        Signs shall be completely located within a landscape planter area.

(C)        Signs shall only be permitted in lieu of the provisions of a 32 square foot identification sign.

(D)        The total square footage of sign including attached or detached signs shall not exceed an aggregate of 100 square feet in area.

(3)        Attached

Wall or Canopy

Yes

One per street frontage

1 sq. ft. per lineal foot of building frontage

Wall - below the roof line

Canopy - confined to canopy fascia, canopy columns or other structural elements below the canopy

(A)        The total square footage of sign including attached or detached signs shall not exceed aggregate of 100 square feet in area.

 


CLASS

TYPE

PERMIT REQUIRED

MAXIMUM NUMBER

AGGREGATE AREA1

MAXIMUM HEIGHT2

ADDITIONAL STANDARDS3

(4)           Information/ Instruction Signs

Attached to island column

No

One per canopy column

3 square feet

10 feet

(A)   No other signs shall be permitted on the canopy or columns.

(B)   Signs encompassed within a fuel pump or required by State or Federal Government shall not be regulated by this Code.

(C)   No signs shall be permitted to be displayed on top of attachment to or suspended from any pump.

 

Note: See footnotes on Page 9.97-32.

 

 


(g)    Special Sign Requirements for Public/Quasi-Public Uses.

 

CLASS

TYPE

PERMIT REQUIRED

MAXIMUM NUMBER

AGGREGATE AREA1

MAXIMUM HEIGHT2

ADDITIONAL STANDARDS3

(1) Identification (Detached)

Freestanding or Wall

Yes

One per site

1 square foot per lineal foot of street frontage not to exceed 50 square feet per street

4 feet

(A)   Sign shall be located within a landscaped planter.

(B)   Additional signage may be permitted subject to a sign program (i.e., booster signage for baseball diamonds).

(2) Identification (Attached)

Wall

Yes

One per use or building frontage

1 square foot per lineal foot of building frontage not to exceed 24 square feet

Below the entire line

 

 

Footnotes for Section 9.37.150(a) through 9.37.150(g):

 

1)    The maximum site sign area is 1 square foot of sign area per linear foot of building site frontage on a public street, up to a maximum of 100 square feet for all sign (monument and wall). A greater maximum site sign area may be allowed for multi-tenant commercial developments subject to approval of a Sign Program and based on building frontage. Replacing of existing signs at a multi-tenant development shall not require a Sign Program if the sign was originally legally constructed.

 

2)    The maximum allowable height of a sign must also comply with the height/setback requirements of Section 9.37.130(g).

 

3)    Illuminated signs located in residential districts may only be externally illuminated.

 

(Added by Ord. 91-17, 11/26/91; amended by Ord. 94-03, 1/11/94; Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94; Ord. 94-21, 12/13/94; Ord. 96-10, 8/13/96; Ord. 01-06, 10/9/01; Ord. 03-07, 4/9/03; Ord. 03-09, 4/23/03; Ord. 04-01, 3/10/04; Ord. 08-04, 3/18/08)

 

 


9.37.160 Special Use Sign Permits.
        The purpose of the Special Use Sign Permits section is to permit and regulate the use of: temporary banners, pennants, and flags, in conjunction with special events; and off-site directional signage for visitor-serving land uses.

(a)    Special Event Sign Permit. The use of banners, pennants, flags, and other temporary signage which are used to promote or advertise special events, civic activities, grand openings, and special sales are permitted when erected in an approved location and only upon obtaining a Temporary Site Development Permit as defined in Chapter 9.71 of the Dana Point Municipal Code; the provisions as set forth in this Section; and, where applicable an encroachment permit. Applications for special event banners, pennants and flags shall be filed with the Department of Community Development on forms furnished by the Department.

                Special events held outdoors in tents, unfinished structures, or in occupancies not approved for general use shall comply with the provisions as set forth in this Section and Chapter 9.39 of the Dana Point Municipal Code.

(1)    Grand Opening/Liquidation/Special Sales. On-site grand opening or liquidation sale banners, pennants, or flags in connection with the opening of a business, a major remodel, new ownership, or closure of a business may be permitted and approved by the Director of Community Development, subject to the provisions listed in this Subsection. If approved, a certificate of approval shall be issued including the expiration date.

(A)   Banners, pennants, and flags shall be permitted for sixty (60) days within a twelve (12) month period unless extended by the Director of Community Development. This can be accrued in any multiple or consecutive days up to sixty (60) days;

(B)   Banners, pennants, and flags shall not exceed a total aggregate area of more than one square foot per lineal foot of building frontage on a public street; such banners, pennants, and flags shall not exceed an aggregate area of twenty-four (24) square feet.

(C)   Copy shall be limited to usual wording such as “Going Out of Business Sale,” “Liquidation Sale,” “Grand Opening,” or wording related to special sale items. The business name may be used if the banner is used to temporarily advertise a new business prior to obtaining permanent signage.

(D)   Any banner, pennant, or flag shall not be displayed within or on a window, be ground-mounted, or placed in trees. Banners, pennants, and/or flags shall be placed only on the building in which the event is to occur. No off-site banners, pennants or flags shall be permitted.

(E)   Pennants and flags proposed in conjunction with the use of a banner and window signage shall be limited in size and number subject to the discretion of the Director of Community Development.

(F)    Temporary banners, pennants, flags, and window signage shall compliment rather than detract from the site and permanent signage and shall comply with Section 9.37.140(e) and (f) of this Chapter.

(G)   Total temporary signage for each site shall not exceed three different forms of banners, pennants, and/or flags.

(2)    Non-Profit Organizations. Temporary banners, pennants, and flags advertising a special event, on- or off-site, including civic, public, religious, educational, or philanthropic events, may be granted a special event sign permit for no longer than one month per occurrence unless extended by the Director of Community Development. Temporary banners, pennants, and flags shall be appropriate for the event and shall not have an adverse affect on adjacent land uses. The sign copy may contain names, logos, or corporate sponsors but such names, logos, or corporate sponsors may not exceed one-third (1/3) of the aggregate area of signage. Advertising signage area, specific locations, colors and materials shall be submitted for review by the Director of Community Development. If approved, a certificate of approval shall be issued including the expiration date.

(3)    Fee. A fee and deposit shall be required as approved by a Resolution of the City Council to guarantee the removal of temporary banners, pennants and flags at the end of the permit period. If temporary banners, pennants or flags are not removed at the end of the permit period, the applicant shall forfeit the deposit and excess days will be debited against any potential future permit time. Fees for non-profit organizations may be waived by the Director of Community Development. The applicant shall retain a copy of an approved permit on-site to be presented upon request by an authorized City Official.

(b)    Off-Site Sign Permit.

(1)    Eligibility Criteria. The intent of this Section is to provide adequate off-site directional signage for visitor-serving land uses which are not readily visible or accessible from major public roadways. To be eligible for consideration of an off-site sign permit, a business or activity must be:

(A)   A visitor-serving use as defined in the Zoning Code to include resorts, hotels, motels, restaurants, conference facilities, commercial-recreation uses, specialty and convenience shops, and recreation/open spaces uses; and

(B)   Located on a site not immediately adjacent to or taking access from a Circulation Element roadway of primary or higher classification.      Businesses and activities which do not meet both of these criteria are not eligible for off-site signage.

(2)    Location. Off-site signs must be placed entirely on developed, private, non-residential property with the approval of the property owner. Only one off-site sign is permitted per business or activity, although more than one business or activity may be identified on an off-site sign in conformance with Subsection (3)(D) of this Section. All off-site signs must be located within a one thousand (1,000) foot radius of the business or activity advertised.

(3)    Design. In order to present a unified appearance and avoid visual clutter, off-site signs shall comply with the following design criteria:

(A)   Maximum height of forty-two (42) inches, which may be increased up to a maximum of sixty-six (66) inches if the sign is mounted on a twenty-four (24) inch landscaped berm.

(B)   Maximum sign area of twenty-four (24) square feet.

(C)   Minimum and maximum character size of eight (8) inches and twelve (12) inches, respectively. Character size may be increased to a maximum of sixteen (16) inches at the discretion of the Director of Community Development.

(D)   Maximum of three (3) businesses and/or activities advertised per sign.

(E)   Sign copy limited to the name of the business or activity and a simple directional arrow.

(F)    Sign color, materials, method of illumination and design to be consistent with the architecture and existing on-site signage for the site where it will be located.

(G)   Sign placement to comply with the provisions of Section 9.37.130 of this Chapter.

(H)   The sign shall not displace any required parking stall or other required feature or element of the subject site plan.

(I)    The sign shall be integrated with the site design of the subject property, including landscaping.

(J)    The sign shall be calculated with the sign budget of the site it is located and shall not exceed the allowed sign budget as defined in the Zoning Code.

(4)    Review and Administration. Off-site signs may be permitted subject to the approval of a minor Conditional Use Permit as a consent action by the Planning Commission. In approving an off-site sign, the Planning Commission must find:

(A)   That the business or activity meets the eligibility criteria from Subsection (b)(1) of this Section;

(B)   That the proposed off-site sign will improve the accessibility and visibility of the businesses or activities advertised; and

(C)   That the placement and design of the proposed off-site sign will not create visual confusion, clutter or traffic hazards.

                As a condition of approval for off-site signs, the applicant shall provide evidence of an agreement between the applicant and the owner of the property where the sign will be located for the placement and maintenance of the sign.

(c)    Multi-Tenant Identification Sign. This Section contains criteria to allow multi-tenant centers to include all tenant names on the centers identification sign.

(1)    Design. In order to assure eligibility, multi-tenant identification signs shall comply with the following design criteria:

(A)   The sign shall be monument design and comply with the monument design standards detailed in this Chapter.

(B)   Sign shall contain the name of the center (if any) and/or the name(s) of tenants. The name of the center shall be the prominent title either by using larger characters, different color or other design technique.

(C)   Copy is easily readable from passing vehicles and character size is not more than eight (8) inches in height.

(D)   Sign color, materials, method of illumination and design to be consistent with the architecture and existing on-site signage for the site where it will be located and comply with Section 9.37.140.

(E)   Sign placement and height to comply with the provisions of Section 9.37.130 of this Chapter.

(F)    Size of sign shall comply with the provisions of Section 9.37.150(d) of this Chapter.

(G)   The sign shall not displace any required parking stall or other required feature or element of the subject site plan.

(H)   The sign shall be integrated with the site design of the subject property, including landscaping.

(I)    In order to assure aesthetic compatibility, additional conditions may be required to maintain continuity and harmony of the signage on the site.

(2)    Review and Administration. Multi-tenant center identification signs may be permitted subject to the approval of a minor Conditional Use Permit by the Planning Commission. In approving a multi-tenant center identification sign, the Planning Commission must find:

(A)   That the business or activity meets the eligibility criteria from Subsection (d)(1) of this Section;

(B)   That the proposed multi-tenant center identification sign will improve the accessibility and visibility of the businesses or activities advertised; and

(C)   That the placement and design of the proposed multi-tenant center identification sign will not create visual confusion, clutter or traffic hazards.

(Added by Ord. 91-17, 11/26/91; amended by Ord. 94-03, 1/11/94; amended by Ord. 95-02, 1/24/95; Ord. 95-04, 2/14/95; Ord. 96-04, 3/26/96; Ord. 96-05, 4/9/96; Ord. 01-06, 10/9/01; Ord. 04-01, 3/10/04)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 9.37.170 Prohibited Signs.
        Except as otherwise expressly permitted in this Chapter, all signs are expressly prohibited, including, but not limited to the following:

(a)    Flashing, moving, animated and intermittently lighted signs and advertising devices including animals and human beings, excluding public service signs such as time and temperature signs and traditional barber shop poles.

(b)    Roof signs as defined in Section 9.37.020(r).

(c)    Signs which project over public right-of-way or adjacent private property.

(d)    Changeable copy signs with the exception of signs intended for the advertisement of civic activities and menu board signs.

(e)    Banners, flags, pennants, balloons, and other temporary signage except as may be permitted by Section 9.37.160 in conjunction with a Temporary Site Development Permit or Section 9.37.110(k).

(f)    Off-site signs and other similar signs installed for the purpose of advertising a project, subject, or business, unrelated to the premises upon which the sign is located, inclusive of “snipe” signs and billboards, but exclusive of garage/yard sale and open house signs.

(g)    Vehicular signs including signs attached by any means to automobiles, trucks, trailers, or other vehicles on private or public property for the purpose of advertising, identifying, or providing direction to a use or activity not related to the lawful use of the vehicle for rendering service or delivering merchandise.

(h)    Obscene or unlawful signs.

(i)     Signs in the public right-of-way and public property except those signs that are provided for in this Chapter.

(j)     Permanent pole signs exceeding five (5) feet in height, not including flag signs, with open space from ground level to the bottom of the sign exceeding thirty-five (35) percent of the overall height.

(k)    Audible signs or advertising devices.

(l)     Inflatable signs and advertising devices.

        (m)   Canned monument signs.

(n)    Portable signs which include A-frame or sandwich board signs.

(o)    Internally illuminated monument signs.

        Exhibit 9.37-11 depicts many of the prohibited sign types described in this Section.

 

EXHIBIT 9.37-11

PROHIBITED SIGNS

 



 

(Added by Ord. 91-17, 11/26/91; amended by Ord. 94-03, 1/11/94; Ord. 03-07, 4/9/03; Ord. 03-09, 4/26/03)

 

9.37.180 Unsafe and Unauthorized Signs.
        For any sign or other advertising device regulated in this Chapter that is deemed by the Director of Community Development to be unsafe or hazardous to the public health, safety, and welfare or that has been constructed, erected, or maintained in violation of this provisions as set forth in this Chapter or other applicable code, the permittee or property owner shall be given written notice to correct and/or remove the sign violation. If the permittee or property owner fails to alter or remove the structure to comply with the regulations set forth in this Code within ten (10) days, such sign violation may be removed or altered by the City at the expense of the permittee or owner. Any sign or advertising device which presents an immediate threat to the public safety may be removed without notice. (Added by Ord. 91-17, 11/26/91; amended by Ord. 94-03, 1/11/94)

 

9.37.190 Nonconforming Signs.
        A legal nonconforming sign is any permanent sign which was legally established and maintained in conformance with the ordinance codified in this Chapter in effect at the time of original installation, but because of size, height, location, design, construction, or other circumstance is not in conformance with the requirements of this Code. The provisions of this Section shall apply to all nonconforming signs.

(a)    General Provisions. A nonconforming sign shall be properly maintained in accordance with Subsection (c) of this Section, but may not be:

(1)    Changed to another nonconforming sign either due to a change in text, cosmetically or structurally;

(2)    Structurally or electrically expanded or altered unless such alteration brings the sign into conformance with all current provisions of this Chapter;

(3)    Relocated to another site on the same property;

(4)    Re-established after discontinuance for ninety (90) days or more;

(5)    Re-established after damage or destruction of more than fifty (50) percent of its original valuation.

(b)    Removal. Existing signs which are determined to be nonconforming on the effective date of this Chapter (December 26, 1991) shall be modified or removed to comply with all provisions of this Chapter within seven (7) years of the initial date of first written notice from the Director of Community Development, unless extended as permitted in this Section. Such written notice shall be recorded with the Orange County Recorder and mailed to the property owner. The owner shall be given written notice to correct or remove the non-conforming sign within the seven (7) year amortization period. If the property owner fails to alter or remove the structure to comply with the regulations set forth in this Chapter within ten (10) days following the final date of the amortization period, such sign may be removed or altered by the City at the expense of the permittee or owner. Signs which were erected or altered without a required permit or signs which did not comply with the applicable regulations when erected shall be immediately removed by the owner upon written notice from the City.

(1)    Window Signs. Any window sign that does not conform to this Chapter shall be abated or made to conform within one hundred twenty (120) days of the property or business owner receiving written notice that the sign is nonconforming.

(c)    Maintenance. All signs shall be maintained in good repair and functioning properly, to the satisfaction of the Director of Community Development. Signs shall be free from all defects including but not limited to cracking, peeling and rusting. Signs that are not properly maintained shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated upon proper notice.

(d)    Minor Repairs and Repainting. Legal nonconforming signs may be removed for the purpose of repairing or repainting and may be replaced upon obtaining a sign permit. Legal nonconforming signs may be replaced if the identical sign and text is replaced within sixty (60) days of its removal.

(e)    Change of Ownership. Upon change of ownership of the business advertised by the nonconforming sign, the sign as originally approved, including text, may remain on site for seven (7) years from the date of written notice from the Director of Community Development in accordance with procedure of Subsection (b) of this Section.

(f)    Change in Property Size or Configuration. If any size or configuration of a parcel or building is changed by the subdivision of the property, building addition or demolition, signs for the property shall be made to conform to the sign regulations applicable to the newly created parcel or building at the time such change becomes effective.

(g)    Time Extension. Prior to the expiration of the seven (7) year period provided in Subsection (b) of this Section, a written request may be made to the Planning Commission for an extension. No time extension shall be approved for any sign unlawfully erected.

(1)    Time Period. The Planning Commission may approve a time extension for a period deemed appropriate, up to one year.

(2)    Application and Fee. An application shall be submitted on a form provided by the Director of Community Development and accompanied by a fee set by a Resolution of the City Council. Submittal requirements shall include:

(A)   An exhibit showing all signs currently on site;

(B)   The date the sign was constructed and located on the site;

(C)   The remaining economic life of the sign, which may or may not be less than the actual physical life of the sign;

(D)   Any unusual circumstances concerning the size, height and location of the sign;

(E)   The manner in which the sign violated the sign regulations as provided in this Section;

(F)    A letter of justification showing how the immediate removal or alteration of the sign, as required by this Section, would create unnecessary hardship on the applicant, and which hardship may be inconsistent with the purpose and intent of the sign regulations.

(3)    Findings. The Commission shall find the following in approval of an extension of time for a nonconforming sign:

(A)   Due to special circumstances, immediate removal of the sign will result in a substantial hardship for the applicant.

(B)   The sign is not detrimental to the surrounding properties or the general health, safety and welfare.

(C)   The sign does not constitute an obstruction to vehicular or pedestrian traffic or visibility and is not a hazardous distraction.

(4)    Conditions. Subject to approval of the time extension, the Planning Commission may require reasonable modification or alteration to the sign to improve appearance or its compliance with this Section. Modification that would extend the useful life of the sign shall not be permitted.

(h)    All signs deemed nonconforming by the adoption of this Code and subject to Subsections (b) through (g) of this Section shall have the period of time extended to remove or modify the sign extended to December 31, 2001.

(i)     Discretionary Review of Existing Nonconforming Signs. Nonconforming signs in existence at the time these provisions are adopted by the City Council may apply for a Sign Exception Permit to legalize the subject sign as an alternative to removing or modifying the sign to comply with the requirements of this Chapter. Applications to request a Sign Exception Permit shall be submitted to the Community Development Department within ninety (90) days from the date the Sign Ordinance amendment is adopted. Nonconforming signs, as defined in this Section, for which applications have not been received by this date shall be removed.

(1)    The Planning Commission, at a noticed public hearing, may grant a Sign Exception Permit, provided the following findings can be made:

(A)   Enforcement of regulations of the Sign Code would result in unnecessary physical hardship which would preclude visual access of the proposed sign;

(B)   There are exceptional circumstances to subject property which do not apply to other properties;

(C)   Enforcement of regulations would deprive the applicant of privileges enjoyed by other properties with the same constraints;

(D)   Sign Exception Permit would not result in a grant of special privilege;

(E)   Request is based on hardship and not as a matter of convenience;

(F)    Granting of the Sign Exception Permit would not result in conditions which would be detrimental to public health, safety or welfare to properties in the vicinity;

(G)   Approval places suitable conditions to protect surrounding properties;

(H)   Approval would not result in adverse impacts, either cumulatively or individually, to coastal access, public recreation opportunities, or coastal resources, and development would be consistent with Local Coastal Program;

(I)    The sign is visually appealing, currently in good working order and well maintained, and does not currently have a sight-line or other vehicular or electrical problem that creates a public health, safety or welfare issue; and

(J)    The site has a physical or functional constraint that effectively limits the ability of the business to advertise its location to the general public through the placement of a conforming sign;

(2)    The property owner shall submit the Sign Exception Permit application to the Community Development Department within ninety (90) days from the date the ordinance codified in this Chapter is adopted. The application shall include:

(A)   Discretionary Application forms;

(B)   Letter of justification addressing findings identified in Subsection (1) of this Section;

(C)   Colored site photos of all signs on subject property;

(D)   Site plan including dimensions of subject sign; and

(E)   Planning fees (CEQA fee).

(3)    The Planning Commission’s denial of a request for a Sign Exception Permit shall designate the sign as illegal. As an illegal sign, it shall be removed within thirty (30) days once the decision is final.

(4)    The Planning Commission’s approval of a Sign Exception Permit shall render the sign legal nonconforming which shall be subject to the provisions of this Section except shall not require removal under Subsection (b) of this Section.

(Added by Ord. 91-17, 11/26/91; amended by Ord. 94-03, 1/11/94; Ord. 00-06, 10/24/00; Ord. 01-06, 10/9/01; Ord. 04-01, 3/10/04)

 

9.37.200 Inventory and Abatement of Illegal or Abandoned Signs.
(a)    Within six (6) months after the adoption of the ordinance codified in this title, the Director of Community Development shall authorize an inventory and identification of illegal and abandoned signs shall be made of all signs within the City. Illegal or abandoned signs shall be abated in accordance with the provision of this Section.

(b)    The Director of Community Development shall require the removal or abatement of all illegal or abandoned signs. If signs are not removed by the owner, abatement shall commence after sixty (60) days of the final inventory of illegal or abandoned signs.

(c)    Any unlawful signs located within the public right-of-way or on public property may be removed, without notice, by the Director of Community Development. Abated signs shall be retained at City Hall for a period of not less than three (3) working days, after which the signs may be discarded.

(d)    Should the City be required to remove any illegal or abandoned signs, the reasonable cost of such removal shall be assessed against the owner of such signs. The cost of removal shall be established by a Resolution of the City Council.

(Added by Ord. 91-17, 11/26/91; amended by Ord. 94-03, 1/11/94)

 

9.37.210 Historical Signs.
        An existing sign, which because of character, age, influence, cultural or historic significance, may be exempted from the standards of this Chapter. All such signs shall be subject to approval of a minor Conditional Use Permit by the Planning Commission.

(a)    Historical signage criteria may include:

(1)    Date in which the sign was erected;

(2)    Documentation of originality of historic or cultural value;

(3)    Documentation showing that the sign has been maintained in original form and significant text as when it was originally constructed.

(b)    Findings. In approving a historical sign, the Planning Commission shall determine:

(1)    That the sign contributes to the positive architectural, cultural, or historical character of the City of Dana Point, County of Orange, State of California, or the United States;

(2)    That the sign would not create confusion to the public or to public safety officials in response to emergencies;

(3)    That the sign would not adversely affect the health, safety or welfare of the community; and

(4)    That documentation of the history of the sign and site has been provided to the City for archive purposes.

(Added by Ord. 91-17, 11/26/91; amended by Ord. 94-03, 1/11/94)

 

9.37.220 Maintenance and Operation.
(a)    All time and/or temperature signs shall be continually maintained and calibrated to display the correct time and accurate temperature. Within three (3) days of the bi-annual time change, signs displaying the time shall be adjusted accordingly.

(b)    All signs shall be maintained in good repair and functioning properly to the satisfaction of the Director of Community Development. Signs shall be free from all defects including but not limited to cracking, peeling, and rusting. Signs that are not properly maintained shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated upon proper notice.

(Added by Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94; amended by Ord. 01-06, 10/9/01)

 

9.37.230 Use of Product or Manufacturer Names in Signs.
(a)    Product or manufacturer names are permitted on temporary banner signs. Product or manufacturer names may be allowed in tenant identification signage under the following conditions:

(1)    The registered name of the business (dba) includes the product or manufacturer name; or

(2)    The product or manufacturer name is associated with a product which, when new, has a manufacturer’s suggested retail price exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).

(b)    If a product and/or manufacturer name is used in a tenant identification sign, the following restrictions shall apply:

(1)    The product and/or manufacturer name portion of the sign may not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the total sign area; and

(2)    A maximum of one product name and one manufacturer name may be included in the sign except as provided in Subsection (c).

(c)    Exceptions from Subsection (b)(2) may be permitted subject to the approval of a minor Conditional Use Permit by the Director of Community Development.

(Added by Ord. 94-21, 12/18/94; amended by Ord. 04-01, 3/10/04)

Chapter 9.39 TEMPORARY USES AND STRUCTURES
9.39.010 Intent and Purpose.
        The purpose of this Chapter is to establish uniform standards in order to control the location, design, and duration of temporary uses and structures within the City of Dana Point.

        The temporary uses listed in Sections 9.39.020 through 9.39.070 may be permitted in any district unless otherwise specifically prohibited. A Temporary Site Development Permit shall be required subject to the approval of the Director of Community Development as described in Chapter 9.71, Site Development Permits. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94)

 

9.39.020 Temporary Real Estate Offices.
        Temporary real estate offices and related signs may be established within the area of an approved tentative tract to be used solely for the first sale of homes in projects of twenty (20) or more units within the same tract, subject to the following provisions:

(a)    Building Site not Required. The parcel of land on which a temporary real estate office is established is not required to be a building site provided the parcel is described on a final subdivision map.

(b)    Permitted Structures and Facilities. The following structures and facilities are permitted in conjunction with the establishment of a temporary real estate office.

(1)    Model homes, garages, detached/accessory buildings, recreational facilities, and other permanent development that is in compliance with the zoning regulations and land use approvals applicable to the properties that are being sold.

(2)    Temporary real estate office buildings dedicated to the properties being sold. Such offices shall have a current General Plan, Zoning Map, and project approval prominently displayed to inform potential purchasers of the planned land uses surrounding the development.

(3)    Temporary and permanent fencing, walks and structural amenities.

(4)    Accessways and parking to provide security, safety, access, and off-street parking as necessary for employees and guests.

(c)    The Temporary Site Development Permit shall include those conditions and requirements deemed to be necessary or advisable to protect the public safety and the general welfare and adequate guarantees that the structures and facilities will be removed or made consistent with applicable zoning regulations within ninety (90) days after the expiration of the permit. In addition to those findings required for the approval of a Temporary Site Development Permit, any approving action for a temporary real estate office shall also include the following findings:

(1)    That the access parking and circulation facilities will not result in excess traffic congestion or traffic safety hazards.

(2)    That the operation of the temporary real estate office and associated activities will not conflict with adjacent and nearby residential uses.

(d)    Time Limitation. A Temporary Site Development Permit application for a temporary real estate office may be approved for a maximum time period of two (2) years from the date of approval. Subsequent extensions of one (1) year each may be granted at the discretion of the Director of Community Development for the continued first sale of homes. Within sixty (60) days of the completion of the sale of the last home in the development, the temporary real estate office and its appurtenant structures shall either be removed or converted to an approved permanent use or structure.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94)

 

9.39.030 Temporary Construction Office.
        The temporary use of a construction office during the construction of a site, structure, or building on the same site or adjoining site may be permitted upon the following conditions.

        A temporary construction office shall be removed or shall be converted to a permitted use prior to the use and occupancy for the main building or buildings. If the construction is phased over a length of time, the temporary construction office shall be removed prior to certificates of use and occupancy being issued for seventy (70) percent of the site, structures or buildings.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.39.040 Continued Use of an Existing Building During Construction.
        The use of an existing, lawfully established building may continue during construction or relocation of another building on the same building site, in compliance with the following provisions:

(a)    Conformity with Regulations. Prior to occupancy of a new building, the existing building shall be brought into conformity with any additional regulation rendered applicable by the placement of any new building on the site. Conformity shall be accomplished by removal, reconstruction, relocation, conversion, change of use or any combination thereof.

(b)    Guarantee of Completion. The Director of Community Development shall require the landowner to provide a guarantee including, but not limited to, a bond to ensure full compliance with the zoning regulations upon completion of the new building or sooner if, in the Director’s opinion, work pertaining to the completion of all facilities required by law is not being diligently pursued.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.39.050 Seasonal Commercial Activities.
        Seasonal commercial activities are temporary commercial uses which are associated with cultural or historical events including, but not limited to, Halloween pumpkin sales and Christmas tree sales. Unless prohibited by the regulations of the specific zoning district, seasonal commercial activity associated with cultural events shall be permitted in any commercial or industrial district, any church or school site, or any vacant residential district property which abuts a primary or higher rated roadway as designated in the General Plan. All seasonal commercial activities associated with cultural events shall be subject to the following requirements:

(a)    Temporary Site Development Permit. All seasonal commercial activities shall require approval of a Temporary Site Development Permit pursuant to Chapter 9.71.

(b)    Date of Opening. The date of opening for any seasonal commercial activity shall be specified in the Temporary Site Development Permit, except that the date of opening for designated uses shall be as follows:

(1)    Halloween pumpkin sales shall not be open prior to October 1 each year.

(2)    Christmas tree sales shall not be open prior to Thanksgiving each year.

(c)    Merchandise to be Sold. Seasonal commercial activity shall not engage in the sale of any merchandise not directly related to the associated cultural or historical event, as determined by the Director of Community Development.

(d)    Electrical Permit. If the facility is to be energized, the applicant shall secure an electrical permit and building permit, as applicable, from the City.

(e)    Removal of Facility. Upon completion of the seasonal commercial activity, all facilities used for such activities shall be removed and the site shall be cleared of all debris and restored to the pre-event condition. Unless otherwise permitted in the Temporary Site Development Permit, the removal of facilities and clearing of the site shall be complete within three (3) calendar days of the close of the activity, except that the date of removal for designated uses shall be as follows:

(1)    Halloween Pumpkin Sales, November 14

(2)    Christmas Tree Sales, January 8

(f)    Fire Prevention Standards. The facility shall comply with fire prevention standards as approved and enforced by the City’s Fire Chief.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-21, 12/13/94)

 

9.39.060 Public Display of Fireworks.
        Public displays of fireworks may be permitted in any district or specific plan area subject to the approval of a Temporary Site Development Permit, pursuant to Chapter 9.71. Permits may be issued at any time of the year, but in no case may any more than three (3) such permits will be issued between June 30 and July 7 for displays in celebration of the fourth of July. Such permits may include the accessory sales by nonprofit organizations of food, beverages and merchandise. All such displays shall be subject to the provisions of the permits required by the Fire Protection Services Department. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-21, 12/13/94)

 

9.39.070 Special Events.
        A special event is a temporary use which requires special consideration due to an increase in traffic, parking, noise, light and glare, vibration, odor, visual impact, or other affects incidental to the operation of a temporary use and the effects that such uses may have on the health, safety and welfare of the neighborhood or the community as a whole. In granting a special event permit, the Director of Community Development may require certain safeguards and establish certain conditions of approval to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the community.

(a)    Definition. A special event is defined as any activity which temporarily intensifies the impacts (i.e., parking, traffic, noise, light and glare, etc.) of an existing permitted use or which create a potential conflict among land uses. Normal sales or functions which are incidental to the existing permitted use (i.e., sales conducted within the structure of an existing retail use, live entertainment if currently permitted under a Conditional Use Permit, etc.) shall not be considered a special event. Typical activities that would be considered a special event would include, but not be limited to, auctions (outdoor), farmers markets, open air markets and swap meets.

(b)    Permitted Uses. The following temporary uses are permissible in any zone in the City pursuant to the provisions of this Section and subject to the granting of a Temporary Site Development Permit per Chapter 9.71.

(1)    Retail sales events such as grand openings or special sales; or

(2)    Outdoor gatherings and events of a temporary or seasonal nature which may include, but not be limited to, outdoor entertainment, community events, holiday or seasonal activities, or similar activities of religious, charitable, fraternal, or educational organizations or associations.

(c)    Duration of Special Events. Any event exceeding twenty-one (21) consecutive days in a calendar year shall not be considered a temporary use and shall be processed in accordance with the applicable permits and procedures for such permanent use.

(d)    Types of Permits. There are three types of Temporary Site Development Permits that may be issued for special events:

(1)    Individual Temporary Site Development Permit — a permit for any one (1) event within a calendar year subject to administrative review and approval by the Director of Community Development. A public hearing shall be required if the event is determined to be a major event.

(2)    Comprehensive Temporary Site Development Permit — a permit for up to eight (8) separate, non-consecutive events within a calendar year subject to administrative review and approval by the Director of Community Development. A public hearing shall be required if the event is determined to be a major event.

(3)    Master Temporary Site Development Permit — a permit for nine (9) or more non-consecutive events within a calendar year or for any continuous activity or use of a property which constitutes a special event as defined above. Master special event permits are subject to review and approval by the Planning Commission. A public hearing is required for consideration of a master special event permit.

(e)    Basis for Approval, Conditional Approval of a Special Event Permit. The approval, conditional approval or denial of any Individual Temporary Site Development Permit, Comprehensive Temporary Site Development Permit, or Master Temporary Site Development Permits shall be based upon the following factors and principles:

(1)    That the proposed temporary use is a special event permitted under this Section.

(2)    That the special event is consistent with the Zoning Code and will not be incompatible with the General Plan.

(3)    That the site for the special event is adequate in size, shape, and access to accommodate additional demands generated by the proposed use.

(4)    That the special event as proposed and/or conditioned will protect the safety and general welfare of the community; and will not cause significant noise, traffic, or other conditions or situations that may be detrimental or incompatible with other permitted uses in the vicinity.

(5)    That any unimproved, vacant, privately owned property proposed for a special event shall be deemed “improved” for the duration of the special event so as to comply with the provisions of Dana Point Municipal Code Section 12.08.016(n). Signage shall be placed upon the subject property indicating that the property is being utilized under an approved Temporary Site Development Permit, and shall indicate the duration of the event.

(f)    Filing of Application. The items required for filing shall include:

(1)    A complete application form;

(2)    An application fee as specified in the current structure of service fees, except that fees for non-profit organizations and associations may be waived by the Director of Community Development;

(3)    A site plan showing the layout of the proposed activity. The number of copies required shall be as follows:

(A)   Individual or Comprehensive Permit:

—    Five (5) copies for administrative review

—    Fifteen (15) copies for public hearing (as determined below)

(B)   Master Permit:

—    Fifteen (15) copies

(4)    A letter of authorization from the property owner(s) if different than the applicant;

(5)    A letter of explanation signed and dated by the applicant demonstrating how the request meets the four (4) findings required for approval of a Temporary Use Permit for a special event;

(6)    Notification materials as provided below.

(g)    Notification Requirements.

(1)    Single Event. No notification for a public hearing shall be required unless deemed necessary in the interest of the public safety and welfare of the surrounding community. Such determination shall be made by the Director of Community Development based on the following factors:

(A)   The likelihood that the proposed special event will create noise beyond the boundaries of the property where the event is being held which may constitute a nuisance to property owners or residents;

(B)   The likelihood that the proposed special event will require parking off-site from where the special event is being held;

(C)   The time of day and day of the week during which the proposed special event is to be held;

(D)   The property on which the special event is proposed to be held abuts residential property, school, nursing home, hospital, or similar facility; or

(E)   The scope and magnitude of the proposed special event is such that notice should be provided and a public hearing should be held.

                Events which have the potential to impact adjacent property as described within these criteria shall be considered major events.

(2)    Major Events and Master Permits. For major events and master permits, the following notification materials shall be submitted:

(A)   An assessor’s map showing the subject site and indicating all properties within a three hundred (300) foot radius of the subject site.

(B)   A list of the names of the property owners, their addresses and the assessor parcel numbers within a three hundred (300) foot radius of the subject site.

(C)   Addressed envelopes with postage for each property owner within three hundred (300) feet of the subject site.

(h)    Consideration of an Application.

(1)    An application for a major event or master event permit shall be submitted to the Director of Community Development no later than ninety (90) days before the first day of the proposed event, unless otherwise determined by the Director of Community Development.

(2)    The application shall be acted upon by the Director of Community Development/Planning Commission no later than forty five (45) days after the application is accepted as complete and at least forty five (45) days before the first day of the proposed event.

(3)    The Director of Community Development may require the applicant to provide verification of initial public notice for a major event. The decision of the Director of Community Development on initial public notice shall be sent to the applicant within five (5) days of the application submittal. Legal notice of a public hearing before the Planning Commission on the subject application shall be provided pursuant to Section 9.61.050 of the Dana Point Zoning Code.

(4)    Activities conducted on property owned by or leased to the City, or any public road rights-of-way may require an encroachment permit issued by the City of Dana Point, or other affected agency. The applicant shall be responsible for any fees or surety required for the use of public property.

(5)    Application for any Temporary Site Development Permit for a special event shall be referred by the Director of Community Development to other affected agencies as may be appropriate for review and comment.

(6)    Related issues including, but not limited to, police/security, food and water supply, use of tents and canopies, sanitation facilities, medical services, noise, signage, fire protection, and traffic control shall be adequately addressed to the satisfaction of the Director of Community Development, Public Works Director, Sheriff, or Health Officer in their administration of other City codes. Such other codes may require the applicant to obtain permits such as building electrical, health or tent permits.

(7)    The Director of Community Development/Planning Commission shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny any application and shall state findings and reasons for such decision. The Director of Community Development/Planning Commission, as appropriate, shall have the authority to attach conditions which directly relate to or further the protection of the public health, safety, and general welfare and ensure the fulfillment and intent of the City’s Municipal Code.

(8)    If an application is granted subject to conditions, the Temporary Site Development Permit shall become effective only after the conditions have been fulfilled or after the applicant has provided reasonable and sufficient guarantees that the conditions will be satisfied. The applicant shall satisfy or provide sufficient guarantee for the satisfaction of the conditions at least fifteen (15) days prior to the first day of the special event.

(9)    Advertisement of a special event which requires approval of a Temporary Site Development Permit prior to issuance of such permit by the Director of Community Development/Planning Commission may be done at the applicant’s own risk. Advertising of the subject special event prior to the event does not guarantee that Temporary Site Development Permit will be approved.

(10)  Written approval from the owners of all properties used during the special event is required upon application submittal. A minimum of $1,000,000 in liability insurance and indemnification is required for all owners, the City and other agencies, as determined by the Director of Community Development.

(11)  Sales of prepared food, food stuffs, and merchandise (other than Christmas trees or Halloween pumpkins) shall be permitted only as specifically defined in the Temporary Site Development Permit.

(12)  Informal swap meets and other street corner vending operations are not permitted through this Section.

(i)     Special Event Monitoring and Security.

(1)    The Director of Community Development or the Planning Commission, as a condition of approval, may require monitoring of the special event by appropriate City Departments and/or third parties. Such monitoring shall be at the expense of the applicant, with any associated payment required in full at least fifteen (15) days prior the first day of the subject event.

(2)    Facility use deposits will be considered on a case-by-case basis to evaluate potential damage to city streets, parks, or other public property. The Director of Community Development shall evaluate the potential for damage and may require a cash bond or other guarantee for removal of the temporary use, cleanup, repair and restoration of the activity site within seven (7) days of the conclusion of the special event. Said guarantee shall be in an amount which is sufficient to cover the estimated costs of administration, steam cleaning, sidewalk repair, storm drain cleanout, and other associated cleanup or repair operations. All facility use deposits shall be at the expense of the applicant, with any associated payment required in full at least fifteen (15) days prior the first day of the subject event.

(j)     Consumption of Alcoholic Beverages at Special Events.

(1)    The service or sale of alcoholic beverages at a special event requires approval of a Conditional Use Permit by the Planning Commission at a public hearing. Verification of permits from the State Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control (ABC) is required for the temporary service or sale of alcoholic beverages at a special event. Such verification shall be provided by the applicant at least fifteen (15) days prior the first day of the subject event.

(2)    The applicant shall attend a City-approved training program on the responsible service of alcoholic beverages and California law regarding the service and sale of alcoholic beverages. The applicant will be responsible for disseminating all information from such programs to all servers. In addition, servers will be required to read the City’s policies and procedures, as well as sign a server responsibility statement. The statement must be submitted to the Director of Community Development at least fifteen (15) days prior to the first day of the subject event.

(3)    All other requirements of the City of Dana Point Alcohol Policy must be met to the satisfaction of the Director of Community Development.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-21, 12/13/94; Ord. 96-10, 8/13/96)

 

9.39.080 Film, Video and Still Photography.
(a)    Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to establish a streamlined permit procedure for professional film, video and still photography within the City of Dana Point.

(b)    Definitions. The following definitions shall apply to the language contained in this Section:

(1)    “Charitable films” shall mean any and all activities described under subsection (b)(2) carried out by a non-profit organization which qualifies under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code as a charitable organization. No person shall receive a profit, directly or indirectly, from the marketing and production of the film or from showing the film, videotape or photographs.

(2)    “Film, video and still photography” shall mean and include all activity attendant to staging or shooting commercial motion pictures, television shows or programs, commercial advertisements, commercial promotion and training films, and professional still photography for promotional or advertising purposes.

(3)    “Regular activities of the news media” shall mean the filming, videotaping or photographing for the purpose of spontaneous, unplanned television news broadcast or reporting for print media by reporters, press photographers or news cameramen.

(4)    “Student films” shall mean any and all activities described under subsection (b)(2) carried out by students enrolled in a course or course of study at a college, university or other school for which the completion of a student film is a component of course or graduation requirements.

(5)    “Studio” shall mean a fixed place of business where filming activities (motion or still photography) are regularly conducted upon the premises.

(c)    General Requirements.

(1)    Applicability. Film, video and still photography shall be permitted as a temporary use in all zoning districts, unless otherwise specifically prohibited, subject to the approval of a temporary Site Development Permit by the Director of Community Development. All filming activities are subject to the provisions of this section unless specifically exempted under subsection (d) below.

(2)    Cost. The fees related to a temporary Site Development Permit for film, video and still photography shall be as established by the City Council pursuant to the most current Schedule of Service Fees. The fees charged for permits for filming activities shall not exceed the actual costs incurred by the City. A cancellation fee of twenty (20) percent of the permit cost shall be incurred if an applicant cancels the permit after 3:00 p.m. on the last business day before the scheduled shoot.

(3)    Permit Processing Time Requirements. The processing of temporary Site Development Permits for filming activities shall adhere to the following time schedule:

(A)   Two (2) working days for approval and issuance of “typical” permits;

(B)   Four (4) working days for approval and issuance of permits involving traffic control exceeding three (3) minutes, stunts or special physical effects;

(C)   Ten (10) working days for approval and issuance of permits involving road closures.

(4)    Jurisdiction. The City of Dana Point reserves the authority to issue permits for professional film, video and still photography on all public and private property within the City, with the following exceptions:

(A)   The County of Orange retains permit authority for County property within the City; and

(B)   The State of California retains permit authority for State property within the City.

(d)    Exemptions. The following film, video and still photography activities are exempt from the provisions of this Section:

(1)    Filming activities solely for personal, noncommercial use;

(2)    The regular activities of the news media concerning those persons, locations or occurrences which are in the news and of general public interest;

(3)    Charitable films (fee exempt only);

(4)    Student films (fee exempt only); and

(5)    Filming activities conducted at and entirely within a studio.

(e)    Permit Application and Issuance. The following information shall be included in the application for a temporary Site Development Permit for film, video, and still photography.

(1)    The name of the owner(s), address(es) and telephone number(s) of the place(s) at which the activity will be conducted;

(2)    The specific location(s) at said address(es) or place(s);

(3)    The inclusive hours and dates such activity will transpire;

(4)    A general statement of the character or nature of the proposed filming activity;

(5)    The name(s), address(es) and telephone number(s) of the person(s) in charge of such activity;

(6)    The exact number of personnel to be involved;

(7)    A description of any use of animals, pyrotechnics or special physical effects to be involved; and

(8)    The exact number and type of vehicles and equipment to be involved.

        Applications for temporary Site Development Permits shall be processed in a timely manner in conformance with the requirements specified in subsection (c)(3) above.

(f)    Findings. In approving a temporary Site Development Permit for film, video or still photography, the Director of Community Development shall make the following findings:

(1)    The filming activity requested falls within the scope of City Council Policy No. 501 and the provisions of this Section.

(2)    The filming activity as proposed and conditioned is not inconsistent with the City’s Zoning Code and is not incompatible with the City’s General Plan.

(3)    The site is adequate in size, shape, and access to accommodate additional demands generated by the proposed filming activity.

(4)    The filming activity as proposed and conditioned will not create significant noise, traffic, or other conditions that will be detrimental or incompatible with other permitted uses within the vicinity.

(5)    Any unimproved, vacant, privately-owned property used for filming activity shall be deemed “improved” for the duration of the permit so as to comply with the provisions of Dana Point Municipal Code Section 12.08.016(n) regarding parking on unimproved, vacant, privately owned property.

(g)    Conditions of Approval.

(1)    Standard Conditions. The following standard conditions of approval shall be included in all temporary Site Development Permits for film, video and still photography:

(A)   Prior to the issuance of a temporary Site Development Permit, the applicant shall provide a letter of indemnification to the City, agreeing to hold the City harmless for any events or actions which may occur during or as a result of the activities authorized by this permit.

(B)   Prior to the issuance of a temporary Site Development Permit, the applicant shall provide proof of liability insurance to the satisfaction of the Director of Community Development. Said insurance shall list the City of Dana Point as additional insured for a minimum of $1,000,000 per occurrence.

(C)   Any vacant, unimproved, privately owned property which is proposed to be used for off-street parking purposes shall be posted with signs indicating that the parking is reserved for filming activity parking only; and specifying the dates of the filming activity.

(D)   The applicant shall ensure that no activities will occur that are contrary to the public health, safety, or welfare.

(E)   The applicant shall be responsible for the restrictions and conditions set forth in this permit. A copy of this permit shall be on site at all times. Any deviations from the provisions as set forth in this permit without written authorization from the City of Dana Point shall deem this permit null and void, and shall be taken into consideration for future requests of this type.

(2)    Special Conditions. The following special conditions of approval shall be included, when applicable, in all temporary Site Development Permits for film, video and still photography:

(A)   Site Clean-Up. The applicant shall conduct all operations in an orderly fashion with continuous attention to the storage of equipment not in use and the clean-up of trash and debris. The site used shall be cleaned of trash and debris upon completion of shooting at the scene and restored to the original condition before leaving the site. The applicant may be required to post a refundable faithful performance bond or security deposit prior to permit issuance to ensure clean-up and restoration of the site.

(B)   Filming on Private Property. The applicant shall provide evidence, to the satisfaction of the Director of Community Development, that activities taking place on private property are done with the approval of the property owner.

(C)   Filming in Public Right-of-Way. The applicant shall obtain the appropriate encroachment permits for the use of public rights-of-way, including sidewalks, medians and parkways. This includes permission to string cable across rights-of-way from generator to service point. Temporary “No Parking” signs shall be posted by the appropriate jurisdiction if the applicant will be parking vehicles or equipment in zones which do not otherwise permit parking.

(D)   Filming in Flood Control Channels. The applicant shall vacate any flood control channel where filming is taking place as required to allow releases of water. The applicable flood control agency or district shall be named as an additional insured on the applicant’s liability insurance for filming in or on flood control properties.

(E)   Filming on Beaches. Scenes requiring a fire or campfire on the beach shall utilize a gas jet. No fires other than gas jets will be permitted unless the beach is equipped with fire rings. Access roads to beaches which serve as an emergency service road may not be obstructed in any way at any time. No relocation, alteration or moving of beach structures will be permitted without prior approval from the permitting jurisdiction.

(F)    Filming in City Parks. The applicant shall reserve the use of City parks through the Community Services Department. A security deposit for use of City parks shall be required prior to the issuance of a temporary Site Development Permit for filming activities.

(G)   Use of Public Parking Lots. The applicant may be billed according to the current rate schedule established by the applicable jurisdiction for the use of public parking lots.

(H)   Traffic Control. The applicant shall be required to use California Highway Patrol or Orange County Sheriff personnel for all traffic control of any nature or duration. The applicant shall submit a traffic control plan for the permit which includes the following:

1.     The applicant shall furnish and install advance warning signs and any other traffic control devices necessary in conformance with the current CALTRANS Manual of Traffic Controls for Construction and Maintenance Work Zones. All appropriate safety precautions must be taken.

2.     Traffic may be restricted to one 12-foot lane of traffic and/or stopped intermittently. The period of time that traffic may be restricted will be determined by the permitting jurisdiction, based upon location, time of day, and time of year.

3.     Traffic may not be detoured across a double-yellow line without prior approval from the permitting jurisdiction.

4.     Unless otherwise authorized, camera cars must be driven in the direction of traffic and must observe all traffic laws.

5.     Any emergency road work or construction by City or County crews and/or private contractors, under permit or contract to the appropriate jurisdiction, shall have priority over filming activities.

(I)    Reimbursement for Personnel. The applicant shall be responsible for the reimbursement of any City or County personnel (i.e., police, fire, etc.) provided for the purpose of assisting the production.

(h)    Permit Amendment and Validity. Once issued, a temporary Site Development Permit for filming activities may be amended with written attachments detailing minor changes to the permit, or “riders.” There is no limit on the number of riders to a permit. However, a permit cannot be extended or amended by rider after the end of the permit period or the completion of filming activity, whichever occurs first.

                Permits shall be valid for the dates, times and locations specified in the permit. The City of Dana Point reserves the right, upon showing good cause, to change the date for which the permit has been issued provided established limitations are complied with in respect to time and location. Permits may be canceled by the applicant with a full refund at any time up to 3:00 p.m. of the last business day before the commencement of filming activity. Any violation of the provisions of the permit or of this Section shall deem the permit null and void.

(Added by Ord. 94-19, 11/22/94)

 

9.39.090 Seasonal Fruit Sales.
        Seasonal produce sales are temporary commercial uses which occur during the particular local growing period of certain fruits or vegetables. Unless prohibited by the regulations of the specific zoning district, seasonal produce sales shall be permitted only on fully developed property in any commercial district.

(a)    Temporary Site Development Permit. Seasonal produce sales shall require approval of a Temporary Site Development Permit pursuant to Chapter 9.71.

(b)    Operator Requirements.

(1)    Seasonal produce sales are limited to growers with current Department of Agriculture certification.

(2)    Seasonal produce sales operators must conspicuously display a current Certified Producer’s Certificate issued by the State of California.

(3)    Seasonal produce sales operators must obtain property owner approval.

(c)    Locational and Parking Requirements.

(1)    All seasonal produce sales must be located within a parking lot or other acceptable paved area of an existing and operative development. No such sales shall be permitted on any vacant lot or abandoned development.

(2)    The operator must demonstrate sufficient available parking in conjunction with all other on-site uses.

(3)    No seasonal produce sales shall occur within one thousand (1,000) feet of another seasonal produce stand, excepting those associated with other approved temporary uses such as a farmers market, fairs or festivals.

(d)    Merchandise to be Sold. Seasonal produce sales shall not duplicate existing produce sold on-site by current tenants unless authorized by the property owner and approved by the Director of Community Development.

(e)    Duration of Sales. Seasonal produce sales shall be limited to a maximum of 120 consecutive days at any one site.

(f)    Removal of Facility. Upon completion of seasonal produce sales, all facilities used for such activities shall be removed and the site restored to the pre-event condition. Unless otherwise permitted in the Temporary Site Development Permit, the removal of facilities and clearing of the site shall be complete within three (3) calendar days of the close of the activity.

(Added by Ord. 96-10, 8/13/96)

Chapter 9.41 HAZARDOUS WASTE FACILITIES
9.41.010 Purpose and Intent.
        This Chapter establishes uniform standards to control the location, design, and maintenance of hazardous waste facilities and protect the health, quality of life, and the environment of the residents of the City of Dana Point.

        The City Council hereby adopts the following policies:

(a)    The City of Dana Point prioritizes hazardous waste management strategies in order of priority as follows: source reduction (top priority), on-site recycling, off-site recycling, on-site treatment, off-site treatment, and disposal (last priority).

(b)    Public participation shall be a high priority throughout the process of siting hazardous waste facility projects.

(c)    The City of Dana Point will cooperate fully with other local, State, and Federal agencies to efficiently regulate the management of hazardous materials and hazardous waste.

(d)    Transportation of hazardous waste shall be minimized, and regulated where possible, to avoid environmentally sensitive areas and populated, congested, and dangerous routes.

(e)    Regulations governing pretreatment of hazardous wastes before discharge into sewer systems will be strictly followed. Discharge of hazardous wastes into storm drains is prohibited.

(f)    The City of Dana Point shall cooperate with the County of Orange with respect the proper management of household hazardous wastes. The City’s General Plan addresses the types and quantities of household hazardous waste generated in the City, options and strategies for managing these wastes, and a program for educating the residents as to identification and proper management of household hazardous waste.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.41.020 Modification of Zoning Codes to Regulate Hazardous Waste Facilities.
        The following shall apply to all applications for a land use decision regarding hazardous waste facility projects:

(a)    All hazardous waste facility projects and specified hazardous waste facility projects shall require a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 9.65. A Coastal Development Permit shall also be required if a Coastal Development Permit is otherwise required for development of the site by City Ordinance or State Law. A Coastal Development Permit shall also be required if such Coastal Development Permit is otherwise required for development of the site by City Ordinance or State law. The local permitting process is intended to assure protection of public health and the environment without imposing undue restrictions on projects.

(b)    All hazardous waste facility projects and specified hazardous waste facility projects must meet the criteria herein unless the City Council determines that one or more criteria should be relaxed to meet an overriding public need.

(c)    Specified hazardous waste facility projects and hazardous waste storage and disposal facilities shall be sited only in industrial zones. Hazardous waste facility projects, other than specified hazardous waste facility projects and hazardous waste storage and disposal facilities shall be sited in the following zoning designations: business park or community commercial zones only. All such uses shall be subject to a Conditional Use Permit and Coastal Development Permit, when a Coastal Development Permit is otherwise required.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.41.030 Procedural Requirements for Specified Hazardous Waste Facilities.
(a)    General. All applications for specified hazardous waste facility projects must follow the procedures set forth in Health and Safety Code Sections 25199 et seq., Public Resources Code Sections 21000—21177, and Government Code Sections 65920 et seq.; this Chapter and the following:

(1)    Conflict of Interest. The person, or entity, preparing the documents required by the California Environmental Quality Act shall not be the same person, or entity, which acts as a consultant to the Local Assessment Committee.

(2)    Public Education Plan. Every application for a specified hazardous waste facility project shall contain a proposed public education/participation program to be employed during the local land use decision making process. Such plan shall be mutually agreeable to the project proponent and the Director of Community Development.

(3)    Property Value Impact Study. An application for a specified hazardous waste facility shall include an independent study of the impact of the facility on real property values within the City. The study shall have been funded by the applicant. The City shall select and control the work of the consultant conducting the study. The property value impact study shall be completed and filed with the application.

(4)    Employment Impact Study. The project proponent shall pay to the City, in advance, a fee in an amount sufficient to pay for the City’s costs in conducting and reviewing an independent study of anticipated changes in employment in the City of Dana Point if the facility is sited. The City shall hire and control the work of the consultant conducting the study. Said study shall be completed prior to action on the application by the Local Assessment Committee.

(b)    Local Assessment Committee Comments. The Local Assessment Committee shall provide comments on the draft environmental impact report or proposed negative declaration, as appropriate, for specified hazardous waste facility projects.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.41.040 Processing Applications.
        Every application for a hazardous waste facility project or a specified hazardous waste facility project shall be processed in accordance with the following procedures in addition to, and consistent with, Public Resources Code Sections 21000—21177 and Government Code Sections 65920 et seq. In the event of inconsistencies between the foregoing statutes and this Chapter, the provisions of this Chapter shall govern, to the extent they are not preempted by operation of law.

(a)    Determination by Director of Community Development. The Director of Community Development shall determine whether an application is complete for filing not later than thirty (30) calendar days after the application is submitted for filing.

(b)    Planning Commission Hearing. The Planning Commission shall hold a hearing on the application within sixty (60) calendar days after the application is accepted as or deemed complete.

(c)    Consistency Determination. At the request of the applicant, the Director of Community Development shall issue an initial written determination on whether the project is consistent with the General Plan, applicable zoning ordinances, the environmental guidelines of the City for implementing the California Environmental Quality Act (“CEQA”), and the County of Orange Hazardous Waste Management Plan in effect on the date the application was accepted as or deemed complete. This determination, which shall be issued within sixty (60) calendar days after the application has been accepted as or deemed complete, will not prohibit the City from making a different determination when the final decision is made if such decision is based on information which was not considered when the initial determination was made.

(d)    City Council Hearing. A public hearing on the application shall be held by the City Council not later than 180 days after the application is complete when the Director of Community Development, upon the advice of the City Attorney, has determined:

(1)    That the application complies with all ordinance requirements;

(2)    That all procedures required by the City of Dana Point with regard to the California Environmental Quality Act have been met;

(3)    That all State and Federal permits for the facility have been obtained; and

(4)    That the applicant, not later than thirty (30) days prior to any public hearing scheduled by the City, has provided three (3) sets of stamped envelopes addressed to all owners of record as shown on the latest County Equalized Assessment Roll that lie within a one-mile radius of the boundary of the facility and three (3) sets of mailing labels indicating all residents, tenants, and businesses within a one-mile radius of the boundary of the facility.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.41.050 Contents of Application.
        Every application for a hazardous waste facility project or a specified hazardous waste facility project shall be made in writing to the Director of Community Development on the forms provided by the Community Development Department and accompanied by a filing fee as set by Resolution of the City Council. An application must include fifteen (15) copies of the application, site plans, elevation, floor plans, and landscape plans all drawn to scale, and the following information:

(a)    Name and Address. Name and address of the applicant;

(b)    Ownership. Evidence that the applicant is the owner of the premises involved or that it has written permission of the owner to make such application;

(c)    Plot and Development Plans. Plot and development plans drawn in sufficient detail as determined by the Director of Community Development and the City Engineer to clearly describe the following:

(1)    Physical dimensions of the property and structures,

(2)    Location of existing and proposed structures,

(3)    Proposed setbacks and landscaping,

(4)    Proposed methods of circulation and parking,

(5)    Existing and proposed drainage patterns,

(6)    Proposed ingress and egress,

(7)    Proposed storage and processing areas,

(8)    Utilization of property under the requested land use permit,

(9)    The distance from the project property line to the nearest adjacent structure, and a description and location of such structure,

(10)  Proximity of the project to one hundred (100) year flood prone areas,

(d)    Earthquake Fault Zones. Proximity of the project to any known earthquake fault zones;

(e)    Groundwater. The relationship of the proposed project to all above groundwater supplies and all known underground aquifers that might be threatened with contamination;

(f)    Topography. Topographic description of the property and surrounding area;

(g)    Geological Study. A preliminary geological study of the property and surrounding area which comprehends as deep a soils analysis as there are known aquifers, regardless of the potability of those aquifers;

(h)    Utilities. Existing and proposed utilities which service or will be required to service the facility;

(i)     Map. A vicinity map which indicates, at a minimum proximity of the project to schools, parks, and other community facilities within the City of Dana Point;

(j)     Routes. Proposed haul route for trucks taking hazardous waste and hazardous substances to and from site and the City limits;

(k)    Wastewater. Identification of all wastewater, treated and untreated, generated by the proposed facility and the method and place of final discharge shall be included with any application filed pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter;

(l)     Visual, Noise and Odors. An analysis of any visual, noise, or olfactory impacts associated with the project and recommended mitigation measures shall be included with any application filed pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter;

(m)   Air Quality. An analysis of all anticipated air quality impacts associated with the project and proposed mitigation measures to ensure no degradation of air quality shall be included with any application filed pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter;

(n)    Endangered Species. Identification of any rare or endangered or candidate rare or endangered species of plant or animals or habitats of such species within the project site and recommended impact mitigation measures;

(o)    Quantities of Hazardous Waste. Identification of the amounts (in tons), sources, and types of hazardous wastes to be treated, stored, or disposed of at the proposed facility; the ultimate disposition of the wastes, and anticipated life of the facility. This information shall be based on an actual survey of the industries to be served and, thereby, be representative of the wastes that will be processed at the facility;

(p)    Risk Assessment. A risk assessment which analyzes, in detail, all probabilities and effects of releases or spills, at the site, transportation related accidents from the point of origin to the facility, and any other probabilities requested by either the Director of Community Development, Director of Public Works, Planning Commission, or the City Council. Such analyses shall identify mitigation measures to reduce the identified risks. The risk assessment shall identify the most probable routes for transporting hazardous wastes to the facility. The risk assessment must also detail the maximum credible accident from the facility operations and its impact on all immobile populations in the City. The study must appropriately address the quantity and types of wastes that could be received at the facility. It must also include consideration of the design features and planned operational practices at the facility. Additionally, the study must provide an estimate of the distance over which the effects of a spill or emergency situation would carry, options for reducing the risks, and procedures for dealing with such spills or emergency situations;

(q)    Monitoring Program. A plan that identifies an ongoing monitoring program of air, soil, surface water, and groundwater. This plan shall include any monitoring requirements imposed by other permitting agencies such as, but not limited to, the South Coast Air Quality Management District, Regional Water Quality Control Board, Department of Health Services, or their successors in interest;

(r)    Alternative Sites. A designation of reasonable alternative sites which shall be reviewed pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act;

(s)    Environmental Information. An Environmental Information Form in sufficient detail to enable the City to complete an Initial Study pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act for the preparation by a qualified environmental consulting firm of an Environmental Impact Report or Negative Declaration, with all costs to be born by the applicant; and

(t)     Emergency Response Plan. An emergency response plan consistent with all applicable County, regional and City emergency response plans and all City, County, State and Federal regulatory requirements regarding emergency response procedure, including the following:

(1)    Detailed procedures to be employed at the time of emergency for each and every type of chemical substance and emergency, including contingency procedures;

(2)    Anticipated impacts on local fire, police, and      medical services; and

(3)    Names, home and business addresses, and home and business telephone numbers of all management personnel at the facility, if known, and a detailed description of uncontrolled release and release reporting procedures.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94)

 

9.41.060 Standards and Locational Criteria for Specified Hazardous Waste Facilities.
        All specified hazardous waste facility projects in the City of Dana Point must comply with the provisions of this Chapter, including the locational criteria of Sections 9.41.080 through 9.41.320, inclusive. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.41.070 Proximity to Populations.
(a)    Residuals repositories, as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 25204 must be a minimum of two thousand (2,000) feet from the closest residence.

(b)    Treatment and storage facilities, as those terms are defined in Health and Safety Code Section 25205.1 shall comply with zoning setback requirements for industrial facilities, unless a greater distance is justified pursuant to a risk assessment.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.41.080 Capability of Emergency Services.
        All facilities shall be located in areas where fire departments are able to immediately respond to hazardous waste emergencies, where mutual aid and immediate aid agreements are established, and where demonstrated emergency response times are the same or better than those recommended by the National Fire Prevention Association and the Orange County Fire Department including a call response time for eighty (80) percent of the service area with the first fire engine and paramedics unit to reach the site within five (5) minutes. In addition, hazardous materials accident response services at the facility may be required based on the type of wastes handled or the location of the facility. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.41.090 Flood Hazard Areas.
(a)    Residuals repositories and hazardous waste storage facilities are prohibited in areas subject to inundation by floods with a one hundred (100) year return frequency, and shall not be located in areas subject to flash floods and debris flows.

(b)    All other facilities shall avoid locating in floodplains or areas subject to flash floods and debris flows unless they are designed, constructed, operated, and maintained to prevent migration of hazardous wastes in the event of inundation.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.41.100 Proximity to Active or Potentially Active Faults.
        All facilities are required to a have a two hundred (200) foot setback from a known active earthquake fault. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.41.110 Slope Stability/Subsidence/Liquefaction.
        Residuals repositories and storage facilities are prohibited in areas of potential rapid geologic change. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.41.120 Dam Failure Inundation Areas.
        All specified hazardous waste management facilities shall locate outside a dam failure inundation area. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.41.130 Aqueducts and Reservoirs.
        All facilities shall locate in areas posing minimal threats to the contamination of drinking water supplies contained in reservoirs and aqueducts. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.41.140 Discharge of Treated Effluent.
        Facilities generating wastewater shall be located in areas with adequate sewer capacity to accommodate the expected wastewater discharge. If sewers are not available, the site should be evaluated for ease of connecting to a sewer or for the feasibility of discharge directly into a stream or the ocean. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.41.150 Proximity to Supply Wells and Well Fields.
(a)    A residual repository shall be located away from the cone of depression created by pumping a well or well field ninety (90) days. Location is preferred where the saturated zone predominantly discharges to non-potable water without any intermediate withdrawals for public water supply.

(b)    All other hazardous waste facilities shall locate outside the cone of depression created by pumping a well field for ninety (90) days unless an effective hydrogeologic barrier to vertical flow exists.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.41.160 Depth to Groundwater.
(a)    Residuals repositories and facilities with subsurface     storage and/or treatment are prohibited in areas where the highest anticipated elevation of underlying groundwater is five (5) feet or less from the lowest subsurface point of the facility.

(b)    At all facilities, the foundation of all containment structures at the facility must be capable of withstanding hydraulic pressure gradients to prevent failure due to settlement, compression, or uplift as certified by a California Registered Civil Engineering Geologist.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.41.170 Groundwater Monitoring.
(a)    Residuals repositories and facilities with subsurface storage and/or treatment must develop a program that successfully satisfies the Regional Water Quality Control Board (RWQCB) permit requirements for groundwater monitoring.

(b)    Facilities which handle liquids should be located where groundwater flow is in one direction with no vertical interformational transfer of water.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.41.180 Major Aquifer Recharge Area.
(a)    Residuals repositories are prohibited within any area known to be, or suspected of, supplying principal recharge to a regional aquifer.

(b)    Facilities with subsurface storage or treatment must be located at least one mile away from potential drinking water sources.

(c)    All other facilities located in areas known to be, or suspected of, providing recharge to an existing water supply well shall provide for increased spill containment and inspection measures.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.41.190 Soil Permeability.
(a)    Soil permeability requirements for disposal and subsurface treatment and storage facilities shall conform to those required by the State Water Resources Control Board. All other above ground facilities shall have engineered structural design features common to other types of industrial facilities. These features shall include spill containment and monitoring devices.

(b)    All other facilities may be located in areas where surficial materials are principally highly permeable materials if adequate spill containment and inspection measures are employed.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.41.200 Existing Groundwater Quality.
(a)    Residuals repositories are allowed only where the uppermost water-bearing zone or aquifer is presently mineralized (by natural or human-induced conditions) to the extent that it could not reasonably be considered for beneficial use.

(b)    All other facilities located in areas where existing groundwater quality is Class 1 or Class 2 should provide increased spill containment and inspection measures as specified by the Director of Community Development in accordance with standards designed to provide maximum protection to groundwater.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.41.210 Non-Attainment Areas.
        All facilities with air emissions located in non-attainment areas and emitting air contaminants in excess of established limits will require pre-construction review under new source review requirements, and must obtain a permit to construct and a permit to operate from the South Coast Air Quality Management District. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.41.220 Prevention of Significant Deterioration (PSD) Areas.
        All facilities with air emissions locating in the region which are classified under the PSD regulations as major stationary sources will be required to submit to pre-construction review and apply best available control technology. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.41.230 Wetlands.
(a)    Facilities are prohibited from locating in wetlands without a Section 404 Clean Water Act Permit, unless:

(1)    Industrial usage is permitted,

(2)    No filling is required; and

(3)    Fish, plant and wildlife resources can be maintained and enhanced on a portion of the site, or preserved elsewhere in the area.

(b)    Approval of Permits for facilities in wetlands areas shall be conditioned upon issuance of a Section 404 permit.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.41.240 Proximity of Habitats of Threatened and Endangered Species.
        Facilities are prohibited in habitats of threatened or endangered species or candidate threatened or endangered species unless the applicant obtains approval for a Habitat Conservation Plan meeting the requirements of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and the California Department of Fish and Game. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.41.250 Agricultural Lands.
(a)    Facilities shall not be located in areas zoned for agricultural uses.

(b)    Incinerators shall not be located in areas where the emissions from the facility could directly impact food crops.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.41.260 Recreation, Cultural, or Aesthetic Areas.
        All facilities shall be prohibited in areas of recreation, cultural, or aesthetic value as determined by the Director of Community Development, Planning Commission, or City Council. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.41.270 Areas of Potential Mineral Deposits.
(a)    Residuals repositories shall not be located on or near lands classified as containing mineral deposits of significance by California’s Mineral Land Class Maps and Reports.

(b)    All other facilities shall avoid locating on or near lands classified as containing mineral deposits of significance if the use or preservation of the mineral deposit would be restricted or prevented.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.41.280 Proximity to Areas of Waste Generation.
        Subject to other standards and criteria described herein, all facilities shall be located in areas best suited for providing services to the hazardous waste generators of the City of Dana Point. Facilities which will primarily serve generators from outside the City must demonstrate why the facility cannot be located closer to the points of hazardous waste generation to be serviced. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.41.290 Distance from Major Transportation Routes.
        Distance traveled on minor roads shall be kept to a minimum. Facility proponents shall be required to pay user fees to ensure proper road construction and maintenance necessary to accommodate the anticipated increase in traffic due to the facility. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.41.300 Structures Fronting Minor Routes.
(a)    Facilities shall be located such that any minor routes to and from state or interstate divided highways to or from the facility are used primarily by trucks, and the number of nonindustrial structures (homes, hospitals, schools, etc.) along such routes is minimal.

(b)    The facility proponent shall evaluate the “population at risk” based on the Federal Highway Administration’s Guidelines for applying criteria to designate routes for transporting hazardous materials. The “population at risk” factor should not exceed that for existing facilities. Sites with lower factors are preferred.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.41.310 Access Roads.
        The changes in the ratio of route capacity to average annual peak hour traffic shall be negligible after calculating the number of trucks on the major and minor routes expected to service the facility. To determine if a change in average annual peak hour traffic is negligible, the same standards of significant/insignificant impact utilized in the California Environmental Quality Act shall be used. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.41.320 Consistency With the General Plan.
        The proposed facility shall be consistent with all General Plan requirements, the Zoning Code, and other planning actions or policies that were in place at the time the application was deemed complete. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.41.330 Direct Revenue to Local Jurisdictions.
        The City may, at its discretion, explore, review, and impose appropriate taxes, user fees, application filing fees, review fees, emergency response plan review fee and other revenue or compensation measures. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.41.340 Safety and Security.
(a)    The owner or operator shall prevent the unknowing entry, and minimize the possibility for the unauthorized entry, of persons, livestock, or wild animals onto any portion of the facility.

(b)    The operator shall provide a twenty-four (24) hour surveillance system which continuously monitors and controls entry onto the facility.

(c)    Perimeter fencing shall be constructed which meets the requirements of the regulations implementing the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, if applicable to the Project, or to the Director of Community Development’s satisfaction.

(d)    Signs with the legend “DANGER HAZARDOUS WASTE AREA—UNAUTHORIZED PERSONNEL KEEP OUT,” shall be posted at each entrance to the facility, and at other appropriate locations. The legend shall be written in English and Spanish and shall be legible from a distance of at least twenty-five (25) feet.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.41.350 Monitoring.
(a)    Upon reasonable notice, and for the purpose of ensuring compliance with all standards, conditions, and other requirements which the City of Dana Point is authorized to enforce under its police power, City officials or their designated representatives may enter the premises on which a hazardous waste facility permit has been applied for or granted.

(b)    The owner or operator of a facility shall report quarterly to the Community Development Department the amount, type, and disposition of all wastes processed by the facility. Included in the report will be copies of all manifests showing the delivery and types of hazardous wastes and include a map showing the exact location (coordinates and elevation) of quantities and types of materials placed in repositories or otherwise stored or disposed of on-site.

(c)    The owner or operator of a hazardous waste facility shall immediately send copies of all complaints as to facility operations and copies of all inspection reports made by other Local, State or Federal Agencies to the Director of Community Development.

(d)    The emergency response plan shall be updated annually, signed by all management personnel at the facility, and distributed to all local emergency response agencies and the Director of Community Development.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.41.360 General Conditions.
        The City may impose, as necessary, conditions and standards other than those presented in Sections 9.41.020 to 9.41.240 above in order to achieve the purposes of this Chapter and to protect the health, safety, or general welfare of the community. In addition to the conditions and standards imposed pursuant to this Section, the standards and conditions in Sections 9.41.250 to 9.41.310 of this Chapter shall also apply. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.41.370 Excess Volume.
        No hazardous waste facility shall be sited if such facility will manage a volume or type of hazardous waste in excess of that generated within the City of Dana Point and not currently being managed by a facility located in Dana Point unless satisfactory compensation is made to the City or a joint powers agreement provides otherwise. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.41.380 Modifications.
        Any modifications of the types and quantities of hazardous waste to be managed at the facility which were not included in the approved application for land use, including the Conditional Use Permit and Coastal Development Permit if required, must be approved by the City through an amendment to the Conditional Use Permit and Coastal Development Permit if required, before such modifications occur at the facility. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.41.390 Contingency Operation Plan.
        Every hazardous waste facility project must have a contingency operation plan approved by the California Department of Health Services (“DHS”). The facility owner or operator shall maintain a current copy of the contingency plan approved by DHS at the Hazardous Waste Facility and provide current copies of the contingency plan to the Chief of Police, Fire Chief, each hospital within ten miles, and the Orange County Department of Environmental Health. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.41.400 Closure Plan.
        The owner or operator of a hazardous waste facility project, prior to the local land use decision, shall submit to the Community Development Department a written closure plan approved by the Department of Health Services. All revisions to such closure plans shall also be submitted to the Community Development Department. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.41.410 Financial Responsibility.
        Prior to issuance of an “Occupancy Permit” to begin the use identified in the land use decision, the applicant shall submit, to the City Manager/designee, proof that it has met all of the financial responsibility requirements imposed by the Department of Health Services and any other Federal or State Agency. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.41.420 Indemnification.
        By submitting an application pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, the applicant agrees to protect, indemnify, defend, and render harmless the City of Dana Point and its City Council, City Attorney, Planning Commission, and all officers, employees and agents of the City against and from all claims, actions, or liabilities relating to the land use decision or arising out of its implementation at the site. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.41.430 Hazardous Waste Minimization.
        No specified hazardous waste facility project will be approved if it significantly undercuts incentives for waste minimization by hazardous waste generators. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.41.440 Emergency Response Procedures.
        Owners/operators of all facilities shall prepare and submit an annual emergency response preparedness report to the Director of Community Development. Such report shall be initialed by each person at the facility who has emergency response responsibilities. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.41.450 Environmental Monitoring Report.
        Owners/operators of all facilities shall submit an annual air, soil, and groundwater monitoring report to the Director of Community Development. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.41.460 Release Response Costs.
        The facility owner/operator shall be responsible for all costs incurred by the City of Dana Point and its officers, agents, employees, or contractors, for responding to a release of hazardous wastes at or enroute to or from the facility. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.41.470 Extremely Hazardous Wastes.
        Any storage, treatment, disposal or transportation of “extremely hazardous waste” as defined in Section 25115 of the Health and Safety Code, by the facility owner/operator shall be reported to the Director of Community Development at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to such storage, treatment, disposal, or transportation. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.41.480 Compliance Costs.
        All costs of compliance with this Chapter shall be borne by the facility owner/operator. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.41.490 Enforcement.
        The City of Dana Point may employ any and all methods permitted by a law to enforce any and all provisions of this Chapter. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.41.500 Findings.
(a)    The findings specified in this Section shall be made in writing prior to making a land use decision which will allow the siting of a hazardous waste facility project:

(1)    The project will be consistent with the General Plan, when adopted.

(2)    The Project will not be detrimental to the health, safety, or general welfare of the community.

(3)    The Project Site is or will be served by roads and other public or private service facilities.

(4)    The Project has met or exceeded each requirement of this Chapter.

(5)    The environmental impacts identified in the Environmental Impact Report or Proposed Negative Declaration have been adequately mitigated and a Mitigation Reporting and Monitoring Program has been established for each mitigation measure.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.41.510 Duration of Land Use Decision.
        The life of the land use decision shall be determined at the time of approval and shall not exceed ten (10) years. The project proponent shall commence substantial construction of the facility within two (2) years of the land use decision and such construction must be pursued diligently to completion. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.41.520 Appeal of Land Use Decision.
        Appeal of decisions by the City Council pertaining to specified hazardous waste facilities projects shall be filed with the Office of the Governor of the State of California in accordance with Health and Safety Code Section 25199.9 et seq. The decision entered by the City Council for all other facilities shall be deemed final. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

Chapter 9.43 TRANSPORTATION DEMAND MANAGEMENT
9.43.010 Intent and Purpose.
        This Chapter meets the requirements of Section 65089(b)(3) of the California Government Code requiring the development of a trip reduction and travel demand element to the Congestion Management Plan and Section 65089.3(a)(2) of the California Government Code which requires adoption and implementation of a trip reduction and travel demand ordinance. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.43.020 Policy.
        New commercial, industrial, and mixed-use development including employment centers of one hundred (100) persons or more may adversely impact existing transportation and parking facilities, resulting in increased motor vehicle emissions, deteriorating levels of service, and possibly significant additional capital expenditures to augment and improve the existing transportation system. In order to more efficiently utilize the existing and planned transportation system and to reduce vehicle emissions, it is the policy of the City to:

(a)    Reduce the number of peak-period vehicle trips generated in association with additional development;

(b)    Promote and encourage the use of alternative transportation modes such as ridesharing, carpools, vanpools, public bus and rail transit, bicycles and walking, as well as those facilities that support such modes;

(c)    Achieve related reductions in vehicle trips, traffic congestion, and public expenditure and achieve air quality improvements through utilization of existing local mechanisms and procedures for project review and permit processing;

(d)    Promote coordinated implementation of strategies on a county-wide basis to reduce transportation demand;

(e)    Achieve the most efficient use of local resources through coordinated and consistent regional and/or local TDM programs.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.43.030 Applicability.
(a)    The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to all new development projects that are estimated to employ a total of one hundred (100) or more persons as determined by the methodology in Section 9.43.030(b).

(b)    For purposes of determining whether a new development project is subject to this Chapter, the total employment figure shall be determined as follows:

(1)    Employment projections developed by the project applicant, subject to approval by the City; or

(2)    Employment projections developed by the City using the following employee generation factors by type of use.

 

Land Use Category

Gross Sq.Ft./Employee

Commercial:

        Regional

        Community

        Neighborhood

 

500

500

500

Office/Professional

250

Industrial

525

Hotel

0.8 — 1.2/room

 

(3)    The employment projection for a development of mixed or multiple uses shall be calculated on a case-by-case basis based upon the proportion of development devoted to each type of use.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.43.040 Facility Standards.
        All applicable developments shall be subject to the Facility Standards as specified in this Section and shall include in the project Site Development Plan’s provision to provide each of the improvements identified in either Option “A” or Option “B” below:

(a)    Option “A” Facility Improvements.

(1)    Preferential Parking for Carpool Vehicles.

(A)   At least fifteen (15) percent of the employee parking spaces shall be reserved and designated for carpool vehicles by marking such spaces “Carpool Only.”

(B)   Carpool spaces shall be used only by carpool vehicles in which at least two of the persons will be employees or tenants of the proposed project, or where a Reciprocal Preferential Carpool Parking Agreement with other developments has been established.

(C)   Such carpool spaces shall be located near the building’s employee entrance(s) or at other preferential locations within the employee parking areas as approved by the Director of Public Works and Director of Community Development or their designees.

(D)   The total number of employee parking spaces shall be determined by using the following factors by type of use as specified in the City of Dana Point Municipal Code:

 

Type of Use

Percentage of Total Parking Devoted to Employee Parking

Commercial

30%

Office/Professional

85%

Industrial

90%

Hotel

20%

 

(2)    Bicycle Parking and Shower Facilities.

(A)   Bicycle parking and locker facilities shall be provided in a secure location for use by employees or tenants who commute to the site by bicycle. The number of facilities/racks to be provided shall be at the rate of at least five (5) racks for every one hundred (100) employees or fraction thereof.

(B)   A minimum of two (2) shower, changing, and locker facilities shall be provided, one each for men and women.

(3)    Information on Transportation Alternatives.

(A)   A commuter information area shall be provided that offers employees appropriate information on available transportation alternatives to the single-occupancy vehicle. This area shall be centrally located and accessible to all employees or tenants.

(B)   Information in the area shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

1.     Current maps, routes and schedules for public transit;

2.     Ridesharing match lists;

3.     Available employee/tenant incentives;

4.     Ridesharing promotional material supplied by commuter-oriented organizations.

(4)    Rideshare Vehicle Loading Areas.

(A)   The need for, design, and location of passenger loading areas to embark and disembark passengers from rideshare vehicles shall be reviewed by the Director of Public Works and the Director of Community Development or their designees.

(B)   Passenger loading areas shall be of a size large enough to accommodate the number of waiting vehicles equivalent to the rate of at least five (5) stalls for every one hundred (100) required parking spaces for the project.

(C)   The passenger loading areas shall be located as close as possible to the building’s employee entrance(s), and should be designed in a manner that does not impede vehicular circulation in the parking area.

(5)    Vanpool Vehicle Accessibility.

(A)   The design of all parking facilities shall incorporate provisions for access and parking of vanpool vehicles.

(B)   Where applicable, vanpool vehicle accessibility shall provide a minimum of seven (7) feet two (2) inches vertical clearance for those parking spaces and ramps to be used by such vehicles.

(C)   Vanpool parking spaces shall be located near the building’s employee entrance(s) or other preferential locations as approved by the Director of Public Works and the Director of Community Development or their designees.

(D)   The number of accessible vanpool parking stalls shall be at the rate of at least two stalls per every one hundred (100) employee parking stalls as determined in Section 9.43.040(a) (1)(D) above.

(6)    Bus Stop Improvements.

(A)   Bus stop improvements including bus pullouts, bus pads, and right-of-way for bus shelters shall be required for all applicable developments located along high traffic volume streets and established bus routes.

(B)   Bus stop improvements shall be determined in conformance with standard traffic engineering principles including, but not limited to, the following:

1.     The frequency and relative impact of blocked traffic due to stopped buses;

2.     The level of transit ridership at the location.

(b)    Option “B” Facility Improvements. Any combination of similar or alternate facilities, improvements or programs designed to achieve a reduction in transportation demand comparable to that effected by measures required under Option “A.” A report documenting the comparable performance of the substitute methods shall be submitted for review and approval by the Director of Community Development.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94)

 

9.43.050 Property Owner Responsibility.
        The property owner shall be responsible for complying with the provisions of this Chapter either directly or by delegating such responsibility to an employer or tenant. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.43.060 Enforcement and Penalties.
        For purposes of ensuring that applicable developments comply with all the provisions of this Chapter, the City shall, following written notice to subject property owner or designee (employer or tenant), initiate enforcement action(s) which may include, but not be limited to, the following:

(a)    Withholding issuance of a building permit;

(b)    Withholding issuance of a certificate of use and occupancy; or

(c)    Issuance of stop work order(s).

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 02-09, 7/23/02)

 

9.43.070 Chapter Definitions.
        For purposes of this Chapter, the following terms have been defined:

(a)    “Alternative Transportation Modes” means any mode of travel that serves as an alternative to the single occupant vehicle. This can include all forms of ridesharing such as carpooling or vanpooling, as well as public transit, bicycling or walking.

(b)    “Applicable Development” means any new development project that is determined to meet or exceed the employment threshold using the criteria contained in Section 9.43.030 of this Chapter.

(c)    “Developer” means the builder who is responsible for the planning, design, and construction of an applicable development project. A developer may be responsible for implementing the provisions of this Chapter as determined by the property owner.

(d)    “Employee” means any person employed by a firm, person(s), business, educational institution, non-profit agency or corporation, government agency or other entity which employs one hundred (100) or more persons at a single worksite.

(e)    “Employer” means any person(s), firm, business, education institution, government agency, non-profit agency or corporation, or other entity which employs one-hundred (100) or more persons at a single worksite, and may either be a property owner or tenant of an applicable development project.

(f)    “Facility(ies)” means the total of all buildings, structures, and grounds that encompass a worksite, at either single or multiple locations, that comprises or is associated with an applicable development project.

(g)    “New Development Project” means any non-residential project being processed where some level of discretionary action by a decision-making body is required.

(h)    “Property Owner” means the legal owner of the applicable development project who serves as the lessor to an employer or tenant.

(i)     “Tenant” means the lessee of facility space at an applicable development project who also serves as an employer.

(j)     “Worksite” means a building, or grouping of buildings located within the jurisdiction which are in actual physical contact or separated by a private or public roadway or other private or public right-of-way, and which are owned or operated by the same employer (or by employers under common control).

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 02-09, 7/23/02)

Chapter 9.45 COVENANTS FOR EASEMENTS
9.45.010 Authority for Adoption.
        This Chapter is adopted pursuant to Government Code Sections 65870 to 65875. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.45.020 Application of this Chapter to Development Projects.
        This Chapter shall apply to all development projects approved by the City, its Council, voters, officers, and employees, which are not a part of the subdivision process, and acts independently from any other authority or method for the City to require an easement.

        The provisions of this Chapter shall only apply when:

(a)    The covenant for easement is for:

(1)    Parking or loading;

(2)    Ingress, egress, or emergency access;

(3)    Joint access;

(4)    Light and/or air access;

(5)    Landscaping;

(6)    Open space purposes; and/or

(7)    To achieve a General Plan goal or policy.

(b)    At the time of recording the covenant of easement, all the real property benefitted or burdened by said covenant shall be in common ownership.

(c)    The development project for which the approval is sought is not an approval under the Subdivision Map Act.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.45.030 Procedures.
        Whenever the City Council determines, independently or based upon the recommendation of City staff, that a Covenant of Easement is needed for one or more of the purposes identified in Section 9.45.020, the approval, permit, or designation shall not become effective unless or until said Covenant of Easement is recorded.

(a)    Whenever a Covenant of Easement is required herein, the covenant shall either:

(1)    Be in a form and manner approved by the City Attorney based upon the advice of the Director of Public Works and the Director of Community Development; or

(2)    Be prepared by the City Attorney. Whenever the City Attorney prepares a Covenant of Easement, the City shall be entitled to reimbursement from the applicant for the costs associated therewith.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94)

 

9.45.040 Content of Covenant.
        Any Covenant of Easement prepared pursuant to this Chapter shall contain, at a minimum, the following elements:

(a)    Identification of the owner and/or owners of the real property to be burdened, including a statement that both the burdened and benefitted parcels are under common ownership;

(b)    A consent to said Covenant of Easement and the recording thereof by the record owner and/or owners to the Covenant;

(c)    Identification of the real property to be benefitted and to be burdened by said covenant including a legal description of the same;

(d)    A statement that said covenant shall act as an easement pursuant to Chapter 3 (commencing with Section 801) of Title 2 of Part 2 of Division 2 of the California Civil Code, including an express statement that said easement and Covenant of Easement shall not merge into any other interest in real property pursuant to California Government Code Section 65871(b);

(e)    A statement that said Covenant of Easement shall run with the land, be binding upon all successors in interest to the burdened real property, inure to all successors in interest to the real property benefitted, and shall be subject to California Civil Code Section 1104;

(f)    Identify the approval, permit, or designation granted which required the Covenant;

(g)    A statement identifying the Municipal Code Section which sets forth the procedure for release of the Covenant;

(h)    An appropriate section for execution of said Covenant of Easement by the record owner or owners of the subject real property.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.45.050 Release of Covenant—Procedures.
        Any person may request that the City Council make a determination as to whether or not the restriction imposed by the Covenant of Easement is still necessary to achieve the City’s land use goals. A person shall be entitled to only one (1) such determination in any twelve (12) month period.

(a)    To obtain a determination mentioned above, a “Request for Determination” application shall be made and filed with the City Clerk. Said application shall include a fee as set by resolution of the City Council.

(b)    Upon receipt of a completed application, the City Clerk shall set the matter for public hearing before the City Council and cause notice thereof to be given pursuant to Government Code Section 65090, and a copy of the notice shall be mailed to the record property owner or owners as shown on the Tax Assessor’s latest equalized role if other than the applicant and to all record property owners within five hundred (500) feet of the property.

(c)    At the conclusion of the public hearing, the City Council shall determine and make a finding, based upon substantial evidence in the record, whether or not the restriction imposed by the Covenant of Easement is still necessary to achieve the land use goals of the City. If the City Council determines that the Covenant for Easement is still required, the City Council shall by resolution determine that the need still exists.

(d)    If the City Council finds that the Covenant of Easement is no longer necessary, the City Council shall by resolution make the determination and finding and direct the City Attorney to prepare a release thereof and transmit the same to the City Clerk for recording.

(e)    The City Council’s determination in subsections (c) and (d) above shall be final and conclusive.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

Chapter 9.55 WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPE STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 18-07. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


9.55.010 Intent and Purpose.
        This Chapter promotes and encourages high quality landscape improvements in Dana Point that recognize and respect the limited availability of water in the State of California. These provisions are intended to effect landscapes that can be maintained with low water use serviced by irrigation systems which will not overuse or waste the available water supply. This Chapter requires the consideration of water conservation measures through the appropriate design, installation and maintenance of landscape and irrigation systems in accordance with Governor Brown’s April 1, 2015 Drought Executive Order (B-19-25).

        The purpose of the City’s Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance is to establish an alternative model acceptable under Executive Order No. B-19-25 as being at least as effective as the State Model Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance in the context of conditions in the City in order to:

(1)    Promote the benefits of consistent landscape ordinances with neighboring local and regional agencies;

(2)    Promote the values and benefits of landscapes while recognizing the need to invest water and other resources as efficiently as possible;

(3)    Establish a structure for planning, designing, installing, and maintaining and managing water efficient landscapes in new construction and rehabilitated projects;

(4)    Establish provisions for water management practices and water waste prevention for existing landscapes;

(5)    Use water efficiently without waste by setting a Maximum Applied Water Allowance (MAWA) as an upper limit for water use and reduce water use to the lowest practical amount; and

(6)    Encourage the use of economic incentives that promote the efficient use of water, such as a budget-based tiered-rate structure, providing rebate incentives and offering educational programs.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 09-08, 12/14/09; Ord. 16-02, 2/2/16)

 

9.55.020 Applicability.
(a)    Beginning February 1, 2016, and consistent with Executive Order No. B-29-15 all planting, irrigation, and landscape-related improvements shall comply with this Chapter and a landscape permit shall be required for the following types of landscape projects:

(1)    New landscape projects with an aggregate landscape area equal to or greater than 500 square feet, requiring a building or landscape permit, plan check or a discretionary permit;

(2)    Rehabilitated landscape projects with an aggregate landscape area, equal to or greater than 2,500 square feet, requiring a building or landscape permit, plan check or a discretionary permit;

(3)    New or rehabilitated landscape projects with an aggregate landscape area of 2,500 square feet or less may comply with the performance requirements of this ordinance or conform to the prescriptive measures contained in Appendix A of the Submittal Requirements and Guidelines;

(4)    New or rehabilitated projects using treated or untreated graywater or rainwater capture on site, any lot or parcels within the project that has less than 2,500 square feet of landscape area and meets the lot or parcel’s landscape water requirement (Estimated Total Water Use - ETWU) entirely with the treated or untreated graywater or through stored rainwater capture on site is subject only to Appendix A of the Submittal Requirements and Guidelines;

(5)    At cemeteries, Sections 2.9, 2.10, and Appendix C of the Submittal Requirements and Guidelines shall apply to new landscape installations and Sections 2.9, 2.10, and 3 of the Submittal Requirements and Guidelines shall apply to landscape rehabilitation projects.

(b)    Section 9.55.050(b) of the Landscape Water Use Standards of this Chapter shall apply to:

(1)    All landscape areas, whether installed prior to or after January 1, 2010; and

(2)    All landscape areas installed after February 1, 2016 to which Section 9.55.020(a) is applicable.

(c)    This Chapter does not apply to:

(1)    Registered local, State, or Federal historical sites;

(2)    Ecological restoration projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system;

(3)    Mined-land reclamation projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system; or

(4)    Plant collections, as part of botanical gardens and arboretums open to the public.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 09-08, 12/14/09; Ord. 16-02, 2/2/16)

 

9.55.030 General Provisions.
(a)    Landscape design and construction shall emphasize water conservation through the appropriate use and groupings of plant materials that are well adapted to particular sites and to local climatic, geological, or topographical conditions.

(b)    All landscape plan approvals are subject to and dependent upon the applicant complying with all applicable City ordinances, codes, regulations, adopted policies, and the payment of all applicable fees.

(c)    All landscape areas shall be maintained in an orderly, attractive and healthy condition. This shall include proper pruning, mowing of turf areas, weeding, removal of litter, fertilization, replacement of plants when necessary and the regular application of appropriate quantities of water to all landscape areas.

(d)    All irrigation systems shall be maintained in proper operating condition. Water line breaks, head/emitter ruptures, overspray or runoff conditions and other irrigation system failures shall be repaired immediately.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 09-08, 12/14/09; Ord. 16-02, 2/2/16)

 

9.55.040 Procedures.
        The submittal, review, revision and approval of all required landscape and irrigation plans shall be in compliance with the following provisions:

(a)    Prior to the issuance of grading permits or building permits, whichever occurs first, a Landscape Documentation Package shall be submitted to the City for review and approval and a landscape permit shall be issued for all landscape projects subject to the provisions of this Chapter. Any Landscape Documentation Package submitted to the City shall comply with the provisions of the Submittal Requirements and Guidelines.

(b)    The Landscape Documentation Package shall include a certification by a professional appropriately licensed to prepare landscape and irrigation plans in the State of California stating that the landscape design and water use calculations have been prepared by or under the supervision of the licensed professional and are certified to be in compliance with the provisions of this Chapter and the Submittal Requirements and Guidelines.

(1)    Landscape and irrigation plans shall be submitted to the City for review and approval with appropriate water use calculations. Water use calculations shall be consistent with calculations contained in the Submittal Requirements and Guidelines and shall be provided to the local water purveyors, as appropriate, under procedures determined by the City.

(2)    Verification of compliance of the landscape installation with the approved plans shall be obtained through a Certification of Completion in conjunction with a Certificate of Use and Occupancy or Permit Final process, as provided in the Submittal Requirements and Guidelines. The Certification of Completion shall be prepared by the record professional that prepared the landscape design certification required in Section 9.55.040(a) and in accordance with the provisions of Submittal Requirements and Guidelines.

(c)    Conceptual landscape and irrigation plans shall be required for all projects subject to this Chapter pursuant to Section 9.55.020, which also require discretionary approval. Conceptual landscape and irrigation plans shall be included as part of the application package submitted to the Community Development Department, and required for discretionary permits, and shall incorporate the principles of this Chapter. Final landscape and irrigation plans shall be required for all projects subject to this Chapter pursuant to Section 9.55.020.

(d)    All required landscape and irrigation plans shall be prepared in accordance with the Submittal Requirements and Guidelines available from the Community Development Department.

(e)    All final landscape and irrigation plans shall be prepared by a professional appropriately licensed in the State of California.

(f)    Conceptual landscape and irrigation plans shall be acted upon in conjunction with the specific discretionary approval application.

(g)    Final landscape and irrigation plans shall be submitted for review, and approved, by the Community Development Department prior to the issuance of grading permits or building permits, whichever occurs first.

(h)    Any modification to an approved final landscape or irrigation plan must first be approved by the Director of Community Development prior to the installation of the subject landscaping or irrigation.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 09-08, 12/14/09; Ord. 16-02, 2/2/16)

 

9.55.050 Landscape Water Use and Design Standards.
        The design and installation of all proposed landscape improvements subject to this Chapter shall be in compliance with the following general provisions:

(a)    For applicable landscape installation or rehabilitation projects subject to Section 9.55.020(a) of this Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance, the ETWU allowed for the landscape area shall not exceed the MAWA calculated using an ET adjustment factor of 0.7, except for special landscape areas where the MAWA is calculated using an ET adjustment factor of 1.0; or the design of the landscape area shall otherwise be shown to be equivalently water-efficient in a manner acceptable to the City; as provided in the Submittal Requirements and Guidelines.

(b)    Irrigation of all landscape areas shall be conducted in a manner conforming to the Submittal Requirements and Guidelines, and shall be subject to penalties and incentives for water conservation and water waste prevention as determined and implemented by the local water purveyors or as mutually agreed by local water purveyors and the City.

(c)    Landscape design shall illustrate a concern for aesthetic elements such as balance, scale, texture, form, and unity.

(d)    Landscape design shall address the functional aspects of landscaping such as grading, drainage, erosion control, minimal runoff, erosion prevention, wind barriers, provisions for shade and reduction of glare.

(e)    Landscape design shall provide for the planting of all unpaved areas with an effective combination of trees, ground cover, turf, shrubbery, and/or approved dry landscape materials including, but not limited to, accessory decorative outdoor landscape elements such as ponds, fountains, artificial turf, and paved or decorated surfaces, and sculptural elements.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 09-08, 12/14/09; Ord. 16-02, 2/2/16)

 

9.55.060 Delegation.
        The City may delegate to, or enter into a contract with, a local agency to implement, administer, and/or enforce any of the provisions of this Chapter on behalf of the City.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 09-08, 12/14/09; Ord. 16-02, 2/2/16)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 9.55.070 Definitions.
        The following definitions are applicable to this Chapter:

        “Aggregate landscape area” means areas related to production home neighborhoods, common interest developments, or other situations where multiple parcels are undergoing landscape development as one project, but may eventually be individually owned or maintained.

        “Applied water” means the portion of water supplied by the irrigation system to the landscape.

        “Budget-based tiered-rate structure” means tiered or block rates for irrigation accounts charged by the retail water agency in which the block definition for each customer is derived from lot size or irrigated area and the evapotranspiration requirements of landscaping.

        “Ecological restoration project” means a project where the site is intentionally altered to establish a defined, indigenous, historic ecosystem.

        “Estimated Total Water Use (ETWU)” means the average annual total amount of water estimated to be necessary to keep plants in a healthy state, calculated as provided in the Submittal Requirements and Guidelines. It is based on the reference evapotranspiration rate, the size of the landscape area, plant water use factors, and the relative irrigation efficiency of the irrigation system.

        “ET adjustment factor” or “ETAF” is equal to the plant factor divided by the irrigation efficiency factor for a landscape project, as described in the Submittal Requirements and Guidelines. The ETAF is calculated in the context of local reference evapotranspiration, using site-specific plant factors and irrigation efficiency factors that influence the amount of water that needs to be applied to the specific landscape area.

        A combined plant mix with a site-wide average plant factor of 0.5 (indicating a moderate water need) and average irrigation efficiency of 0.71 produces an ET adjustment factor of (0.7) = (0.5/0.71), which is the standard of water use efficiency generally required by this Chapter and the Submittal Requirements and Guidelines, except that the ETAF for a special landscape area shall not exceed 1.0.

        “Hardscapes” means any durable material or feature (pervious and non-pervious) installed in or around a landscape area, such as pavements or walls. Pools and other water features are considered part of the landscape area and not considered hardscapes for purposes of this Chapter.

        “Irrigation efficiency” means the measurement of the amount of water beneficially used divided by the amount of water applied. Irrigation efficiency is derived from measurements and estimates of irrigation system characteristics and management practices. The irrigation efficiency for purposes of this Chapter are 0.75 for overhead spray devices and 0.81 for drip systems.

        “Landscape area” means all the planting areas, turf areas, and water features in a landscape design plan subject to the Maximum Applied Water Allowance and estimated applied water use calculations. The landscape area does not include footprints of buildings or structures, sidewalks, driveways, parking lots, decks, patios, gravel or stone walks, other pervious or non-pervious hardscapes, and other non-irrigated areas designated for non-development (e.g., open spaces and existing native vegetation).

        “Landscape contractor” means a person licensed by the State of California to construct, maintain, repair, install, or subcontract the development of landscape systems.

        “Landscape documentation package” means the documents required to be provided to the City for review and approval of landscape design projects, as described in the Submittal Requirements and Guidelines.

        “Landscape permit” means a permit issued by the Community Development Department for the purposes of meeting the landscape area thresholds and design requirements under Section 9.55.020 of this Chapter and the corresponding Submittal Requirements and Guidelines.

        “Landscape project” means total area of landscape in a project, as provided in the definition of “landscape area,” meeting the requirements under Section 9.55.020 of this Chapter.

        “Local agency” means a city or county, including a charter city or charter county, that is authorized to implement, administer, and/or enforce any of the provisions of this Chapter. The local agency may be responsible for the enforcement or delegation of enforcement of this Chapter including, but not limited to, plan check, issuance of permits, and inspection of a landscape project.

        “Local water purveyor” means any entity, including a public agency, district, city, county, or private water company that provides retail water service.

        “Maximum Applied Water Allowance” or “MAWA” means the upper limit of annual applied water for the established landscape area as specified in Section 2.2 of the Submittal Requirements and Guidelines. It is based upon the area’s reference evapotranspiration, the ET adjustment factor, and the size of the landscape area. The Estimated Total Water Use shall not exceed the Maximum Applied Water Allowance. MAWA = (ETo) (0.62) [(ETAF x LA) + ((1-ETAF) x SLA)]

        “Mined-land reclamation projects” means any surface mining operation with a reclamation plan approved in accordance with the Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975.

        “New construction” means, for the purposes of this Chapter, a new building with a landscape or other new landscape such as a park, playground, or greenbelt without an associated building.

        “Non-pervious” means any surface or natural material that does not allow for the passage of water through the material and into the underlying soil.

        “Pervious” means any surface or material that allows the passage of water through the material and into the underlying soil.

        “Plant factor” or “plant water use factor” is a factor, when multiplied by ETo, that estimates the amount of water needed by plants. For purposes of this Chapter, the plant factor range for very low water use plants is 0 to 0.1; the plant factor range for low water use plants is 0.1 to 0.3; the plant factor range for moderate water use plants is 0.4 to 0.6; and the plant factor range for high water use plants is 0.7 to 1.0. Plant factors cited in this Chapter are derived from the publication “Water Use Classification of Landscape Species.” Plant factors may also be obtained from horticultural researchers from academic institutions or professional associations as approved by the California Department of Water Resources (DWR).

        “Recycled water” or “reclaimed water” means treated or recycled waste water of a quality suitable for non-potable uses such as landscape irrigation and water features. This water is not intended for human consumption.

        “Reference evapotranspiration” or “ETo” means a standard measurement of environmental parameters which affect the water use of plants. ETo is given expressed in inches per day, month, or year as represented in Appendix D of the Submittal Requirements and Guidelines, and is an estimate of the evapotranspiration of a large field of four- to seven-inch tall, cool-season grass that is well watered. Reference evapotranspiration is used as the basis of determining the Maximum Applied Water Allowances.

        “Rehabilitated landscape” means any re-landscaping project that meets the applicability criteria of Section 9.55.020(a), where the modified landscape area is greater than 2,500 square feet.

        “Smart irrigation controller” means an automatic irrigation controller utilizing either evapotranspiration or soil moisture sensor data with non-volatile memory and shall be required for irrigation scheduling in all irrigation systems, recommending U.S. EPA WaterSense labeled devices as applicable.

        “Special landscape area” means an area of the landscape dedicated solely to edible plants such as orchards and vegetable gardens, areas irrigated with recycled water, water features using recycled water, and recreational areas dedicated to active play such as parks, sports fields, golf courses, and where turf provides a playing surface.

        “Submittal Requirements and Guidelines” refers to the Submittal Requirements and Guidelines for implementation of this Chapter, as adopted by the City, which describes procedures, calculations, and requirements for landscape projects subject to this Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance.

        “Turf” means a ground cover surface of mowed grass. Annual bluegrass, Kentucky bluegrass, Perennial ryegrass, Red fescue, and Tall fescue are cool-season grasses. Bermudagrass, Kikuyugrass, Seashore Paspalum, St. Augustinegrass, Zoysiagrass, and Buffalo grass are warm-season grasses.

        “Valve” means a device used to control the flow of water in an irrigation system.

        “Water feature” means a design element where open water performs an aesthetic or recreational function. Water features include ponds, lakes, waterfalls, fountains, artificial streams, spas, and swimming pools (where water is artificially supplied). The surface area of water features is included in the high water use hydrozone of the landscape area. Constructed wetlands used for on-site wastewater treatment, habitat protection or storm water best management practices that are not irrigated and used solely for water treatment or storm water retention are not water features and, therefore, are not subject to the water budget calculation.

(Added by Ord. 09-08, 12/14/09; amended by Ord. 16-02, 2/2/16)

Chapter 9.61 ADMINISTRATION OF ZONING*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 18-01 and 18-07. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


9.61.010 Intent and Purpose.
        The intent and purpose of this Chapter is to establish regulations for the effective and efficient implementation of this Code. This Chapter contains the procedures for the interpretation of the Code, criteria for acceptance of applications for discretionary actions, standards for processing of applications and requirements for the notice and conduct of public hearings. In combination, the provisions of this Chapter provide for a system of development review that is open to the public and responsive to the needs of the community. This Chapter will work to the benefit of all in the community by providing for the comprehensive management and implementation of this Code. Where the standards in this Chapter and Chapter 9.69 “Coastal Development Permit” differ, the standards of Chapter 9.69 shall be used for purposes of processing coastal development permits. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 97-05, 9/9/97)

 

9.61.020 Interpretation, Administration and Enforcement.
(a)    Authority and Procedure for Interpretations.

(1)    The Director of Community Development is hereby charged with the duty of providing interpretations of the Zoning Code.

(2)    The interpretations of the Director of Community Development are subject to the policy directives of the Planning Commission and City Council.

(3)    Any appeal of decisions by the Director of Community Development shall be made pursuant to Section 9.61.110, Appeal Procedures.

(4)    All interpretations of the Code made by the Director shall be recorded in writing. The record of interpretations made by the Director shall be kept on file in the Community Development Department and shall be available to the public upon request. These interpretations shall be incorporated into the Zoning Code pursuant to the provisions of Section 9.61.080, at such time as is deemed appropriate by the Director.

(b)    Planning Commission Administration of Code. The Planning Commission of the City of Dana Point is responsible for administering the Zoning Code, making recommendations to the City Council on matters governed by the Code, and initiating amendments to the Code when necessary to promote the public health, safety, or welfare.

(c)    Procedure for Enforcement. When any use or structure is found to be in violation of the provisions of this Code, the City Council may direct the City Attorney to commence appropriate civil, administrative, or criminal proceedings for the discontinuation or removal of the illegal use or structure in the manner prescribed by law.

(d)    Investigation or Inspection of Property. Any duly authorized city official may enter any premises, building, or structure at any reasonable hour, after either obtaining the consent of the owner or other responsible individual or pursuant to an inspection warrant, for investigation or inspection of such premises, building, or structure to determine whether said building, premises, or structure is in violation of this Code. Every person who denies, prevents, obstructs or attempts to deny, prevent, or obstruct such access pursuant to an inspection warrant is guilty of a misdemeanor.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.61.030 Penalty for Violation of the Code.
        Penalty for violation of the Code is described in Dana Point Municipal Code, Title 1, Section 1.01.200. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 9.61.040 Procedures for Applications Requiring Discretionary Action.
(a)    Legislative and Judicial Actions. Legislative action, implemented by adoption of an Ordinance by the City Council, is required for General Plan Amendments, Local Coastal Program Amendments, Specific Plans, Zone Change Amendments, and Zone Text Amendments. General Plan Amendments and Specific Plan Amendments may only be initiated in accordance with Section 9.61.080(b). Judicial action, implemented by adoption of a Resolution by the Planning Commission, is required for Specific Plan Amendments, Conditional Use Permits, Variances, Site Development Permits, and Tentative Tract/Parcel Maps.

(b)    Initiation of an Application. Applications requiring discretionary or judicial action may be initiated by the City Council, Planning Commission, any person who is able to demonstrate an ownership interest in the proposed application and the subject property, or the authorized agent of any person with an ownership interest in the subject property.

(c)    Acceptance of Applications.

(1)    When a final action on any given application is a denial and conditions surrounding that application have not substantially changed, the Director of Community Development

        shall reject any new applications for any identical or substantially similar proposal for a period of twelve (12) months from the final action date on the original application.

(2)    Upon submittal of a development application by an applicant, in accordance with the Permit Streamlining Act, Government Code Section 65920 et seq., the Director of Community Development shall have thirty (30) days to review the development application to determine if the application is complete pursuant to subsection (d). Prior to the end of that thirty (30) day period, the City shall notify the applicant in writing of any deficiencies in the application which make the application incomplete. This provision shall not apply to legislative actions by the City.

(3)    If an applicant is notified in writing that a development application is incomplete, the applicant shall have three (3) months from the date of notification to revise and resubmit the application. If the applicant fails to revise and resubmit the application within the said three (3) month period, the application shall be deemed withdrawn. Thereafter, a resubmittal of an application for the same site shall constitute a new development application subject to the payment of new fees and commencing a new timeline for City action on the project.

(4)    The Director of Community Development, upon written request by the applicant or by the exercise of appropriate discretion, may provide a one-time extension of the three-month timeline for the revision and resubmittal of an incomplete application. Such extension shall not exceed sixty (60) days.

(5)    The Director of Community Development or designee may send a courtesy notice to the applicant that if an incomplete application is not rectified by the submittal of additional information necessary to make the application complete, that the application will be deemed to be withdrawn. However, this notice is strictly a courtesy to an applicant and failure by the City to send, or the applicant to receive such notice shall not operate to negate the effective withdrawal of the application.

(6)    The provisions of Government Code Section 65920 et seq., are applicable to City actions in processing development applications but are not applicable to legislative actions of the City.

(d)    Time Limit for Final Action on Development Project Applications.

(1)    Applications Requiring an Environmental Impact Report. Those applications accepted as complete and requiring an Environmental Impact Report pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act, (CEQA), the State Guidelines and the City of Dana Point CEQA Guidelines, shall be scheduled for a public hearing so that final action may be taken within one (1) year of the acceptance of the compete application unless the applicant requests, or consents to, an extension of time.

(2)    All Other Applications. All other development applications accepted as complete by the Director of Community Development, shall be scheduled for public hearing so that final action may be taken within six (6) months of the date the application was deemed complete, unless the applicant requests, or consents to, an extension of time.

(3)    Conflicts with Other Provisions. When the time limits established by other provisions of this Code (except for Chapter 9.69 “Coastal Development Permit” are in conflict with the time limits established by this Section, the provision with the shorter duration shall apply.

(e)    Requirements for Complete Applications.

(1)    Applications shall be made on a form prescribed by the Director of Community Development and shall contain the following information and other information as requested by the Director. The accuracy of all information, maps, and lists submitted shall be the responsibility of the applicant. The Director may reject any application that does not supply, at a minimum, the following information:

(A)   The name and address of the applicant and property owners.

(B)   Evidence that the applicant:

1.     Is the owner of the premises involved; or

2.     Has written permission of the owner or owners to make the application; or

3.     Is or will be the plaintiff in an action of eminent domain to acquire the premises involved; or

4.     Is a public agency negotiating to acquire a portion of the premises involved; and

5.     Has paid the required application fees and deposits or is exempt from such fees and deposits.

(C)   The location of the subject property (address or vicinity).

(D)   The legal description of the subject property and two (2) copies of a recent (within 6 months of the submittal date) preliminary title report for the subject property.

(E)   A detailed written description of the nature and specifics of the development proposal or requested action.

(F)    Two (2) self-addressed, stamped envelopes to be used for notification of application completeness and final action on the application.

(2)    The following submittals are required for any application for a Conditional Use Permit, Variance, Site Development Permit, Coastal Development Permit, or other discretionary entitlements.

(A)   All required written information and colors/materials boards shall be submitted in eight and one-half (8½) inch by eleven (11) inch format.

(B)   All required plans shall be submitted in a format no smaller than eight and one-half (8½) by eleven (11) inches and no larger than twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36) inches. Larger plans must be folded to eight and one-half (8½) inches by eleven (11) inches. The twenty-four (24) inch by thirty-six (36) inch size plans are preferred.

(C)   Indicate in writing and with graphics the nature, situation, and development of existing uses, buildings, and structures within one hundred (100) feet of the subject property and the effect the proposed application may have on those uses, buildings, and structures.

(D)   Explain how the requested application will not cause negative impacts, endanger, or otherwise imperil the public health, safety, or general welfare, and will be compatible with and an enhancement to the subject site, surrounding properties and the City (one copy).

(E)   Provide a detailed site plan indicating the existing and proposed area and dimensions of a project site; all existing features (streets, alleys, driveways, buildings, vegetation) within fifty (50) feet of the project boundary; the location, dimension, grades and descriptions of all existing and proposed uses, structures, yards, walls, fences, parking and loading facilities, landscaping, easements, utilities, dedications, and any other use and development features relevant to the application. All site plan drawings shall be drawn to an engineering scale between 1²:10¢ and 1²:40¢, or other scale appropriate to the project and acceptable to the Director of Community Development (12 sets).

(F)    All existing and proposed building and structural elevations, and the materials and colors of all existing and proposed structural and surface components. All architectural elevations shall be drawn to an architectural scale of either 1²:8¢ or 1²:4¢, or other scale appropriate to the project and acceptable to the Director of Community Development (12 sets).

(G)   Floor plans for each existing and proposed floor indicating the size (dimension and area) and use of each room or area. All floor plans shall be drawn to an architectural scale of either 1²:8¢ or l²:4¢, or other scale appropriate to the project and acceptable to the Director of Community Development (12 sets).

(H)   The required site plan shall indicate the dimensions and state of improvement of the existing and proposed streets or easements providing access to the subject site. The plans shall include all access features on, and within fifty (50) feet of the subject site. Applications which propose access from a Circulation Element roadway shall provide plans showing all access features within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the subject site as determined by the Director of Public Works.

(I)    A written list and description of other existing or proposed permits or approvals for the subject site (one copy).

(J)    Such other information as the Director of Community Development or designee may request in writing to clearly identify the conformity of the application to the General Plan and/or the Dana Point Municipal Code.

(K)   Ownership information as follows:

1.     Two (2) copies of the most recent County Assessor map, drawn to scale, showing the location of all properties included in the application; the location of all highways, streets, and alleys; and the location and dimensions of all lots or parcels of land within a five hundred (500) foot radius of the exterior boundaries of the subject property. If the subject property is located in the Coastal Zone, a coastal development permit is required, and the map shall also illustrate all lots or parcels of land within a one hundred (100) foot radius of the exterior boundaries of the subject property.

2.     A list of the names and addresses of all persons who are shown on the most recent assessment roll of the County of Orange as owners of properties within a five hundred (500) foot radius of the exterior boundaries of the subject property. If the subject property is located in the Coastal Zone, the applicant shall also submit a second list of the addresses of all dwelling units within one hundred (100) feet of the exterior boundaries of the subject property.

3.     Two (2) complete sets of stamped (first class postage) No. 10 business envelopes which are addressed to the property owners on the above list. If the subject property is located in the Coastal Zone, a coastal development permit application is required, and the applicant shall also submit two (2) complete sets of stamped envelopes which are addressed to the residents of dwelling units within one hundred (100) feet of the subject property.

                Both sets of envelopes shall also include envelopes addressed to the property owner, the owner’s agent, the project architect and project engineer.

(3)    Submittal requirements for General Plan Amendments, Zoning Text Amendments, Local Coastal Program Amendments shall be the same as in Sections 9.61.040(e)(1) and (2)(I), (J), and (K) above, and shall include a written statement describing how the proposed amendment will be consistent with the General Plan, beneficial to the surrounding neighborhood and the community as a whole and in keeping with the protection of the public health, safety, and general welfare.

(4)    Additional Specific Information.

(A)   An application for a Conditional Use Permit shall also include evidence to substantiate the basis for approval as provided in Section 9.65.040, Basis for Approval, Conditional Approval or Denial of a Conditional Use Permit.

(B)   An application for a Variance shall also include evidence proposed to substantiate the basis for approval as provided in Section 9.67.040, Basis for Approval, Conditional Approval or Denial of a Variance.

(C)   An application for a Coastal Development Permit shall also include evidence proposed to substantiate the basis for approval as provided in Section 9.69.060, Basis for Approval, Conditional Approval or Denial of a Conditional Use Permit.

(D)   An application for Site Development Permit shall also include evidence proposed to substantiate the basis for approval as provided in Section 9.71.040, Basis for Approval, Conditional Approval or Denial of a Site Development Permit.

(f)    Procedure for Applications Made Prior to Code Amendment. When an application is filed, and deemed complete, prior to the adoption of an amendment to the Code (or prior to effective certification of the Code amendment by the Coastal Commission for development in the Coastal Zone), processing of the application may continue exempt from the provisions of the pending amendment. Applications filed or deemed complete after a code amendment is adopted (or after effective certification of the Code amendment by the Coastal Commission for development in the Coastal Zone), shall proceed pursuant to the applicable provisions of the amended Code.

(g)    Recommendation by the Director of Community Development. The Director of Community Development shall review the application in accordance with the regulations and standards of this Code and relevant adopted plans and ordinances of the City and transmit a recommendation on the application to the Planning Commission.

(h)    Action by the Planning Commission.

(1)    A public hearing shall be scheduled before the Planning Commission and notice given pursuant to Section 9.61.040.

(2)    The Planning Commission may refer the application back to the Director of Community Development for further review. Such referral shall be accompanied with clear directives for recommended changes to the site plan or design features of the project.

(3)    If the application is not referred back to the Director of Community Development, the Planning Commission shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny an application for discretionary approval. Action on the application may be continued to a future meeting pursuant to the applicable provisions of Article 5, Chapter 4.5 of the California Government Code. If applicable, the decision approving or conditionally approving the application shall state the period of time for which the approval shall be valid.

(4)    The applicant or any interested party may file an appeal of the Planning Commission action pursuant to Section 9.61.110. The appeal hearing shall be noticed as provided in Section 9.61.050.

(5)    When a public hearing is required, notice of the hearing shall be given in accordance with the provisions of Section 9.61.050 of this Code.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94; Ord. 94-21, 12/13/94; Ord. 97-05, 9/9/97)

 

9.61.050 Notice and Conduct of Public Hearings.
(a)    Notice of Hearings for Review of Applications. No less than ten (10) calendar days prior to the date of a public hearing on development applications, the Director of Community Development shall give notice including the time and the place at which the application will be heard, the identity of the hearing body or officer, nature of the application (including but not limited to the date of filing of the application, the name of the applicant, the file number assigned to the application, and a description of the development), a brief description of the general procedure of the City of Dana Point concerning the conduct of hearing and local actions, and the general location of the property under consideration. If the application is for a coastal development permit which is appealable to the Coastal Commission, the notice shall indicate this fact and shall describe the process for local and Coastal Commission appeals, including any local fees required. (14 Cal. Code of Regulations/13565, 13568). The Director shall observe the following notice requirements:

(1)    The notice shall be posted in three (3) places in the City of Dana Point designated by Resolution of the City Council.

(2)    The notice shall be advertised in a newspaper circulated within the City of Dana Point.

(3)    The notice shall be mailed via first class mail to the applicant(s); to the property owner(s) or the property owner’s agent(s); to all persons listed as owners of property within five hundred (500) feet of the exterior boundary of the subject property on the notification list required in Section 9.61.040, and if the subject property is located in the Coastal Zone, to the office of the Coastal Commission having jurisdiction over the City of Dana Point and to all persons listed as occupants of dwelling units within one hundred (100) feet of the exterior boundary of the subject property on the notification list required in Section 9.61.040.

                Notice shall also be provided to anyone filing a written request and paying the cost for notification and to such other persons whose property might, in the Director’s judgment, be affected by the proposed application. For coastal development permit applications, the Director shall also provide notice by first class mail free of charge to all persons who have requested to be on the mailing list for that development project or the mailing list for all coastal decisions within the City of Dana Point.

(4)    If the Director finds that the posting and mailing of notices prescribed in this Section may not give sufficient notice to the affected property owners, then additional notices may be posted at locations which are best suited to reach the attention of, and properly inform those persons who may be affected.

(5)    When the proposed entitlement affects more than 1,000 (one thousand) property owners, the required notice may be provided by placing a 1/8 page display advertisement in a newspaper circulated within the City of Dana Point. Such notice shall be considered an acceptable substitute for the published notice required in subsection (2) and the mailed notice required in subsection (3). However, in the case of coastal development permit applications, newspaper notice shall not substitute for the mailed notice required in subsection (3) above.

(6)    The notice shall be sent to public officers, departments, bureaus, or agencies which, in the determination of the Director of Community Development, could be affected by the application or otherwise require noticing.

(7)    When a Negative Declaration is recommended for adoption pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), notice of intent to adopt a Negative Declaration shall be published no less than twenty-one (21) days prior to the hearing date, or thirty (30) days prior to the hearing date for applications which require circulation of the Negative Declaration to the State Clearinghouse.

(8)    Notice for Timeshare Properties.

(A)   If a timeshare property falls within the one hundred (100) foot occupant-notification radius for Coastal Development Permits described in (8) above, all shareholders shall be notified as described in subsection (3) above.

(B)   If a timeshare property falls outside the one hundred (100) foot occupant-notification radius described in subsection (8) above, but within the five hundred (500) foot property owner-notification radius described in subsection (3) above, notices shall be sent to the property manager/sales agent for the timeshare, the shareholders

 

        association for the timeshare where one exists, and one notice to each physical unit in the timeshare, addressed to “Occupant.”

(b)    Notice for General Plan Amendments. Prior to any amendment to the General Plan, the Community Development Department shall forward the proposed action to the following entities:

(1)    Any City or County within or abutting the area covered by the proposal, and any special district which may be significantly affected by the proposed action.

(2)    Any elementary, high school, or unified school district within the area covered by the proposed action.

(3)    The Local Agency Formation Commission.

(4)    Any area-wide planning agency whose operations may be significantly affected by the proposed action.

(5)    Any Federal Agency if its operations or land within its jurisdiction may be significantly affected by the proposed action.

(c)    Notice of Public Hearings for Revocations. The Director of Community Development, in giving notice of a public hearing to revoke a Conditional Use Permit, Variance, or Site Development Permit, Coastal Development Permit, or other entitlement, shall observe the noticing requirements set forth as follows:

(1)    Notification shall be provided as prescribed in Section 9.61.050; and

(2)    The Director shall serve the owner of the premises involved written notice of such hearing, by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested and by posting a copy of said notice in a conspicuous location on the property.

(d)    Continuances. If, for any reason, testimony on a case cannot be heard or completed at the time set for such hearing, the Planning Commission may continue or extend the hearing to another time. Before adjournment or recess, the Planning Commission chairman shall publicly announce the time and place at which the hearing will be continued.

(e)    Failure To Receive Notice. The failure of any person or entity to receive notice required pursuant to this Section shall not constitute grounds to invalidate the proceedings or actions of the City in regards to the item for which the notice was given.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-21, 12/13/94; Ord. 97-05, 9/9/97)

 

9.61.060 Fees and Deposits.
(a)    Filing Fees and Deposits. Each applicant for an Amendment, Zone Changes, Conditional Use Permit, Variance, Site Development Permit, Coastal Development Permit or other entitlement or relief provided for in this Code shall pay the fees and costs established by Resolution of the City Council upon the filing of an application such entitlement or relief. Said Resolution may be periodically amended by resolution to reflect the cost of processing such applications.

(b)    Waiver of Fees. For special circumstances, the City Council may provide for the waiver or reduction of filing fees or deposits that have been established by Resolution of the City Council. The special circumstances may include, but not be limited to, cases of excessive hardship, projects that provide exceptional benefits to the public, projects sponsored by a non-profit applicant, or projects that provide very low, low, or moderate income housing.

(c)    Deficiencies and Refunds. The following provisions apply when full payment has not been made for an application or when an application is withdrawn:

(1)    If any application is withdrawn, as provided in Section 9.61.070, within thirty (30) days from the date the application is filed, but prior to the publication of the notice of hearing, the City shall refund fifty (50) percent of the fees paid.

(2)    If any application is withdrawn, as provided in Section 9.61.070 after thirty (30) days from the date the application is filed, but prior to the publication of the notice of hearing, the City shall refund twenty-five (25) percent of the fees paid.

(3)    No refund shall be made after the notice of hearing has been published.

(4)    If the application fee is a deposit based on an hourly rate, the refund will be the difference between the time expended by the City and the amount of the deposit.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.61.070 Procedure for Withdrawal of an Application.
        Any application for Amendment, Zone Change, Conditional Use Permit, Variance, Site Development Permit, Coastal Development Permit, Appeal or other application for permit, entitlement, or relief provided for in this Code may be withdrawn at any time prior to a public hearing by filing with the Director of Community Development a written request for withdrawal. The request for withdrawal shall be signed by all persons who signed the original application or their designated agents or successors. Any such application or petition may be withdrawn after commencement of a public hearing thereon, with consent of the hearing body. The Director of Community Development shall provide to the Coastal Commission written notice of the withdrawal of a coastal development permit application. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 97-05, 9/9/97)

 

9.61.075 Amendment and Modifications to Discretionary Permits.
        An approved discretionary permit, variance or other entitlement may be amended or modified as long as the amendment is found to further the purposes of the Zoning Ordinance. An amendment request shall be filed prior to the expiration date of the previously approved permit. The Director of Community Development shall make one of the following determinations regarding the request:

(a)    Minor Amendments. If requested amendments are found to be minor in nature by the Director of Community Development, the amendments may be approved administratively.

(b)    Major Amendments. If the Director of Community Development determines that the requested amendments are significant enough to require a discretionary review, then the amendments shall be referred to the original decision making authority. If the original application for the project required a public hearing, then the original decision making authority’s review of amendments shall require a public hearing in accordance with Section 9.61.050, Notice and Conduct of Public Hearings.

(Added by Ord. 08-06, 6/3/08)

 

9.61.080 Amendments.
(a)    Scope of Amendments. Amendments may be proposed to change zoning districts, modify district boundaries or to revise the provisions of Title 9 to add, remove, or modify regulations pursuant to the provisions of the Government Code. Amendments may be filed to add, remove, of modify the

        goals and policies of the General Plan or to change the land use designations therein. Amendments to Title 9 and to the Land Use Element, Urban Design Element, and Conservation/Open Space Element of the General Plan shall not be effective in the coastal zone for local coastal program purposes unless and until effectively certified by the Coastal Commission as an amendment to the Local Coastal Program. An amendment to the Local Coastal Program shall be processed pursuant to the provisions of Section 9.61.080(e) below.

(b)    Amendment Initiation. The City Council, the Planning Commission, or staff may initiate an amendment to the text of the Zoning Code. Amendments involving a change in zoning district boundaries or a rezoning of property may only be initiated by the City Council, the Planning Commission, or the owner of the subject property. Only the City Council may initiate General Plan Amendments. Initiation of an amendment by the City Council

 

 

        or the Planning Commission may be directed at a regular meeting of either body. Following initiation of the amendment, the procedural steps identified in Sections 9.61.080(g) and 9.61.050 will be followed.

(c)    General Plan Amendments.

(1)    Frequency of Amendments. No mandatory Element of the General Plan shall be amended more frequently than four (4) times during any calendar year. This limitation on frequency does not apply to amendments to the General Plan requested and necessary for a single development of residential units, at least twenty-five (25) percent of which will be occupied or available to persons or families of low or moderate income.

(2)    Planning Commission Recommendation. The Planning Commission shall hold at least one public hearing and make a written recommendation on the adoption of an amendment to the General Plan. The Planning Commission shall forward its recommendation to the City Council.

(3)    Public Hearing. A General Plan Amendment requires a public hearing before the City Council. Any proposed amendment to the General Plan not excluded by (1) above, requires application and noticing as outlined in this Chapter.

(4)    Amendment by Resolution. The City Council shall adopt amendments to the General Plan by Resolution. The City Council may approve, modify, or disapprove the recommendation of the Planning Commission. Any substantial changes proposed by the City Council not previously considered by the Planning Commission shall first be referred to the Planning Commission for its consideration.

(d)    Zoning Code Amendments.

(1)    Types of Amendments. There are two types of amendments to the Zoning Code including:

                Zone Text Amendment — a revision, correction, addition or modification to the text of the Zoning Code, including changes to development standards, use regulations or procedures.

                Zone Change — a change to the zoning designation of a property or properties on the Zoning Map.

(2)    Planning Commission Recommendation. The Planning Commission shall hold at least one public hearing and make a written recommendation on the adoption of a Zone Text Amendment or Zone Change. Such recommendation shall include the reasons for the recommendation and the relationship of the proposed amendment to the General Plan. The Planning Commission shall send its recommendation to the City Council.

(3)    City Council Consideration. The City Council shall hold at least one public hearing for any Zoning Code amendment. The City Council may approve, modify, or disapprove the recommendations of the Planning Commission; provided that any modifications to the proposed amendment are referred to the Planning Commission for report. The Planning Commission is not required to hold a public hearing to review the modifications sent by the City Council. No further City Council action is required when the Planning Commission has recommended disapproval of a Zoning Code amendment.

(4)    Amendment by Ordinance. The City Council shall adopt amendments to the Zoning Code by Ordinance.

(e)    Local Coastal Program Amendments. A Local Coastal Program Amendment (LCPA) is required for modifications to the policies text, figures, tables, charts, and graphs, or land use designations, or land use and development standards contained in the portions of the General Plan Land Use Element, Land Use Map, Zoning Code or the Zoning Map effectively certified by the Coastal Commission as the LCP, for any property in the Coastal Zone. Amendments to the existing certified Dana Point Specific Plan/Local Coastal Program shall be processed in accordance with the procedures contained in that LCP. Amendments shall be processed in accordance with the following provisions:

(1)    Frequency of Submittals of LCP Amendments to the Coastal Commission. No more than three (3) submittals of “major” LCPAs to the Coastal Commission are permitted per calendar year, although there is no limit to the number of changes which can be included in each submittal. There is also no limit on the number of submittals of “minor” LCPAs which may be submitted to the Coastal Commission. Coastal Act/30514(b))

(2)    Types of Amendments.

(A)   “Major Amendments”. A major amendment is any amendment which does not meet the criteria for a “minor” or a “de minimis” amendment as listed below.

(B)   “Minor Amendments”. A “minor” amendment to an LCP includes but is not limited to the following:

1.     Amendments to address the certification of zoning ordinances, zoning district maps or other implementing actions for newly-annexed or detached territory, when either of the following occur:

a.     The certified land use plan and zoning designations of the City of Dana Point and the previous or new jurisdiction(s) of the geographic area are equivalent, or;

b.     The Coastal Commission has certified proposed pre-annexation zoning for the City of Dana Point.

2.     Wording changes in the implementation program which make a use as designated in the zoning ordinances, zoning district maps or other implementing actions more specific without changing the type, location, or intensity of use and which are found by the Executive Director of the Coastal Commission or the Coastal Commission to be consistent with the land use plan as certified by the Coastal Commission.

3.     Changes in the kinds, location, intensity or density of uses covering areas specifically certified by the Coastal Commission as acceptable alternative land uses that become effective upon occurrence of specified events (such as the availability of sewer service) as authorized in the Land Use Plan.

4.     For the Land Use Plan only:

a.     The correction, reorganization, revisions, or deletion of certified language which when taken together does not change the kind, location, intensity or density of use or modify the resource protection measures for any area or property.

b.     Additions or revisions to certified policies which impose further conditions, restrictions or limitations on any use which might adversely affect the resources of the coastal zone, if those amendments do not conflict with any policy of Chapter Three of the (Coastal Act or with any other certified land use plan policy.

5.     Change in the notification and hearing procedures that is consistent with the requirements of the Coastal Act. (Coastal Act/30501, 30514(c); 14 Cal. Code of Regulations/13554, 13555)

(C)   “De Minimis Amendments”.

1.     The Executive Director of the Coastal Commission may determine that a proposed local coastal program amendment is de minimis if the Executive Director determines that a proposed amendment would have no impact, either individually or cumulatively, on coastal resources, is consistent with the policies of Chapter 3 of the Coastal Act (commencing with Section 30200), and meets the following criteria:

a.     The City of Dana Point, at least twenty-one (21) days prior to the date of submitting the proposed amendment to the Executive Director, has provided public notice, and provided a copy to the Coastal Commission, which specifies the dates and places where comments will be accepted on the proposed amendment, contains a brief description of the proposed amendment, and states the address where copies of the proposed amendment are available for public review, by one of the following procedures:

i.      Publication, not fewer times than required by Section 6061 of the Government Code, in a newspaper of general circulation in the area affected by the proposed amendment. If more than one area will be affected, the notice shall be published in the newspaper of largest circulation from among the newspapers of general circulation in those areas.

ii.     Posting of the notice by the local government both onsite and offsite in the area affected by the proposed amendment.

iii.    Direct mailing to the owners and occupants of contiguous property shown on the latest equalized assessment roll.

b.     The proposed amendment does not propose any change in land use or water uses or any change in the allowable use of property.

2.     At the time that the City of Dana Point submits the proposed amendment to the Executive Director, the City of Dana Point shall also submit to the Executive Director any public comments that were received during the comment period provided pursuant to subparagraph a. of paragraph 1. above.

3.     Determination of De Minimis.

a.     The Executive Director shall make a determination as to whether the proposed amendment is de minimis within 10 working days of the date of submittal by the City of Dana Point. If the proposed amendment is determined to be de minimis, the proposed amendment shall be noticed in the agenda of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Coastal Commission, in accordance with Section 11125 of the Government Code, and any public comments forwarded by the City of Dana Point shall be made available to the members of the Coastal Commission.

b.     If three members of the Coastal Commission object to the Executive Director’s determination that the proposed amendment is de minimis, the proposed amendment shall be set for public hearing in accordance with the procedures for either a major or minor amendment, as determined by the Executive Director, or, at the request of the City of Dana Point, returned to the City. If set for public hearing as a major amendment, the time requirements set by Sections 30512 and 30513 of the Coastal Act shall commence from the date on which the objection to the de minimis designation was made.

c.     If three or more members of the Coastal Commission do not object to the de minimis determination, the de minimis local coastal program amendment shall become part of the City’s certified local coastal program 10 days after the date of the Coastal Commission meeting. (Coastal Act/30514(d)).

(3)    Required Findings for Submittal of LCPAs to the Coastal Commission.

(A)   That the public and affected agencies have had ample opportunity to participate in the LCPA process.

(B)   That all policies, objectives, and standards of the LCPA conform to the requirements of the Coastal Act, including that the land use plan as amended is in conformance with and adequate to carry out the Chapter Three policies of the Coastal Act.

(C)   That Coastal Act policies concerning specific coastal resources, hazard areas, coastal access concerns, and land use priorities have been applied to determine the kind locations, and intensity of land and water uses.

(D)   That the level and pattern of development proposed is reflected in the Land Use Plan, Zoning Code, and Zoning Map.

(E)   That a procedure has been established to ensure adequate notice of interested persons and agencies of impending development proposed after certification of the LCPA.

(F)    That zoning measures are in place (prior to or concurrent with the LCPA) which are in conformance with and adequate to carry out the coastal policies of the Land Use Plan.

(4)    Notice/Public Participation Standards. In addition to Notice standards contained in Section 9.61.050, the following notice provisions shall apply (except for De Minimis LCP amendments in which case the notice provisions provided for in Section 9.61.080(e)(2)(C) above shall apply):

(A)   Notice of hearings on LCP documents shall be given general publication and shall be transmitted not less than ten (10) working days before the hearing. Notice of availability of public review drafts of LCPA materials and transmittal of said documents shall be made as soon as public drafts are available, but at a minimum at least six (6) weeks prior to any final action on the documents by the City. Public review drafts shall also be made readily available for perusal in local libraries, at the offices of the Community Development Department and/or other appropriate location at City Hall, and at the Coastal Commission district office having jurisdiction over the City of Dana Point.

(B)   At a minimum, notices of public hearings, public review sessions, availability of public review drafts, studies, or other relevant documents or actions pertaining to the preparation and approval of LCPAs must be mailed free of charge by first class mail to:

1.     Members of the public requesting such notices, including those on a list for all coastal decisions in the City;

2.     Contiguous and affected local governments and special districts;

3.     State and Federal agencies specified in Appendix A of Local Coastal Program Manual of the California Coastal Commission or other regional, state and federal agencies that may have an interest in or be affected by the LCPA, including the Coastal Commission itself; and

4.     Local libraries and media. (14 Cal. Code of Regulations/13515).

(5)    Planning Commission Recommendation. The Planning Commission shall hold at least one public hearing on the proposed LCPA and make a written recommendation on the adoption of an amendment to a local coastal program. Such recommendation shall include the reasons for the recommendation and the relationship of the proposed Ordinance or amendment to the Coastal Act, and applicable General Plan and/or Specific Plan policies. The Planning Commission shall send its recommendation to the City Council.

(6)    City Council Resolution.

(A)   The LCPA shall be submitted to the California Coastal Commission, after public hearing, pursuant to a Resolution adopted by the City Council. The Resolution shall include the following:

1.     A statement certifying that the City will carry out the local coastal program in a manner fully in conformity with Division 20 of the Public Resources Code as amended, the California Coastal Act of 1976. (Coastal Act/30510, 30605; 14 Cal. Code of Regulations/13551(a))

2.     The Resolution shall include an exact description of the nature of the amendment, including but not limited to whether the amendment is to the land use plan, implementing actions, or both, and the nature of the proposed changes.

3.     Resolutions for amendments involving changes to the land use plan shall certify that the City has found that the land use plan as amended is in conformity with and adequate to carry out the Chapter Three policies of the Coastal Act.

4.     Resolutions for amendments involving changes to the implementing actions shall certify that the City has found that the implementing actions as amended are in conformity with and adequate to carry out the provisions of the certified land use plan.

5.     The Resolution shall include the numbers of the General Plan, Zone Text, Zone Change, or other amendment(s) being submitted to the Coastal Commission to amend the certified local coastal program.

6.     The Resolution shall include a statement certifying that the amendment will be submitted to the Coastal Commission for review and approval.

(B)   The City Council Resolution may provide that the amendment will take effect automatically upon Coastal Commission approval, or as an amendment that will require formal approval by Resolution of the City Council after approval by the Coastal Commission, (Coastal Act/30501, 30512, 30513, 30519, 30605; 14 Cal. Code of Regulations/13551(b))

(C)   Under either alternative in subsection 9.61.080(e)(6)(B) above, the requirements of Section 13544 or 13544.5 of the California Code of Regulations as amended must be fulfilled following Coastal Commission approval of the amendment, including that the City Council acknowledges receipt of the Coastal Commissions’ certification of the amendment including any terms or modifications which may have been suggested for final certification and agrees to such terms or modifications. (Coastal Act/30501, 30605; 14 Cal. Code of Regulations/13551(b))

(7)    Contents of an LCPA Submittal to the Coastal Commission. At a minimum, the following shall be included in an LCPA submittal:

(A)   A summary of the measures taken to provide the public and affected agencies and districts maximum opportunity to participate in the LCP amendment process, including;

1.     a listing of members of the public, organizations, and agencies appearing at any hearing or contacted for comment on the LCP amendment, and copies of speaker slips for all persons testifying at said hearing(s);

2.     copies or written summaries of significant comments received and of the City’s response to those comments;

3.     Copies of hearing notices for all public hearings at which the LCPA was discussed or scheduled for discussion;

4.     Proof of publication.

(B)   All policies, plans, standards, objectives, diagrams, drawings, maps, photographs, and supplementary data, related to the amendment in sufficient detail to allow review for conformity with the requirements of the Coastal Act. Written documents should be readily reproducible. An amendment to the “land use plan” portion of the LCP shall include, where applicable, a readily identifiable public access component.

(C)   A written discussion of the LCPA’s relationship to and effect on the other sections of the certified LCP.

(D)   An analysis that meets the requirements of Section 13511 or alternatively Section 13514 of the California Code of Regulations as amended. As part of the analysis, the Chapter Three policies of the Coastal Act shall be applied to determine the kind, location and intensity of land and water uses that would be in conformity with the Chapter Three policies.

(E)   Any environmental review documents, pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act, required for all or any portion of the LCPA.

(F)    An indication of the zoning measures that will be used to carry out the amendment to the land use plan (unless submitted at the same time as the amendment to the land use plan). (Coastal Act/30501; 14 Cal. Code of Regulations/13552).

(G)   Copies of City staff reports for all public hearings at which the LCPA was discussed or scheduled for discussion.

(H)   Copies of final, adopted Ordinances and Resolutions approving the LCPA.

(I)    Copies of final, approved minutes of all public hearings at which the LCPA was discussed or scheduled for discussion.

(f)    Specific Plan Amendments.

(1)    Planning Commission Recommendation. The Planning Commission shall hold at least one public hearing and make a written recommendation on the adoption of an amendment to a Specific Plan. The Planning Commission shall forward its recommendation to the City Council.

(2)    City Council Public Hearing. Any proposed amendment to a Specific Plan requires application and noticing as outlined in this Chapter. One City Council public hearing is required.

(3)    Amendment by Resolution and Ordinance. The City Council may adopt amendments to Specific Plans by Resolution and Ordinance. The City Council may approve, modify, or disapprove the recommendation of the Planning Commission. Any substantial changes proposed by the City Council not previously considered by the Planning Commission shall first be referred to the Planning Commission for its consideration.

(g)    Procedural Duties Regarding Amendments.

(1)    When an application for an amendment is filed in accordance with Section 9.61.040, or when the City Council or Planning Commission has initiated an amendment, the Director of Community Development shall schedule the proposed amendment for a public hearing pursuant to Section 9.61.050 of this Code.

(2)    The Planning Commission, upon receiving the recommendation of the Director of Community Development, shall hold a public hearing to ensure consistency with the General Plan or to provide for the public health, safety, and welfare of the citizens, visitors, and workers in the City of Dana Point.

(3)    The Planning Commission shall transmit a written recommendation on the proposed amendment to the City Council. The recommendation of the Planning Commission may be for approval, conditional approval or denial except when the proposed amendment is a Zone Change, in which case the recommendation shall be for approval or denial.

(4)    The Commission may continue a hearing in order to consider new or revised information as it deems necessary. A continuance shall not extend the period of time within which State law requires the City to render a final decision, unless the applicant requests, or consents to, a continuance beyond that period of time.

(5)    Upon receiving the recommendation of the Planning Commission, the City Council shall hold a public hearing and shall make a determination and take final action on the amendment. This action shall take place within the time period specified in Section 9.61.040 of this Code.

(6)    The Director of Community Development shall maintain an index of all approved amendments to this Code in order to insure that the Code is properly updated.

(7)    For amendments in the Coastal Zone, the Director of Community Development shall provide notice of the amendment hearings and action to the California Coastal Commission.

(h)    Decision of the City Council. The City Council may approve or deny an application for an amendment. Except for Local Coastal Program Amendments, the action of the City Council shall be final.

(i)     Basis for Denial of Amendments. Amendments to the General Plan, Zoning Code, Zoning Map, Local Coastal Program, or Specific Plan may be denied if they are found to be:

(1)    Inconsistent with the General Plan;

(2)    Inconsistent with a goal or policy of the General Plan;

(3)    Inconsistent with the provisions of the Coastal Act;

(4)    Inconsistent with mandatory findings required by State law or by this Code; or

(5)    A threat to the public health, safety, and welfare.

Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-21, 12/13/94; Ord. 97-05, 9/9/97; Ord. 99-05, 4/27/99)

 

9.61.090 Administrative Modification of Standards.
(a)    Intent and Purpose. Standards may be administratively modified by the Director of Community Development to permit development on property which is constrained due to lot size, shape, location, access restrictions, physical constraints or other constraints. Administrative modifications are used only when deviations from Code standards are truly minor and no potential impact will occur to the health, safety or general welfare of adjacent persons or properties will occur.

(b)    Authority of the Director of Community Development. The Director of Community Development shall have the authority to approve, conditionally approve, or deny an application for an administrative modification pursuant to the following limitations:

(1)    Reduction of required lot area, minimum floor area, setbacks, courts or open areas, landscaped areas, distance between buildings or size and location of parking spaces required by the Zoning Code;

(2)    Increases in the height of both retaining and non-retaining side or rear yard fences, walls, or hedges by not more than ten (10) percent of the maximum permitted height.

(c)    Procedure for Administrative Modifications.

(1)    An application shall be filed with the Community Development Department pursuant to Section 9.61.040.

(2)    The Director of Community Development shall review the application and shall determine whether the application is complete as described in Section 9.61.040 and whether the application qualifies as an administrative modification within thirty (30) days of the application date.

(3)    Notice of the administrative modification shall be provided to owners of the abutting properties.

(4)    When in the public interest and agreed to by the applicant, the Director of Community Development may consider and render decisions on administrative modifications without a public hearing.

(5)    If the application qualifies as an administrative modification, the Director of Community Development shall render a decision on the request within thirty (30) days of the application being deemed complete and qualified. If the application does not qualify as an administrative request, the Director shall notify the applicant, and the application may be withdrawn as described in Section 9.61.070.

(6)    Appeals of the Director’s decision may be made pursuant to the provisions of Section 9.61.110.

(d)    Basis for Approval or Denial of Administrative Modifications.

(1)    The Director of Community Development may impose such conditions as are deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare and assure compliance with the provisions and standards included in this Zoning Code.

(2)    In making such determination, the Director of Community Development shall find that the proposed administrative modification meets the following criteria:

(A)   That there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships created by strict application of the Zoning Code due to physical characteristics of the property; and

(B)   The administrative modification does not constitute a grant of special privileges which are not otherwise available to surrounding properties in similar conditions and will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or to the property of other persons located in the vicinity; and

(C)   The administrative modification places suitable conditions on the property to protect the public health, safety, and welfare and surrounding properties.

(D)   For development within the coastal zone, that the administrative modification would not result in significant adverse impacts either individually or cumulatively to coastal access/recreation opportunities or coastal resources, and the development would be consistent with the policies of the Local Coastal Program certified land use plan.

(e)    Notice of Action. The Director of Community Development shall transmit a written Notice of Action to the applicant by first class mail.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 97-05, 9/9/97; Ord. 03-07, 4/9/03)

 

9.61.100 Preliminary Review.
        A preliminary review is a request for a pre-submittal evaluation of a project. The preliminary review will assess the site and architectural design of the proposed project. In addition, this review will consider General Plan consistency, development standards, land use compatibility and community values. The objective of this exercise is to provide the applicant with a sense of the issues that need to be addressed in the formal application. The preliminary review process is not intended and cannot be used as a process to determine the ultimate decision on the formal application. Information gathered through this process can be used to determine whether a formal application should be filed.

(a)    Review Levels. There are two levels of preliminary review available to a prospective applicant, described as follows:

(1)    Staff Level Review. Staff level review involves an informal assessment of the proposed project by the Community Development and Public Works Staff. These reviews are conducted during the regular weekly staff meetings. This review provides the applicant with an opportunity to receive preliminary comments from the departments who will ultimately make recommendations on a formal application. Staff will provide comments on the preliminary review within five (5) working days of the staff meeting.

(2)    Planning Commission Review. Preliminary review by the Planning Commission is a more formal option available to the applicant. This process is more appropriate for projects which may involve more significant issues of sensitivity or compatibility, or qualitative interpretations of City policy. Through this process, a brief assessment will be prepared by staff to identify the issues pertinent to the proposed project. The applicant will have the opportunity to present the proposal directly to the Planning Commission. Preliminary reviews are considered by the Planning Commission under “New Business” at regular meetings. The Planning Commission is legally limited in the type and amount of input they can provide at this level. Typically, comments are focused on the identification of potential issues which may be raised during consideration of a formal submittal. General feedback on how key issues or policies might apply to the project may also be provided.

(b)    Fees. Staff level preliminary reviews require no fee. A fee in accordance with those set forth in a annual resolution of the City Council shall apply to an application for preliminary review by the Planning Commission.

(c)    Required Submittals.

(1)    Staff Level Review. One (1) copy of the conceptual site plan, floor plan(s), building elevations, and any other relevant exhibits.

(2)    Planning Commission Review.

(A)   Ten (10) copies of the conceptual site plan, floor plan(s), building elevations and any other relevant exhibits;

(B)   A letter which provides a brief explanation of the proposed project and justification for the project based on General Plan policies and Zoning Code provisions;

(C)   A completed planning application form;

(D)   A filing fee as required by Section 9.61.100(b).

(Added by Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 9.61.110 Appeal Procedures.
(a)    Decisions May Be Appealed. Any decision rendered by the Director of Community Development may be appealed by the applicant, the Planning Commission, the City Council, any property owner or resident of property within a five hundred (500) foot radius of the subject property, or any group or individual. Appeals of decisions by the Director of Community Development shall be heard by the Planning Commission.

                Any decision rendered by the Planning Commission may be appealed by the applicant, the City Council, any property owner or resident of property within a five hundred (500) foot radius of the subject property, or any group or individual. Appeals of decisions by the Planning Commission shall be heard by the City Council.

(b)    Filing of Appeals. Appeals to the Planning Commission and City Council must be made no later than fifteen (15) calendar days after the rendering of the decision being appealed. Appeals to the Planning Commission shall be filed with the Director of Community Development. Appeals to the City Council shall be filed with the City Clerk.

 

(c)    Appeal Contents. Appeals filed in writing with the Director of Community Development or the City Clerk shall specifically cite the basis of the appeal, including how the person filing the appeal is negatively impacted by the deciding body’s determination to approve, conditionally approve, or deny an application.

(d)    Appeals of Coastal Development Permit. After the exhaustion of the appeal procedures described in Section 9.61.100(a) through (c) above, except as provided for in Section 9.69.090(a)(1) of this Zoning Code, the City’s final action on a coastal development permit for development that is appealable, as described in Section 9.69.090, may be appealed to the Coastal Commission in accordance with the procedures specified in Section 9.69.090.

(e)    Notice of Appeal Hearings. Notice of an appeal hearing shall conform to the requirements of Section 9.61.050 for the original application. The appellant shall be responsible for all noticing materials required in the original application.

(f)    Effective Date of Appealed Actions. A decision rendered by the Director of Community Development appealed to the Planning Commission shall not become final until upheld by the Commission. A decision rendered by the Planning Commission appealed to the City Council shall not become final until upheld by the Council.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-21, 12/13/94; Ord. 96-10, 8/13/96; Ord. 97-05, 9/9/97)

 

9.61.120 Revocations and Modifications.
(a)    Revocation or Modification of Entitlements. The Planning Commission, on its own motion or by direction from the City Council, may recommend, and the City Council may approve the revocation and/or modification of any previously approved application or granted entitlement, after holding a properly noticed public hearing on the matter where any of the following findings are made:

(1)    That the approved application or entitlement was obtained by fraud; or

(2)    That the approved application or entitlement is not being exercised; or

(3)    That the approved application or entitlement has ceased or has been suspended for a period of time and is causing detriment to the public health, safety and welfare or constitutes a public or private nuisance; or

(4)    That the use for which the approved application or entitlement was granted or permitted is being or has been operated or used contrary to the terms or conditions of such approval, or in violation of any statute, ordinance, law, or regulation; or

(5)    If any provision of an approved application or entitlement is held or declared invalid, the approved application or entitlement shall be void and all privileges granted thereunder shall lapse.

(b)    Notice of Action.

(1)    Notice of the action taken by the City Council at a hearing for a revocation or modification of an approved application or entitlement shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the person owning and operating the property, structure, or use.

(2)    Notification of the action by the City Council shall be made by serving a notice in the manner required by law.

(c)    Effective Date of Revocations and Modifications. An order by the City Council revoking or modifying an entitlement shall become effective immediately.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.61.130 Expiration and Extensions.
(a)    Expiration. When the activity for which a discretionary permit such as Conditional Use Permit, Coastal Development Permit or Site Development Permit was granted is not implemented or utilized within the time frame specified in the permit, or within two (2) years if no timeframe is specified in the permit, the discretionary permit shall become null and void and of no effect, unless the permit is extended as provided below.

(b)    Extensions. A discretionary permit may be extended in accordance with the following provisions:

(1)    An application, consisting of a letter requesting an extension, shall be submitted to the Community Development Department prior to the expiration date of the subject discretionary permit.

(2)    A fee, in accordance with the annual fee resolution adopted by the City Council shall be submitted with the letter.

(3)    A maximum of two extensions may be granted. Action on the first extension request may be taken administratively by the Director of Community Development. The Director may grant a one-time extension for a maximum of twelve (12) months. Second extension requests must be presented to the Planning Commission for action. The Planning Commission may grant the second extension for a maximum of twelve (12) months.

(4)    The action of the Director of Community Development or Planning Commission on a request for extension may be appealed in accordance with Section 9.61.110.

(5)    A request for extension may be approved, conditionally approved or denied. An action to conditionally approve or deny a request for extension may be based on the existence of new requirements or standards which were not in effect at the time of the original approval. Such requirements or standards may be contained in the City’s Zoning Code or in the Municipal Code, including the Health, Safety and Building Codes.

(6)    While the discretionary permit is deemed active during the consideration of an extension request, if the expiration date has passed, the permit may not be implemented unless and until the extension request has been approved.

(c)    Exception. Where a proposal to acquire land for a governmental enterprise in conjunction with a discretionary permit has been approved, no time limit shall apply to the utilization of said permit, provided that within one (1) year of the date of approval, the subject governmental agency has either acquired the subject property or has commenced legal proceedings for its acquisition.

(Added by Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94; amended by Ord. 08-04, 3/18/08)

 

 

9.61.140 General Plan Consistency Requirements.
(a)    Projects involving the acquisition, dedication, disposition, vacation, or abandonment of real property shall not be authorized until the location, purpose, and extent of the action has been submitted to and reported upon by the Planning Commission for consistency with the adopted General Plan. The following actions are exempt from this requirement:

(1)    The disposition of the remainder of a larger parcel which was acquired and used in part for street purposes;

(2)    Acquisitions, dispositions, or abandonments for street widening; or

(3)    Alignment projects, providing such dispositions for street purposes, acquisitions, dispositions, or abandonments for street widening or alignment projects are of a minor nature.

(b)    Applications for a General Plan Consistency finding shall be subject to review by the Planning Commission. At the discretion of the Director of Community Development, such applications may be processed in accordance with Section 9.61.040, Procedures for Applications Requiring Discretionary Action.

(c)    The Planning Commission shall render a report as to conformity of the project with the General Plan within forty (40) days after the application for the matter was deemed complete.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

Chapter 9.63 NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 18-01 and 18-07. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


9.63.010 Intent and Purpose.
        This Chapter provides for the regulation of nonconforming uses and structures. This Chapter recognizes the legal status nonconforming uses and structures have. It is the intent of this Chapter to promote and encourage the ultimate conversion of nonconforming uses and structures to uses and structures that are conforming to this Code. The Chapter recognizes that until such conversion, the improvement of nonconforming uses and structures which promote compatibility and enhancement to surrounding land uses and which do not increase in nonconformity are permitted. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.63.020 Land Uses Permitted.
        No property in the City of Dana Point shall be used for any purposes except those permitted by this Code. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 9.63.030 Expansion, Improvement and Maintenance of Nonconforming Structures.
        Nonconformities may be continued subject to the following conditions.

(a)    Expansion of Nonconforming Structures Conforming as to Use. Except as provided for in the Floodplain Overlay District, nonconforming structures which are conforming as to use may be expanded provided that the proposed expansion meets the current requirements of this code and positively contributes to the neighborhood. An expansion of ten (10) percent or less of the existing gross floor area is allowed by right. An expansion of more than ten (10) percent of the existing gross floor area may be approved by the Director as a minor Site Development Permit or forwarded by the Director for review by the Planning Commission.

(b)    Improvements to and Maintenance of Nonconforming Structures Conforming as to Use. Nonconforming structures which are conforming as to use may be, and are encouraged to be, maintained and aesthetically improved in compliance with the Dana Point Municipal Code. Maintenance and aesthetic improvement includes repainting and resurfacing, reroofing, recarpeting and reflooring, relandscaping, and other minor cosmetic improvements. Maintenance and aesthetic improvements shall not serve to expand the nonconforming structure in any way.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 96-10, 8/13/96; Ord. 03-07, 4/9/03; Ord. 08-06, 6/3/08)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 9.63.035 Expansion, Improvement and Maintenance of Nonconforming Uses.
        Nonconforming uses shall not be enlarged or expanded except as provided herein.

(a)    Expansion of Nonconforming Residential Uses. A one-time expansion of ten (10) percent or less of the gross floor area of the structure containing the nonconforming residential use may be permitted and conditioned by the Director of Community Development subject to a consent approval of a Minor Conditional Use Permit by the Planning Commission. Any expansion greater than ten (10) percent requires approval of a Conditional Use Permit by the Planning Commission. The expansions may be subject to conditions to promote neighborhood compatibility and enhancement.

(b)    Expansion of Nonconforming Non-Residential Uses. A one-time expansion of a nonconforming non-residential use is allowed subject to the approval of a Conditional Use Permit by the Planning Commission. Expansions which substantially bring the use into better conformance with this Code are encouraged. The expansion shall result in compliance with the signage and landscaping regulations of this Code. The area of expansion is required to comply with current parking standards.

(c)    Maintenance of Structures Containing Nonconforming Uses. The repair, maintenance, replacement, and aesthetic improvement of structures containing nonconforming uses which promote neighborhood enhancement, and which does not enlarge or expand the nonconforming use, as determined by the Director of Community Development shall be permitted and encouraged. Repair, maintenance, replacement and aesthetic improvements typically include painting, landscaping, paving, the replacement and addition of skylights, windows, doors, open spaces, and other features which promote the livability and usability of the structure and its compatibility with and enhancement to the neighborhood.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 96-10, 8/13/96; Ord. 03-07, 4/9/03; Ord. 08-06, 6/3/08)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 9.63.040 Destruction and Restoration of Nonconformance.
(a)    Damage to Nonconforming Structures due to Accidents. Excluding properties in the Floodplain Districts, any nonconforming structure that is lawfully existing at the time of adoption of this Code which is accidentally destroyed by fire, flood, explosion, earthquake, landslide, act of God, or act of the public enemy, may be restored and reconstructed to the limits of the pre-existing nonconformity provided that all such construction and repair work commence within a period of five (5) years from the date of the accidental damage. Any reconstruction of a nonconforming structure must comply with current building and related codes.

(b)    Voluntary Demolition of Nonconforming Structures.

(1)    If any nonconforming portion of a structure is removed, that portion shall be reconstructed in conformance with current requirements of this Code.

(2)    Any nonconforming structure lawfully existing at the time of adoption of this Code which is demolished beyond fifty (50) percent of the total linear length of all walls, shall be reconstructed to conform to the current requirements of this Code.

(c)    Damage to Structures Containing Nonconforming Uses due to Accidents. When a structure containing a nonconforming use is destroyed due to fire, flood, explosion, earthquake, landslide, act of God, or act of the public enemy, the nonconforming use may be re-established and the structure rebuilt to the limits of the pre-existing nonconformity. Any reconstruction of the structure must comply with current building and related codes.

(d)    Voluntary Demolition of Structures containing Nonconforming Uses. When a structure containing a nonconforming use is voluntarily demolished beyond fifty (50) percent of the total linear length of all walls, that structure shall be reconstructed to conform to the requirements of this Code and the nonconforming use shall be converted to a use which conforms to the current zoning designation of the site.

(e)    Abandonment of Nonconforming Uses. When a nonconforming use is abandoned or discontinued for more than three hundred sixty-five (365) consecutive calendar days, the use shall be converted to conform to the current requirement of this code.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 03-07, 4/9/03; Ord. 08-06, 6/3/08)

 

9.63.050 Notice.
(a)    Upon determination that the provisions of this Chapter apply to a given nonconforming use, the Director of Community Development shall send a notice thereof by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the property owner thereof as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, shall cause such property to be posted with a similar notice, and shall publish such notice at least once in a newspaper of general circulation.

(b)    The notice provided for in this Section shall state that the property in question contains a non-conforming use, shall state the date of abatement established in Section 9.63.040 and shall state that the date of abatement may be appealed to the Planning Commission within thirty (30) days of the date appearing on the notice.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 08-06, 6/3/08)

 

9.63.060 Right of Further Appeal.
(a)    Any interested person may appeal the decision of the Planning Commission to the City Council within fifteen (15) days of service or the order upon the owner. The appeal hearing shall be noticed in the same manner as the original hearing before the Planning Commission.

(b)    Each appeal shall be accompanied by such other documents and information the Director of Community Development deems to be necessary to adequately explain and to provide proper notification for the appeal. Each appeal shall set forth specifically and in detail the grounds for the appeal. The City Council may refuse to consider issues not raised in the written appeal.

(c)    When an appeal has been accepted, the Director of Community Development shall forward to the City Council all documents and information on file pertinent to the appeal, together with the minutes or official action of the approving authority, and a report on the basis of the decision and the appropriateness of the appeal.

(d)    The City Council shall consider the appeal at a public hearing, including all information and evidence submitted with the original application, and any additional information and evidence the appellant may submit which the City Council finds to be pertinent.

(e)    The action of the City Council shall be to sustain, deny, conditionally sustain, or refer the appeal back to the Planning Commission with the directions, all in compliance with the same requirements and procedures that were applicable to the Commission.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 08-06, 6/3/08)

 

9.63.070 Public Nuisance.
        Any nonconformity continuing beyond the date for abatement as established by this Chapter or as extended by the Planning Commission or City Council is a public nuisance. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 08-06, 6/3/08)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 9.63.080 Substitution of a Nonconforming Use.
        Subject to Planning Commission approval, a nonconforming use may be replaced by another nonconforming use, provided that such substitute use is less detrimental to the public welfare and to the property of persons located in the vicinity thereof than is the original conforming use. Any such change of use shall not extend the termination date established for the original nonconforming use. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 08-06, 6/3/08)

 

9.63.090 Termination—Violation of Law.
        Any of the following violations of the Municipal Code shall immediately terminate the right to operate a nonconformity, except as otherwise provided in this Chapter:

(a)    Changing a nonconforming use to a use not permitted in the zoning district;

(b)    Increasing or enlarging the area, space or volume occupied by or devoted to a nonconformity;

(c)    The addition to a nonconforming use of another use not permitted in the zoning district.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 08-06, 6/3/08)

Chapter 9.65 CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 18-01. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


9.65.010 Intent and Purpose.
        The intent and purpose of this Chapter is to recognize that certain uses, although suitable for inclusion in the list of uses allowable in a zoning district, are not always appropriate in every location and circumstance, due to their particular characteristics, nature, intensity or size. Uses requiring a Conditional Use Permit are considered to have a moderate to high potential for adverse impacts to the subject site or surrounding community due to their nature of the use or its operational characteristics.

        This Chapter establishes the procedures, findings and enforcement measures for those uses listed as conditional uses in the individual zoning districts. The Conditional Use Permit process provides a means to evaluate such proposals to determine the compatibility of the proposed conditional use with surrounding uses at the given location and to establish appropriate controls and/or design features to ensure compatibility. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.65.020 Authority of Planning Commission.
        The Planning Commission shall have the authority to approve, conditionally approve, or deny an application for a Conditional Use Permit. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.65.030 Procedural Requirements.
        Uses, programs or development standard modifications with a relatively moderate potential for adverse impacts are considered minor Conditional Use Permits. Uses with a relatively high potential for adverse impacts are considered major Conditional Use Permits. Major Conditional Use Permits shall be processed in accordance with Section 9.61.040. Minor Conditional Use Permits shall be processed in accordance with Section 9.65.040. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94)

 

9.65.040 Minor Conditional Use Permits.
(a)    Applications for minor Conditional Use Permits are restricted to the following requests:

(1)    Shared parking programs.

(2)    Beer/wine/liquor licenses.

(3)    Live Entertainment Uses.

(4)    Animal permits pursuant to Section 9.07.190.

(5)    Modifications to certain development standards as may be specified by this Code.

(6)    Other modifications which, in the determination of the Director of Community Development, have a moderate potential for adverse impacts to the subject site and the surrounding community.

(b)    The submittals required for a minor Conditional Use Permit application shall be the same as those required in Section 9.61.040(e).

(c)    Decisions on minor Conditional Use Permit applications shall be made administratively by the Director of Community Development. The Director shall include a determination of findings and appropriate conditions in the decision. The basis for approval, conditional approval, or denial of a minor Conditional Use Permit shall be as specified in Section 9.65.060.

(d)    Subject to a determination by the Director of Community Development, a minor Conditional Use Permit application may be placed on the Planning Commission agenda for review.

(e)    Subject to a determination by the Director of Community Development, the noticing requirements for a minor Conditional Use Permit may be reduced from the standard five hundred (500) foot radius requirement to a notification of adjacent property owners only.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94)

 

9.65.050 Notice.
        Notice for a public hearing to consider a Conditional Use Permit shall be provided pursuant to Section 9.61.050. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 9.65.060 Basis for Approval, Conditional Approval, or Denial of a Conditional Use Permit.
(a)    The Planning Commission shall consider applications for a Conditional Use Permit and may, with such conditions as are found necessary, approve the use, provided the use will not jeopardize, adversely affect, endanger, or otherwise constitute a menace to the public health, safety, or general welfare, or be materially detrimental to the property of other persons located in the vicinity of such use.

(b)    In making such determination, the Planning Commission, or City Council on appeal, shall make the following findings:

(1)    That the proposed conditional use is consistent with the General Plan.

(2)    That the nature, condition, and development of adjacent uses, buildings, and structures have been considered, and the proposed conditional use will not adversely affect or be materially detrimental to the adjacent uses, buildings, or structures.

(3)    That the proposed site is adequate in size and shape to accommodate the yards, walls, fences, parking and loading facilities, landscaping, and other land use development features prescribed in this Code and required by the Commission or Council in order to integrate the use with existing and planned uses in the vicinity.

(c)    Conditions imposed by the Planning Commission for a conditional use may involve any pertinent factors affecting the establishment, operation, or maintenance of the requested use, including, but not limited to:

(1)    Open space and buffer areas.

(2)    Fences and walls.

(3)    Parking facilities, including vehicular ingress and egress, and the surfacing of parking areas and driveways.

(4)    Public facilities, dedications and improvements.

(5)    Landscaping and maintenance.

(6)    Regulation of nuisance factors associated with the particular use and situation.

(7)    Regulation of operating hours or activities.

(8)    Additional regulation of signs or advertisement.

(9)    A specified time period within which development or use must begin and end.

(10)  Provisions for surety that the conditional use will be removed on or before a specified date or under specific situations.

(11)  A specific expiration date for the Conditional Use Permit.

(12)  Provision of appropriate pedestrian amenities.

(13)  Screening and proper orientation of objectional elements of the use.

(14)  Aesthetic treatments as necessary to integrate the use into the surrounding community.

(15)  Any other conditions deemed necessary to provide for the orderly and efficient development or operation of the conditional use in accordance with the goals and policies of the General Plan.

(d)    The Planning Commission shall deny the requested Conditional Use Permit where the evidence indicates:

(1)    That the requested use will be detrimental to, or incompatible with, the property located in the vicinity or will pose a threat to the public health, safety, or general welfare; and

(2)    That there are no reasonable restrictions or conditions which could be imposed that would permit the establishment of the proposed use in a manner that would prevent the detriment, incompatible or threatening conditions.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.65.070 Notice of Action Taken.
        Notice of the Planning Commission’s decision shall be filed with the City Clerk not more than fifteen (15) days following the Commission’s decision, and a copy of the decision shall be sent to the applicant by certified mail, return receipt requested. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.65.080 Effective Date.
        An order by the Planning Commission granting or denying a major or minor Conditional Use Permit shall become effective immediately. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.65.090 Continuing Validity.
        A major Conditional Use Permit or minor Conditional Use Permit that is valid and in effect and granted pursuant to the provisions of this Code shall run with the land and shall continue to be valid upon change of ownership of the land or any lawfully existing building or structure on the land unless a time limitation for the permit is specified as a condition of approval. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.65.100 Performance of Imposed Conditions.
        Whenever a major Conditional Use Permit or minor Conditional Use Permit is granted or modified and is subject to one (1) or more conditions, the Planning Commission may require that the applicant to whom the permit was granted file with the City a surety bond, a corporate surety bond, a deposit of money, savings and loan certificates, or other surety in an amount prescribed for the purpose of guaranteeing the faithful performance of the condition(s). Any such deposits or guarantees shall be subject to and in compliance with the provisions and conditions of the Municipal Code of the City. The applicant shall also record the granting of the major or minor Conditional Use Permit and its conditions with the County Recorder and shall provide proof of that recordation to the Director of Community Development. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.65.110 Expiration and Extension of a Conditional Use Permit.
        The expiration and extension of any minor or major Conditional Use Permit shall be in accordance with the limitations and procedures specified in Section 9.61.130. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94)

 

9.65.120 Termination of a Conditional Use Permit.
(a)    A major or minor Conditional Use Permit shall be subject to revocation or modification as described in Section 9.61.120.

(b)    A major or minor Conditional Use Permit shall cease to be of any force or effect if the use, development, improvement or operation has ceased for any consecutive period of six (6) months.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.65.130 Maintenance of a Nuisance Prohibited.
        Neither the provisions of this Code nor the granting of any major or minor Conditional Use Permit authorizes or legalizes the maintenance of a nuisance. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

Chapter 9.67 VARIANCES
9.67.010 Intent and Purpose.
        The intent and purpose of this Chapter is to provide the City with a procedure to permit appropriately mitigated developments on property which is constrained, because of size, shape, topography, or other constraining factors, and where strict interpretation of the Code would deny the applicant property development rights which are granted to other properties within the same zoning district under similar physical conditions. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.67.020 Authority of Planning Commission.
        The Planning Commission shall have the authority to approve, conditionally approve, or deny an application for a Variance. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.67.030 Procedural Requirements.
        An application for a Variance shall be processed in accordance with Section 9.61.040. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.67.040 Notice.
        Notice of a public hearing to consider a Variance shall be provided pursuant to Section 9.61.050. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.67.050 Basis for Approval, Conditional Approval, or Denial of a Variance.
(a)    The Planning Commission may grant a Variance, with such conditions as are found necessary to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare and assure compliance with the provisions and standards included in this Code, provided the following findings can be made:

(1)    That the strict or literal interpretation and enforcement of the specified regulation(s) would result in practical difficulty or unnecessary physical hardships inconsistent with the objectives of this Chapter; and

(2)    That there are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions applicable to the subject property or to the intended use of the property which do not apply generally to other properties in the same zoning district; and

(3)    That the strict or literal interpretation and enforcement of the specified regulation(s) would deprive the applicant of privileges enjoyed by the owners of other properties in the same zoning district with similar constraints; and

(4)    That the granting of the Variance will not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the limitations on other properties in the same zoning district with similar constraints; and

(5)    That the Variance request is made on the basis of a hardship condition and not as a matter of convenience; and

(6)    That the granting of the Variance will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare or materially injurious to properties or improvements in the vicinity;

(7)    That the Variance approval places suitable conditions on the property to protect surrounding properties and does not permit uses which are not otherwise allowed in the zone;

(8)    For a Variance to regulations for off-street parking facilities or off-street loading facilities, the following additional findings shall be made:

(A)   That neither the present nor anticipated future traffic volumes generated by the use of the site or the uses of sites in the vicinity reasonably require the strict or literal interpretation and enforcement of the specified regulation(s).

(B)   That the granting of the Variance will not result in the parking or loading of vehicles on public streets in such a manner as to interfere with the free flow of traffic on the streets.

(C)   That the granting of the Variance will not create a safety hazard or any other condition inconsistent with the objectives of this Chapter.

(9)    That granting of the Variance would not result in adverse impacts, either individually or cumulatively, to coastal access, public recreation opportunities, or coastal resources, and the development would be consistent with the policies of the Local Coastal Program certified land use plan.

(b)    Conditions imposed by the Planning Commission for a Variance may involve any pertinent factors affecting the establishment, operation, or maintenance of the requested use, including, but not limited to:

(1)    Open spaces and buffer areas.

(2)    Fences and walls.

(3)    Parking facilities, including vehicular ingress and egress, and the surfacing of parking areas and driveways.

(4)    Public facilities, dedications, and improvements.

(5)    Landscaping maintenance.

(6)    A specified time period within which the variance must be utilized or implemented.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 97-05, 9/9/97)

 

 

9.67.060 Notice of Action Taken.
        Notice of the Planning Commission’s decision shall be filed with the City Clerk not more than 15 days following the Commission’s decision, and a copy of the decision shall be sent to the applicant by certified mail, return receipt requested. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.67.070 Effective Date.
        A decision by the Planning Commission granting or denying a Variance shall become effective immediately, subject to the appeal procedures set forth in Section 9.61.110. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.67.080 Continuing Validity.
        A Variance that is valid and in effect and granted pursuant to the provisions of this Code shall run with the land and shall continue to be valid upon change of ownership of the land or any lawfully existing building or structure on the land. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.67.090 Performance of Imposed Conditions.
        Whenever a Variance is granted or modified and is subject to one or more conditions, the Commission may require that the applicant to whom the Variance was granted file with the City a surety bond, a corporate surety bond, a deposit of money, savings and loan certificates, or other surety in an amount prescribed for the purpose of guaranteeing the faithful performance of the conditions. Any such deposits or guarantees shall be subject to and in compliance with the provisions and conditions of the Municipal Code of the City. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.67.100 Expiration and Extension of a Variance.
        The expiration and extension of any Variance shall be in accordance with the limitations and procedures specified in Section 9.61.130. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94; Ord. 08-04, 3/18/08)

 

9.67.110 Termination of a Variance.
        A Variance shall be subject to revocation or modification as described in Section 9.61.120. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.67.120 Maintenance of a Nuisance Prohibited.
        Neither the provisions of this Code nor the granting of any Variance authorizes or legalizes the maintenance of a nuisance, either public or private. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

Chapter 9.69 COASTAL DEVELOPMENT PERMIT*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 18-01. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


9.69.010 Intent and Purpose.
        The intent and purpose of this Chapter is to establish procedures for the processing of Coastal Development Permits within the City’s Coastal Zone, consistent with the City’s certified Local Coastal Program and pursuant to Division 20 of the Public Resources Code and Division 5.5 of Title 14 of the California Code of Regulations (commencing with Section 13001).

        The procedures established by this Chapter shall govern the issuance of coastal development permits by the City of Dana Point pursuant to Section 30600 of the Coastal Act.

        The procedures described in this Chapter shall take precedence over other Chapters of the Zoning Code in the coastal zone, except in those areas regulated by the Dana Point Specific Plan/Local Coastal Program. The existing certified Dana Point Specific Plan/Local Coastal Program remains in effect in those areas covered by the Dana Point Specific Plan/Local Coastal Program for local coastal program purposes. The procedures in this Chapter shall be applied in a manner which is most protective of coastal resources and public access. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 97-05, 9/9/97; Ord. 99-05, 4/27/99)

 

9.69.020 Coastal Development Permit Required.
        A Coastal Development Permit shall be required for all development, as defined in Section 9.75.040, located within the Coastal Overlay District, except for development specifically exempted pursuant to Section 9.69.040. Coastal Development Permits may be required for development which does not require any other approvals, discretionary or otherwise, from the City. A Coastal Development Permit shall also be required for any proposed development in the area of “Coastal Commission Permit Jurisdiction” as delineated on the Dana Point Local Coastal Program Post Certification Permit and Appeal Jurisdiction Map, filed with the City, or as subsequently amended, in which case the coastal development permit shall be obtained directly from the California Coastal Commission. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 97-05, 9/9/97)

 

9.69.030 Authority to Grant Permit.
        All development undertaken after November 8, 1972, within the coastal zone as defined in the Coastal Initiative of 1972, or after January 1, 1977, within the coastal zone as defined by the Coastal Act of 1976, shall have a valid coastal development permit issued by the California Coastal Commission or by the City pursuant to provisions of the certified Local Coastal Program. (Coastal Act/30600(a)).

(a)    The Director of Community Development shall have the authority to approve, conditionally approve, or deny coastal development permits without a public hearing for the following types of administrative coastal development permit applications for development not located in uncertified areas or in the “Coastal Commission Permit Jurisdiction” area (Pursuant to Section 30519 of the Coastal Act and Section 9.69.030(c) of this Zoning Code) or in the appeals area (Pursuant to Section 30603(a) of the Coastal Act and as defined in Section 9.75.010 of this Zoning Code):

(1)    Applications or a modification to an application for individual single family residences which are not located within the appeals area of the Coastal Overlay District.

(2)    Applications or a modification to an application for improvements to existing structures which are not located within the appeals areas of the Coastal Overlay District.

(3)    Applications for any development, not located within the appeals area of the Coastal Overlay District, which is not a division of land and is specifically authorized as a principal permitted use in the certified local coastal program and does not require a conditional use permit, site development permit, variance, or any other discretionary permit.

(4)    Applications for any other development not in excess of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000).

All decisions of the Director of Community Development are subject to appeal, as described in Section 9.69.090, to the Planning Commission within ten (10) days of the decision. The Director of Community Development may refer any application for a Coastal Development Permit to the Planning Commission for consideration.

(5)    Notwithstanding the specific uses listed in Sections 9.69.030(a)(1) through 9.69.030(a)(4) above, administrative coastal development permits shall not be processed for any of the following types of development, which shall instead be processed through the regular coastal development permit process as specified in this Chapter:

(A)   Any division of land, including but not limited to subdivision pursuant to the Subdivision Map Act, lots splits and lot-line adjustments.

(B)   Any development involving a structure or similar integrated physical construction which lies partly inside and partly outside the Coastal Commission’s appeal area.

(C)   Any development involving a structure or similar integrated physical construction which lies partly inside and partly outside the Coastal Commission’s area of retained permit jurisdiction.

                The Director of Community Development shall process applications for administrative coastal development permits in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 9.69.110 of this Zoning Code. If the Director of Community Development receives an application for an administrative coastal development permit, and if the Director of Community Development finds that the application does not qualify as such within the criteria established in Sections 9.69.030(a)(1) through 9.69.030(a)(4) above, she or he shall notify the applicant that the permit application cannot be processed administratively and must comply with the procedures for regular coastal development permits provided in this Chapter. The Director of Community Development, with the concurrence of the applicant, may accept the application for filing as a regular coastal development permit and shall adjust the application fees accordingly.

(b)    The Planning Commission shall have the authority to approve, conditionally approve, or deny Coastal Development Permits for the following types of coastal development permit applications not located in uncertified areas or in the “Coastal Commission Permit Jurisdiction” area.

(1)    Applications or a modification to an application for an individual single family residence located within the appeals area of the Coastal Overlay District.

(2)    Applications or a modification to an application for more than one single family residence or multiple family residences located within the Coastal Overlay District.

(3)    Applications or a modification to an application for non-residential structures located within the Coastal Overlay District which do not fall into one of the classes of development specified in Sections 9.69.030(a)(1) through 9.69.030(a)(4) above.

All decisions of the Planning Commission are subject to appeal, as described in Section 9.69.090, to the City Council within ten (10) days of the decision. The Planning Commission may refer any application for a Coastal Development Permit to the City Council for a final decision.

(c)    The Coastal Commission retains the authority to approve, conditionally approve, or deny Coastal Development Permits for development proposed in uncertified areas of the City of Dana Point, and in the “Coastal Commission Permit Jurisdiction” area delineated on the Dana Point Local Coastal Program Post Certification Permit and Appeal Jurisdiction Map prepared by the Coastal Commission and a copy of which is filed with the City, or as subsequently amended. The areas of Coastal Commission Permit Jurisdiction includes all tidelands, submerged lands, and public trust lands, whether filled or unfilled within the coastal zone. (Coastal Act/30519(b)).

                However, coastal development permit authority has been delegated to the City for certain public trust lands that have been determined by the Coastal Commission to be filled and developed and which are located within an area which is committed to urban uses. Coastal development permits issued by the City in these areas are appealable to the Coastal Commission. (Coastal Act/30613(a)).

(1)    Where a proposed development lies partially within the area of “Coastal Commission Permit Jurisdiction” and partially within the Coastal Overlay District, and the development is physically integrated, the Coastal Commission shall be the responsible agency for the issuance of any Coastal Development Permit for the entire development. That portion of the development that lies within the Coastal Overlay District shall be deemed to be within an area of deferred certification and the Commission shall approve a coastal development permit if the entire development is consistent with the policies of Chapter 3 of the Coastal Act. In addition, the Coastal Commission has the authority to approve, conditionally approve, or deny coastal development permits for developments approved by the City but which have been appealed to the Coastal Commission consistent with the requirements of this Zoning Code. Where an appealed development is a physically integrated development that lies both within and without the appeals area shown on the Post Certification Permit and Appeal Jurisdiction Map, the Coastal Commission shall have the authority to act on the entire development on appeal. (Coastal Act/30519, 30603).

(2)    The following shall apply to all proposed development in the uncertified Laguna Niguel/Monarch Beach segment of the City of Dana Point for which approval of a coastal development permit application is pending at the time of certification of this Local Coastal Program:

(A)   Applications Pending before the California Coastal Commission

1.     Any coastal development permit application for development in an uncertified area that was submitted to the Coastal Commission prior to effective certification of a Local Coastal Program and is not filed complete as of the date of effective certification shall be withdrawn and resubmitted to the City. The standard of review for such application shall be the requirements of the certified Local Coastal Program and, for development between the sea and the first public road paralleling the sea, the Chapter 3 public access and recreation policies of the Coastal Act. Any application fee paid to the Coastal Commission shall be refunded to the applicant.

2.     Any coastal development permit application for proposed development within the currently uncertified areas of the City which the City preliminarily approved before effective certification of the Local Coastal Program and for which an application has been filed complete with the Coastal Commission may, at the option of the applicant, remain with the Coastal Commission for completion of review and action. Coastal Commission review of any such application shall be based solely upon the requirements of this certified Local Coastal Program and, for development between the sea and the first public road paralleling the sea, the Chapter 3 public access and recreation policies of the Coastal Act. Alternatively, the applicant may resubmit the proposal to the City through an application for a coastal development permit pursuant to the requirements of this certified Local Coastal Program. The standard of review for such application shall be the requirements of this certified Local Coastal Program and, for development between the sea and the first public road paralleling the sea, the Chapter 3 public access and recreation policies of the Coastal Act. Under this option, any application fee paid to the Coastal Commission shall be refunded to the applicant. (Coastal Act/30501, (14 Cal. Code of Regulations/13546).

(B)   Applications Pending before the City of Dana Point. The standard of review for any coastal development permit application pending before the City of Dana Point for proposed development located within the certified areas of the City shall be the requirements of the certified Local Coastal Program. The requirements contained in an amendment to the certified Local Coastal Program shall not be effective in the certified area until the amendment has been effectively certified by the Coastal Commission.

(3)    Prior Coastal Commission Approval.

(A)   In the case of a coastal development permit which was approved by the Coastal Commission, whether or not it has been vested prior to the date of effective certification of the Local Coastal Program, a separate coastal development permit from the City for the same development shall not be required except that:

1.     No material change may be made in any such development previously approved by the Coastal Commission without Coastal Commission approval of an amendment to the Coastal Commission’s coastal development permit; and,

2.     If the coastal development permit approved by the Coastal Commission expires, a new coastal development permit for the same development shall be obtained from the City.

(B)   Development authorized by a coastal development permit issued by the Coastal Commission either prior to effective certification of a Local Coastal Program or on appeal after certification remains under the jurisdiction of the Coastal Commission for the purposes of condition compliance, amendment, extension, reconsideration and revocation.

(C)   Ritz Cove. The Coastal Commission approved Coastal Development Permit 5-85-94 for the subdivision of 101 residential lots, and the construction of a home on each of those lots, provided the homes are constructed in accordance with the adopted codes, covenants, and restrictions. Therefore, separate coastal development permits are not required for the construction of each of the individual 101 homes, since the construction of the homes is already approved under Coastal Development Permit 5-85-94.

(D)   Coastal Development Permit P-79-5539. Development authorized by Coastal Development Permit P-79-5539, including both development approved on condition that an additional coastal development permit be obtained, and development approved on condition of the submission of additional plans for the review and approval of the Executive Director of the Coastal Commission, remains under the jurisdiction of the Coastal Commission for purposes of condition compliance and amendment. Condition compliance includes both obtaining a coastal development permit from the Coastal Commission for development that was approved on condition that a separate coastal development permit be approved, and obtaining approval from the Executive Director of the Coastal Commission for plans for development that was approved on condition of the submission of final plans. Coastal development permits, or approval of plans by the Executive Director of the Coastal Commission, for development authorized by Coastal Development Permit P-79-5539 shall be obtained from the California Coastal Commission.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94; Ord. 95-11, 6/13/95; Ord. 97-05, 9/9/97; Ord. 99-05, 4/27/99)

 

9.69.040 Exemptions.
        The types of development listed below are exempt from the requirement to obtain a Coastal Development Permit. A current record of all projects which are exempt from Coastal Development Permits shall be available for review by the public and shall be sent to the Coastal Commission and shall include the following information: name of applicant, location of the project, and brief description of the project.

(a)    Development projects included in any categorical exclusion list adopted pursuant to Sections 30610(e) and 30610.5 of the Public Resources Code and Subchapter 5 of Title 14 of the California Code of Regulations (Sections 13240 et. seq.) after certification of the Local Coastal Program.

(b)    Improvements to an existing structure which do not changed the use of the structure are exempt, except the types of improvements listed below, which are not exempt:

                For purposes of this subsection, structures on the property normally associated with a single-family residence, such as garages, swimming pools, fences, and storage sheds, but not including guest houses or self-contained residential units, shall be considered part of an existing single-family residence. Further, for purposes of this subsection, landscaping on the lot, and all structures directly attached to the structure being subjected to improvements, shall be considered part of the subject structure, whether the existing structure is residential or not.

(1)    Improvements to any structure located on a beach, wetland, or seaward of the mean high tide line or where the structure or proposed improvement would encroach within fifty (50) feet of the edge of a coastal bluff as described in Chapters 9.27 and 9.75.

(2)    Improvements to any structure located between the sea and the first public road paralleling the sea or within three hundred (300) feet of the inland extent of a beach or of the mean high tide line of the sea where there is no beach, whichever is the greater distance, or within significant scenic resources areas as designated by the certified Local Coastal Program or the Coastal Commission when such improvements would constitute or result in any of the following:

(A)   An increase of ten percent (10%) or more of the internal floor area of the structure;

(B)   An increase in the floor area in any amount when improvements to the structure have previously been exempted in compliance with this subsection;

(C)   The construction of an additional story or a loft or any increase in height of more than ten (10) percent of the existing height of the structure (for single-family residential improvements, increases in the height of significant non-attached structures such as garages, fences, shoreline protective devices or docks are subject to this provision also);

(D)   The construction, placement, or establishment of any detached structure; or

(E)   The demolition of more than 50 percent of the exterior walls of an existing structure.

(3)    Any significant alteration of land forms including removal or placement of vegetation in the following areas; on a beach, wetland, or sand dune; in an area of natural vegetation designated by the City of Dana Point by resolution as significant natural habitat; within one hundred (100) feet or, for a single family dwelling, within fifty (50) feet of the edge of a coastal bluff, as described in Chapter 9.27; or, for structures other than single-family residences, within one hundred (100) feet of streams.

(4)    Expansion or construction of a water well or septic system.

(5)    Improvements in an area which the Coastal Commission has determined to have critically short water supply that must be maintained for the protection of coastal resources or public recreational use, when such improvement would be a major water using development (not essential to residential use if for a single-family or multiple-family residence) including, but not limited to, swimming pools or the construction or extension of landscape irrigation systems.

(6)    Any improvement when the Coastal Development Permit issued for the original structure indicated that future additions/improvements would require a Coastal Development Permit.

(7)    Improvements to any structure or change in occupancy which would result in a change in the intensity of the uses on the building site.

(8)    Improvements pursuant to a conversion of existing structures (other than single-family residences and their associated structures) from a multiple unit rental use or visitor serving commercial use to a condominium, stock cooperative, or time share project.

(9)    Improvements made to a public works facility. (Coastal Act/30333, 30610(a) and 30610(b); 14 Cal. Code of Regulations/13250 and 13253).

                The improvements listed above which are not exempt require a the coastal development permit in accordance with the requirements of this Chapter.

(c)    Maintenance dredging of existing navigation channels or moving dredged material from such channels to a disposal area outside the Coastal Zone, pursuant to a permit from the United States Army Corps of Engineers, or to a disposal facility, area or site within the Coastal Zone for which an approved coastal development permit has been issued or for which a federal consistency determination has been approved by the Coastal Commission. However, Section 9.69.040(d)(2) of this Zoning Code below specifies certain types of dredging which are not exempt. (Coastal Act/30333; 30610(c)).

(d)    Repair or maintenance activities that do not result in an addition to, or enlargement or expansion of, the object of such repair or maintenance activities, except the following types of development which are not exempt:

(1)    Repair or maintenance of a seawall, revetment, bluff retaining wall, breakwater, groin, culvert, outfall or similar shoreline work which involves one or more of the following;

(2)    The placement, whether temporary or permanent, of rip rap, or artificial berms of sand, or any other form of solid material, on a beach or in coastal waters, streams, wetlands, estuaries, or on shoreline protective works.

(3)    The replacement of twenty (20) percent or more of the materials of an existing structure with materials of a different kind.

(4)    The presence, whether temporary or permanent, of mechanized construction equipment or construction materials on any sand area or bluff or within twenty (20) feet of coastal waters or streams.

(5)    Any method of routine maintenance dredging that involves:

(A)   The dredging of one hundred thousand (100,000) cubic yards or more within a twelve (12) month period;

(B)   The placement of dredged spoils of any quantity on any sand area, within fifty (50) feet of the edge of a coastal bluff as described in Chapter 9.27, within an environmentally sensitive habitat area, or within twenty (20) feet of coastal waters or streams;

(C)   The removal, sale, or disposal of dredged spoils of any quantity that would be suitable for beach nourishment in an area the Coastal Commission has declared by Resolution to have a critically short sand supply that must be maintained for protection of structures, coastal access or public recreational use. (Coastal Act/30610(d); 14 Cal. Code of Regulations/13252(a)(2))

(6)    Any repair or maintenance to facilities or structures or work located in any sand area, within fifty (50) feet of the edge of a coastal bluff as described in Chapter 9.27, within fifty (50) feet of or in an environmentally sensitive habitat area; or within twenty (20) feet of any coastal waters or streams that include:

(A)   The placement or removal, whether temporary or permanent, of riprap, rocks, sand or other beach materials or any other forms of solid materials;

(B)   The presence, whether temporary or permanent, of mechanized construction equipment or construction materials on any sandy area.

(7)    Unless destroyed by natural disaster, the replacement of fifty (50) percent or more of a seawall, revetment, bluff retaining wall, breakwater, groin or similar protective work under one ownership is not repair and maintenance according to this subsection but instead constitutes a replacement structure requiring a coastal development permit. (Coastal Act/30610(d); 14 Cal. Code of Regulations/13252).

(e)    The installation, testing, and placement in service or the replacement of any necessary utility connection between an existing service facility and any development approved pursuant to this Chapter. (Coastal Act/30610(f)).

(f)    The replacement of any structure, other than a public works facility, destroyed by natural disaster, provided such replacement structure conforms to applicable current zoning regulations; is designed and intended for the same use as the destroyed structure; does not exceed the floor area, height or bulk of the destroyed structure by more than ten (10) percent; and is sited in the same location on the same building site as the destroyed structure. As used in this subsection:

(1)    “Disaster” means any situation in which the force or forces which destroyed the structure to be replaced were beyond the control of its owner.

(2)    “Bulk” means total interior cubic volume as measured from the exterior surface of the structure.

(3)    “Structure” includes landscaping and any erosion control structure or device which is similar to that which existed prior to the occurrence of the disaster. (Coastal Act/30610(g)).

(g)    Notwithstanding the above provisions, the Director of Community Development shall have the discretion to exempt the ongoing routine repair and maintenance activities of local governments, state agencies, and public utilities (such as railroads) involving shoreline works protecting transportation roadways, as well as the activities described in the “Repair, Maintenance, and Utility Hook-Up Exclusion from Permit Requirements” adopted by the Coastal Commission on September 5, 1978. (Coastal Act/30610(d); 14 Cal. Code of Regulations/13252(c)).

(h)    Interior modifications to an existing structure that do not result in the enlargement or expansion of the cubic area of the structure, except that a change in the intensity or density of use of the structure, or the reconstruction of fifty (50) percent or more of the exterior walls of the existing structure, is not exempt. Such modifications shall comply with the applicable sections of Chapter 8.06 of the Zoning Code and of this Chapter 9.69.

(i)     Notwithstanding the provisions of Chapter 9.39 “Temporary Uses,” temporary events consistent with guidelines adopted by the Coastal Commission may be exempt from coastal development permit requirements.

(j)     A coastal development permit is not required for any of the following projects, except that notification by the agency or public utility performing any of the following projects shall be made to the City within 14 days from the date of the commencement of the project:

(1)    Immediate emergency work necessary to protect life or property or immediate emergency repairs to public service facilities necessary to maintain service as a result of a disaster in a disaster-stricken area in which a state of emergency has been proclaimed by the Governor pursuant to Chapter 7 (commencing with Section 8550) of Division 1 of Title 2 of the Government Code.

(2)    Emergency projects undertaken, carried out, or approved by a public agency to maintain, repair, or restore an existing highway, as defined in Section 360 of the Vehicle Code, except for a highway designated as an official state scenic highway pursuant to Section 262 of the Streets and Highways Code, within the existing right-of-way of the highway, damaged as a result of fire, flood, storm, earthquake, land subsidence, gradual earth movement, or landslide, within one year of the damage. This paragraph does not exempt any project undertaken, carried out, or approved by a public agency to expand or widen a highway damaged by fire, flood, storm, earthquake, land subsidence, gradual earth movement, or landslide from the requirement to obtain a coastal development permit from the City.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94; Ord. 96-10, 8/13/96; Ord. 97-05, 9/9/97; Ord. 99-05, 4/27/99)

 

9.69.050 Application for Coastal Development Permit.
For all development proposed to be located within the Coastal Zone or Coastal Overlay District, an application for a Coastal Development Permit shall be made to the Director of Community Development in accordance with the following procedures, except in those areas designated as “Coastal Commission Permit Jurisdiction” in which case an application shall be made to the California Coastal Commission or its successor agency.

(a)    The application shall be made by the property owner of record, the owner’s authorized agent, or any person with a legal right, interest or other entitlement to use the property for the proposed development or said person’s authorized agent. A signed affidavit from the property owner of record may serve as proof of the legal right to use property for a proposed development. Prior to the issuance of a building permit, the applicant shall demonstrate the legal ability to comply with all conditions of approval of the coastal development permit. (Coastal Act/30601.5).

(b)    Application for a Coastal Development Permit shall be made on forms provided by the Community Development Department, and shall include, at a minimum, the following information:

(1)    A location map showing the area to be developed in relation to nearby lots, streets, highways, any major natural features such as the ocean, beaches, wetlands, streams, and other major landforms.

(2)    A site plan, drawn to scale, which is in sufficient detail to illustrate the compliance of the project with the certified Local Coastal Plan. The site plan shall, at a minimum, provide the following information:

(A)   Site topography, including existing and proposed elevations.

(B)   The location of existing and proposed buildings and structures.

(C)   The lot lines and dimensions of the building site.

(D)   The location of existing and proposed circulation facilities, including streets, alleys and pedestrian accessways.

(E)   The height, material and location of existing and proposed walls.

(F)    Existing and proposed off-street parking.

(G)   Tabulations of lot area, proposed gross floor area and proposed lot coverage.

(3)    Where the application includes proposed construction, the application shall also include the submittal of the following additional information:

(A)   Building elevations with dimensions to indicate the proposed finished floor levels and building height.

(B)   Proposed building setbacks.

(C)   A landscape plan.

(D)   Site Development Permit application and certifications for properties located in a Floodplain Zone.

(4)    Where the application includes proposed demolition, the application shall also include the submittal of the following:

(A)   A description of the existing structure(s), including but not limited to building height, enclosed and non-enclosed floor area, number of stories, and number of parking spaces.

(B)   Building plans of the existing structure(s), if available.

(5)    A dated signature by or on behalf of each of the applicants, attesting to the truth, completeness and accuracy of the contents of the application and, if the signer of the application is not the applicant, written evidence that the signer is authorized to act as the applicant’s representative and to bind the applicant in all matters concerning the application.

(6)    A declaration signed by the applicant certifying that the applicant has posted a notice of the coastal development permit application in accordance with Section 9.69.090(a), and that the applicant will make a good faith effort to maintain, and replace if necessary, the posting until the application has been acted on by the City.

(7)    The following additional, current information (which may be in both written and graphic form), specific to the subject site, shall be required if applicable. In addition, plans to mitigate adverse impacts, plans to monitor the mitigation, and an alternatives analysis shall be required where applicable.

(A)   For sites adjacent to, containing, or potentially containing wetland resources and/or environmentally sensitive habitat areas, a wetlands determination, biological assessment shall be required. Evaluations of the proposed development’s impact on the wetland resources shall be sought from appropriate state and federal resources agencies, including but not limited to the California Department of Fish and Game, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, and the National Marine Fisheries Service.

(B)   For sites adjacent to, containing or potentially containing cultural resources, an archaeological and/or paleontological survey prepared by a licensed archaeologist/paleontologist shall be required.

(C)   For sites adjacent to, containing or potentially containing areas of geologic instability, a geotechnical report prepared by a licensed geologic engineer shall be required.

(D)   For proposed shoreline protective devices, a study on the effects to shoreline sand supply resulting from the device, impacts to public access/recreation and sensitive habitat, effects on adjacent properties, and justification of the necessity for the proposed device, monitoring plans, and the factors described in Section 9.27.030(a)(5)(B)2. of this Zoning Code, prepared by a licensed coastal engineer shall be required.

(E)   For proposed development which would provide less parking than required in Chapter 9.35 of this Zoning Code, either a joint use parking plan prepared pursuant to Section 9.35.060(c)(3) or a shared parking program prepared pursuant to Section 9.35.060(c)(4) of this Zoning Code.

(F)    For proposed development which would result in significant adverse impacts to public views, a visual impact study prepared pursuant to the requirements of the Urban Design Element of the General Plan.

(G)   For proposed development which would result in water quality impacts, a plan shall be submitted to meet state and federal requirements regarding water quality. Such a plan should include, at a minimum, the following: structural and non-structural “best management practices”, stormwater pollution prevention plans, drainage plans, and direction of runoff to the sewer system where possible rather than into storm drains which ultimately empty into rivers or the ocean.

(H)   A plan to mitigate any unavoidable significant adverse impacts to any of the above coastal resources which reasonably would be known to result from the proposed development shall be submitted.

(8)    A written description of the proposed development including any feasible alternatives or any feasible mitigation measures available which would substantially lessen any significant adverse impact which the development may have on the environment. Any approved documents prepared pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act (commencing with Section 21000 of the Public Resources Code as amended) shall be submitted. Additional environmental impact analysis may be required to make the necessary findings required by the certified Local Coastal Program. For purposes of this subsection, the term “significant adverse impact on the environment” shall be defined as contained in the California Environmental Quality Act and the Guidelines adopted pursuant thereto.

(9)    Any additional information determined by the Director of Community Development to be necessary for evaluation of the proposed development.

(10)  The application form shall also provide notice to applicants that failure to provide truthful and accurate information necessary to review the permit application or to provide public notice as required by these regulations may result in a delay in processing the application or may constitute grounds for revocation of the coastal development permit. (Coastal Act/30333; 14 Cal. Code of Regulations/13053.5, 13054(b)).

(c)    Prior to, or concurrently with the filing of the application, the applicant shall pay to the City a fee or deposit equal to the estimated cost of processing said application. The fee or deposit may be adjusted periodically by the City Council by resolution.

(d)    Determination of Class of Development/Appeal Jurisdiction.

(1)    At the time an application for a proposed development in the coastal zone is submitted, the Director of Community Development (or his/her designee) shall determine and inform the applicant that the proposed development is one of the following:

(A)   Within the area of “Coastal Commission Permit Jurisdiction” and thus the applicant must obtain a coastal development permit directly from the Coastal Commission;

(B)   Appealable to the Coastal Commission pursuant to Section 9.61.100(d)(2) and requires a coastal development permit from the City;

(C)   Not appealable to the Coastal Commission pursuant to Section 9.61.100(d)(2) and requires a coastal development permit from the City;

(D)   Exempt or categorically excluded and does not require a coastal development permit pursuant to Section 9.69.040 of this Zoning Code.

(2)    The determination that a proposed development is exempt, categorically excluded, non-appealable or appealable shall be based on the certified Local Coastal Program, including any maps, categorical exclusions, land use designations, and zoning ordinances which are adopted as part of the certified Local Coastal Program.

(3)    Where an applicant, interested person, or the City of Dana Point has a question as to the appropriate designation for the development, the following procedures shall establish whether a development is exempt, categorically excluded, non-appealable, or appealable:

(A)   The Director of Community Development shall make the determination as to what type of development is being proposed (i.e. exempt, categorically excluded, non-appealable, or appealable) and shall inform the applicant of the notice and hearing requirements for that particular development.

(B)   If the determination of the Director of Community Development is challenged by the applicant or an interested person, or if the City of Dana Point wishes to have a Coastal Commission determination as to the appropriate designation, the City shall notify the Coastal Commission by telephone of the dispute/question and shall request an Executive Director’s opinion;

(C)   The Executive Director shall, within two (2) working days of receipt of the City’s request (or upon completion of a site inspection where such inspection is warranted), transmit his or her determination as to whether the development is categorically excluded, non-appealable or appealable;

(D)   If the Executive Director’s determination is not in accordance with the determination of the Director of Community Development, the Coastal Commission shall hold a hearing for purposes of determining the appropriate designation for the development. The Coastal Commission shall schedule the hearing on the determination for the next Coastal Commission meeting in Southern California following the Executive Director’s determination. (Coastal Act/30333, 30620; 14 Cal. Code of Regulations/13569).

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 97-05, 9/9/97)

 

9.69.060 Notice and Public Hearing.
        For coastal development permit applications requiring a public hearing, the Planning Commission, City Council on appeal, other approving body as may be specified pursuant to Section 9.69.030, or Director of Community Development shall conduct a noticed public hearing in accordance with the provisions of Section 9.61.050. If any of the notice and public hearing requirements of Section 9.69.060 conflict with the requirements of Section 9.61.050, the requirements of Section 9.69.060 shall take precedence for purposes of coastal development permit applications.

(a)    Posting of Site. At the time the application is submitted for filing, the applicant must post, at a conspicuous place, easily read by the public and as close as possible to the site of the proposed development, notice that an application for a permit for the proposed development has been submitted to the City of Dana Point. Such notice shall contain a general description of the nature of the proposed development. The City shall furnish the applicant with a standardized form to be used for such posting. If the applicant fails to submit a signed declaration of posting as required by Section 9.69.050(6), the City shall refuse to file the application.

(b)    Conduct of Public Hearing. Public hearings on coastal development permits shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of Section 9.61.050; provided that interested persons are given a reasonable opportunity to appear before and present their viewpoints to the approving authority holding the public hearing, either orally or in writing. (Coastal Act/30333, 30620; 14 Cal. Code of Regulations/13566).

(c)    Notice of City Action when Hearing Continued. If a decision on a development permit is continued by the local government to a time which is neither previously stated in the notice provided pursuant to Section 9.61.050 of this Zoning Code, nor announced at the public hearing as being continued to a time certain, the City of Dana Point shall provide notice of the further hearings (or action on the proposed development) in the same manner, and within the same time limits, as established within Section 9.61.050 of this Zoning Code. (Coastal Act/30333, 30620; 14 Cal. Code of Regulations/13567).

(d)    A public hearing is not required for the coastal development permits issued by the Director of Community Development pursuant to Section 9.69.030(a).

(e)    Waiver of Public Hearing Requirements.

(1)    The requirement for a public hearing on a coastal development permit application for “minor development” as defined in Section 9.69.060(e)(2) below, may be waived only if both of the following occur:

(A)   A Notice of intent to waive the public hearing requirement containing the information identified below in Section 9.69.060(e)(3) is provided to all persons who would otherwise be required to be notified of a public hearing pursuant to Section 9.61.50 and 9.69.060 of this Zoning Code as well as any other persons known to be interested in receiving such notice. For purposes of this section only, “any person” means anyone, whether a neighbor or not.

(B)   No written request for a public hearing on the coastal development permit application in question is received by the Director of Community Development within fifteen (15) working days from the date of sending the notice pursuant to Section 9.69.060(e)(1)(A) above.

(2)    For purposes of this section only, “minor development” means a development which both meets the definition of “development” as defined in Section 9.75.040 of this Zoning Code and which the Director of Community Development determines satisfies all of the following requirements:

(A)   Is consistent with the certified local coastal program as defined in Chapter 9.75 of this Zoning Code, including but not limited to the land use designation for the site and all applicable land use plan resource protection policies and related implementing Zoning Code provisions and standards;

(B)   Requires no discretionary approvals other than a coastal development permit; and

(C)   Has no adverse effect either individually or cumulatively (as “cumulatively” is defined in Section 9.75.030 of this Zoning Code) on coastal resources or public access to the shoreline or along the coast.

(3)    Content of Notice for Waiver of Public Hearing Requirements. The notice of intent to waive public hearing requirements for a coastal development permit pursuant to this section shall include, at a minimum, the following:

(A)   The date of the notice.

(B)   An indication that the coastal development permit either is or is not appealable to the Coastal Commission pursuant to Section 9.69.090 of this Zoning Code.

(C)   The last date, which shall be no less than fifteen (15) working days from the date of the notice, to submit a written request for a public hearing.

(D)   The date the coastal development permit may be granted after the fifteen (15) working day notice period, if a public hearing is not requested in writing within the fifteen (15) working day notice period.

(E)   The last date to submit written comments other than a request for a public hearing.

(F)    A statement that failure by a person to request a public hearing may result in the loss of that person’s ability to appeal to the Coastal Commission any action taken by the Planning Commission on a coastal development permit application which is appealable to the Coastal Commission.

(G)   All other information required in a hearing notice pursuant to Section 9.61.050 of this Zoning Code.

(4)    If a written request for a public hearing on the subject coastal development permit application is received during the fifteen (15) working day notice period, a noticed public hearing pursuant to Chapters 9.61 and 9.69 of this Zoning Code shall be conducted.

(5)    All findings required pursuant to Section 9.69.050 of this Zoning Code shall be made for any coastal development permit application approved through Section 9.69.060(e).

(6)    A Notice of Final Action pursuant to Section 9.69.100 of this Zoning Code shall be distributed for any coastal development permit application approved through Section 9.69.060(d). (Coastal Act/30624.9).

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 97-05, 9/9/97)

 

9.69.070 Basis For Action on Coastal Development Permit Applications.
        Approval, conditional approval, or denial of any Coastal Development Permit by the City of Dana Point or the Coastal Commission on appeal shall be based upon compliance with the provisions of the certified Dana Point Local Coastal Program and, for development between the sea and the first public road paralleling the sea, the public access and recreation policies of Chapter 3 of the Coastal Act.

(a)    Approvals of Coastal Development Permits. In order for a Coastal Development Permit to be approved, all the following findings must be made, in writing, in addition to the findings required to approve other applications being considered concurrently:

(1)    That the proposed development is in conformity with the certified Local Coastal Program as defined in Chapter 9.75 of this Zoning Code. (Coastal Act/30333, 30604(b); 14 Cal. Code of Regulations/13096).

(2)    That the proposed development, if located between the nearest public roadway and the sea or shoreline of any body of water, is in conformity with the public access and public recreation policies of Chapter Three of the Coastal Act. (Coastal Act/30333, 30604(c); 14 Cal. Code of Regulations/13096).

(3)    That the proposed development conforms with Public Resources Code Section 21000 and following and that there are no feasible mitigation measures or feasible alternatives available which would substantially lessen any significant adverse impact that the activity may have on the environment. (Coastal Act/30333; 14 Cal. Code of Regulations/13096).

(b)    Denials of Coastal Development Permits. In order for a Coastal Development Permit to be denied, all the following findings must be made, in writing, in addition to the findings required to deny other applications being considered concurrently:

(1)    That the proposed development is not in conformity with the certified Local Coastal Program as defined in Chapter 9.75 of this Zoning Code. (Coastal Act/30333, 30604(b); 14 Cal. Code of Regulations/13096).

(2)    That the proposed development, if located between the nearest public roadway and the sea or shoreline of any body of water, is not in conformity with the public access and public recreation policies of Chapter Three of the Coastal Act. (Coastal Act/30333, 30604(c); 14 Cal. Code of Regulations/13096).

(c)    Additional findings for public access are found in Section 9.27.030(a) of the Zoning Code.

(d)    That the proposed development will be sited and designed to prevent adverse impacts to environmentally sensitive habitats and scenic resources located in adjacent parks and recreation areas, and will provide adequate buffer areas to protect such resources.

(e)    That the proposed development will minimize the alterations of natural landforms and will not result in undue risks from geologic and erosional forces and/or flood and fire hazards.

(f)    That the proposed development will be visually compatible with the character of surrounding areas, and, where feasible, will restore and enhance visual quality in visually degraded areas.

(g)    That the proposed development will conform with the General Plan, Zoning Code, applicable Specific Plan, Local Coastal Program, or any other applicable adopted plans and programs.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 97-05, 9/9/97)

 

9.69.080 Decision by the Director of Community Development or Planning Commission.
(a)    A copy of the notice of decision shall be filed with the City Clerk. If the decision on a coastal development permit application by the Director of Community Development is not appealed to the Planning Commission, or the decision of the Planning Commission on a coastal development permit application is not appealed to the City Council, in accordance with the appeal provisions of Section 9.61.100(a), then a Notice of Final Action shall be sent to the Executive Director of the Coastal Commission and any person requesting such notice in accordance with the provisions of Section 9.69.100 of this Chapter.

(b)    In approving an application for a Coastal Development Permit or other authorization for development, the Director of Community Development or Planning Commission (or City Council on appeal) may impose any conditions necessary to enable the required findings of fact to be fairly made and/or to be sustained in their validity. Such conditions may include, but need not be limited to, provision for public access and open space or conservation easements and the relocation and/or redesign of proposed site improvements. When conditions requiring the recordation of legal documents are imposed, notification of such action shall be submitted to the Executive Director of the Coastal Commission in accordance with the following:

(1)    A copy of the coastal development permit conditions, findings of approval, and drafts of any legal documents proposed to implement the required conditions pertaining to public access and open space or conservation easements shall be forwarded to the Executive Director of the Coastal Commission for review and approval of such legal documents prior to the issuance of the Coastal Development Permit.

                The Executive Director shall have fifteen (15) working days from the receipt of the documents to review:

(A)   The legal adequacy of the document(s) to carry out the purposes of the permit conditions or certified land use plan;

(B)   The uniform application of the document(s) with other documents required throughout the coastal zone; and

(C)   The document’s consistency with the requirements of potential participating agencies.

(2)    The Coastal Development Permit shall be issued fifteen (15) working days after the date of receipt of such documents by the Executive Director of the Coastal Commission, unless the Executive Director has notified the Director of Community Development within the fifteen (15) working days that any such legal documents are inadequate.

(3)    If the Executive Director has notified the Director of Community Development that the legal documents are inadequate, the Coastal Development Permit shall not be issued until the Director of Community Development has been notified by the Executive Director in writing that the inadequacies have been resolved to the satisfaction of the Executive Director.

(4)    The Coastal Development Permit shall not be issued to the applicant until the required documents have been recorded and verification of such recordation has been sent to, and receipt acknowledged by, the Executive Director.

(5)    Alternatively, only in the case of public access dedications/easements or dedications/easements for open space/conservation areas, the Director of Community Development may request that the Coastal Commission delegate, to the Director of Community Development, the authority to process the recordation of the necessary legal documents, subject to the following:

(A)   The Director of Community Development identifies the City department, other public agency, or private or non-profit association that has the resources and authorization to accept, open, operate, and maintain the public accessways and/or open space/conservation areas required as a condition of approval of coastal development permits; and

(B)   Upon completion of the recordation of the documents, the Director of Community Development shall forward a copy of the coastal development permit conditions and findings of approval and copies of the legal documents pertaining to the public access and open space/conservation conditions to the Executive Director of the Coastal Commission. (Coastal Act/30333, 30620; 14 Cal. Code of Regulations/13574).

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 97-05, 9/9/97)

 

9.69.090 Appeals to the Coastal Commission.
        The final action by the City, as described in Section 9.69.100(a), on a coastal development permit which is appealable to the Commission as described in Section 9.69.090(b), may be appealed in accordance with the procedures described in this Section.

(a)    Exhaustion of Local Appeals. An appellant shall be deemed to have exhausted local appeals where the appellant has pursued his or her appeal to the Planning Commission and/or City Council, as described in the City of Dana Point appeal procedures in Sections 9.61.100(a) through (c) of this Zoning Code; except that exhaustion of all local appeals shall not be required if any of the following occur:

(1)    The City of Dana Point requires an appellant to appeal to more local appellate bodies than have been certified as appellate bodies for permits in the Coastal Zone, in the implementation section of the local coastal program.

(2)    An appellant was denied the right of the initial local appeal by a local ordinance which restricts the class of persons who may appeal a local decision.

(3)    An appellant was denied the right of local appeal because local notice and hearing procedures for the development did not comply with the provisions of this Chapter.

(4)    The City of Dana Point charges an appeal fee for the filing or processing of appeals. (Coastal Act/30333, 30620; 14 Cal. Code of Regulations/13111).

(b)    A final action taken by the City of Dana Point on a coastal development permit application may be appealed to the Coastal Commission for only the types of development defined in Section 9.75.010 of the Zoning Code under “Appealable Development, Coastal”. (Coastal Act/30603(a)).

(c)    Grounds for appeal to the Coastal Commission.

(1)    The grounds for an appeal of a coastal development permit approved by the City of Dana Point for a development listed in Section 9.69.090(b) above shall be limited to an allegation that the development does not conform to the standards set forth in the certified local coastal program or the public access policies set forth in Chapter Three of the Coastal Act. (Coastal Act/30603(b)(1)).

(2)    The grounds for any appeal of a coastal development permit denied by the City of Dana Point for a major public works facility or a major energy facility, as such facilities are defined in Section 9.75.130 of the Zoning Code, shall be limited to the allegation that the development conforms to the standards set forth in the certified local coastal program and the public access policies set forth in Chapter Three of the Coastal Act. (Coastal Act/30603(b)(2)).

(d)    Filing of an Appeal to the Coastal Commission.

(1)    An appellant may contact the Coastal Commission for the appropriate forms and instructions to file an appeal. An appeal must contain the following information:

(A)   The name and address of the permit applicant and appellant;

(B)   The date of the local government action;

(C)   A description of the development;

(D)   The name of the governing body having jurisdiction over the project area;

(E)   The names and addresses of all persons who submitted written comments or who spoke and left his or her name at any public hearing on the project, where such information is available;

(F)    The names and address of all other persons known by the appellant to have an interest in the matter on appeal;

(G)   The specific grounds for appeal which shall be limited to those stated in Section 9.69.090(c);

(H)   A statement of facts on which the appeal is based;

(I)    A summary of the significant question raised by the appeal.

(2)    The appeal must be received in the Coastal Commission district office with jurisdiction over the City of Dana Point before the close of business on the tenth (10th) working day after receipt of the Notice of Final Action (as described in Section 9.69.100 of this Chapter) by the Coastal Commission.

(3)    The appellant shall notify the applicant, any persons known to be interested in the application, and the City of Dana Point of the filing of the appeal. Notification shall be by delivering a copy of the completed Notice of Appeal to the domicile(s), office(s), or mailing address(es) of said parties. In any event, such notification shall be by such means as may reasonably advise said parties of the pendency of the appeal. Unwarranted failure to perform such notification may be grounds for dismissal of the appeal by the Coastal Commission. (Coastal Act/30333/30620.6; 14 Cal. Code of Regulations/13111).

(e)    Any final action by the City on a coastal development permit for development identified in Section 9.69.090(b) above shall become effective at the close of business on the tenth working day from the date of receipt by the Coastal Commission of the Notice of Final Action required in Section 9.69.100 of this Chapter below, unless an appeal is filed within that time, pursuant to Section 9.69.090(d)(2). (Coastal Act/30603(c)).

(f)    If an appeal of a final action on an appealable development is filed with the Coastal Commission, the operation and effect of that action shall be stayed pending a decision by the Coastal Commission on the appeal. (Coastal Act/30623).

(g)    Persons Who May Appeal. A decision of the Director of Community Development, Planning Commission or City Council on a Coastal Development Permit for development which is appealable to the Coastal Commission pursuant to Section 9.69.090(b) above, may be appealed to the Coastal Commission, after the exhaustion of all local appeals as provided for in Section 9.69.090(a) above, by the following persons:

(1)    The applicant.

(2)    Any “aggrieved person” as defined in Section 9.75.010 of this Zoning Code.

(3)    Any two members of the Coastal Commission.

                Where a project is appealed by any two (2) members of the Coastal Commission, there shall be no requirement of exhaustion of appeals to the Planning Commission or the City Council. In the event that the local appeal process was not exhausted, the Planning Commission or City Council, whichever would have been the next higher appellate body for the project in question, may adopt and transmit to the Coastal Commission a resolution requesting that it receive a copy of the Coastal Commissioner appeals. The Coastal Commissioners’ appeal may be suspended pending a decision on the merits of the project by the appropriate appellate body. If the decision of the subject appellate body modifies or reverses the decision of the lower approving authority, the Coastal Commissioners shall be required to file a new appeal from the decision of the Planning Commission or City Council. (Coastal Act 30333/30620; 14 Cal. Code of Regulations/13573).

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 97-05, 9/9/97)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 9.69.100 Notice of Final Action to Coastal Commission.
(a)    The City’s decision on the Coastal Development Permit application shall be considered final when both 1) all required findings have been adopted, including specific factual findings supporting the legal conclusions that the proposed development is or is not in conformity with the certified local coastal program and, where applicable, with the public access and recreation policies of Chapter Three of the Coastal Act; and 2) all rights to appeals before the Planning Commission and City Council, as described in Section 9.61.100 of the Zoning Code, have been exhausted, or the fifteen (15) calendar day appeals period to the Planning Commission and City Council, as described in Section 9.61.100(b) of the Zoning Code, expires without an appeal being filed. (Coastal Act/30333, 30620; 14 Cal Code of Regulations/13570).

(b)    Notice of Final City Action.

(1)    Within seven (7) calendar days of the final City action as described in Section 9.69.100(a) of this Section above, a notice of the final City action shall be sent by first class mail free of charge to:

(A)   the Coastal Commission office having jurisdiction over the City of Dana Point; and

(B)   to any person or group requesting notice of such action.

(2)    Contents of Notice:

(A)   The notice shall contain the date on which the appeal period from the approving authority to the next local appellate body expired.

(B)   The notice shall include all conditions of approval and written findings as described in Section 9.69.100(a) of this Section above, Section 9.69.110(e)(3)(C) below, or Section 9.69.160(c) below.

(C)   For decisions on developments which are appealable to the Coastal Commission, the notice shall indicate that the City’s final action is appealable to the Coastal Commission and shall include attached the procedures described in Section 9.69.090 for appeal of the City decision on the coastal development permit to the Coastal Commission. (Coastal Action/30333, 30620; 14. Cal Code of Regulations/13571(a))

(c)    Failure to Act—Notice. A coastal development permit application is deemed approved by operation of law under Government Code Sections 65950 through 65957. The Director of Community Development shall, within seven (7) calendar days of such determination, notify the Coastal Commission and any persons or group entitled to receive notice pursuant to Section 9.61.050(a)(3) of this Zoning Code that the application has been approved by operation of law pursuant to Government Code Sections 65950-65957.1 and, if applicable, that the application may be appealed to the Coastal Commission pursuant to Section 9.69.090 of this Chapter. This section shall apply equally to a determination by the City that the development has been approved by operation of law and to a judicial determination that the development has been approved by operation of law. (Coastal Act/30333; 30620; 14. Cal Code of Regulations/13571(b)(2)).

(d)    Effective Date of City Action. The City’s final action as described in Section 9.69.100(a) above shall not become effective if either of the following occur during the appeal period described in Section 9.69.090(e):

(1)    An appeal is filed in accordance with Section 9.69.090 of this Zoning Code; or

(2)    The notice of final City action does not meet the requirements of Section 9.69.100(b) above.

        When either of the circumstances described in Section 9.69.100(d)(1) or 9.69.100(d)(2) above occur, the Executive Director of the Coastal Commission shall, within five (5) calendar days of receiving notice of that circumstance, notify the City that the operation and effect of the final City action has been stayed.

        When the circumstance described in Section 9.69.100(d)(2) above occurs, the City shall then transmit a revised notice of final action which meets the requirements of Section 9.69.100(b) above. When the Coastal Commission office having jurisdiction over the City of Dana Point receives the revised notice of final action, and the Executive Director has determined that the revised notice of final action meets the requirements of Section 9.69.100(b) above, the appeal period shall commence. (Coastal Act/30333, 30620; 14 Cal. Code of Regulations/13572)

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 97-05, 9/9/97; Ord. 99-05, 4/27/99)

 

9.69.110 Administrative Coastal Development Permit.
(a)    The Director of Community Development may, without a public hearing, process as an administrative permit any coastal development permit application for the classes of development identified in Section 9.69.030(a)(1) of this Chapter according to the procedures set forth in this section below.

(b)    Content of Application. The application requirements for an administrative coastal development permit are those set forth in Section 9.69.050 of this Chapter.

(c)    Notice.

(1)    Notice shall be posted at the site of the proposed development in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 9.69.060(a) of this Chapter. The City shall revoke the administrative coastal development permit pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 9.69.160 of this Chapter if it determines that the administrative coastal development permit was granted without proper notice having been given, and that proper notice would have had the potential of altering the decision of the Director of Community Development to act differently in issuing said permit.

(2)    Notice of administrative coastal development permits shall also be mailed by first class mail to the Coastal Commission and to persons known to be interested in the proposed development in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 9.61.050 of this Zoning Code.

(d)    Action of Administrative Coastal Development Permits. The Director of Community Development may deny, approve, or conditionally approve applications for administrative coastal development permits on the same grounds as contained in Section 9.69.070 of this Chapter for a regular coastal development permit application and may include reasonable terms and conditions necessary to bring the project into consistency with the certified local coastal program. Administrative coastal development permits issued shall be governed by the procedures used in approving regular coastal development permits pursuant to the provisions of this chapter relative to format, receipt, and acknowledgment of permit.

(e)    Effective Date of Administrative Permit.

(1)    Any administrative coastal development permit issued by the Director of Community Development shall be reported in writing to the Planning Commission at their first regularly scheduled meeting after the permit is approved. The Director of Community Development shall prepare a report in writing with sufficient description of the work authorized by the administrative coastal development permit to allow the Planning Commission to understand the development to be undertaken. Such report shall be available at the meeting and mailed free of charge to all persons wishing to receive such notification at the time of the regular mailing of notice for the Planning Commission meeting and any person who requested to be on the mailing list for the project as described in Section 9.69.110(d) above.

(2)    If one-third or more of the full membership of the Planning Commission so request, the issuance of an administrative coastal development permit shall not become effective, but shall, if the applicant wishes to pursue the application, be treated as a regular coastal development permit application subject to all provisions of this Chapter.

(3)    A decision on an administrative coastal development permit shall not be deemed final and effective until all the following have occurred:

(A)   The Director of Community Development has made a decision on the application;

(B)   The Planning Commission review of the administrative coastal development permit is complete, and the Planning Commission did not object, as provided for in Section 9.69.110(e)(2) above, to the decision of the Director of Community Development;

(C)   All required findings have been adopted, including specific factual findings supporting the legal conclusions that the proposed development is or is not in conformity with the certified LCP; and

(D)   When all rights of appeal under City ordinances, including Section 9.69.090 of this Chapter and Section 9.61.100 of this Zoning Code, have been exhausted.

(E)   Notice of Final Action prepared in accordance with Section 9.69.100 of this Zoning Code has been received by the Coastal Commission.

(f)    Amendment to Administrative Coastal Development Permits

 

(1)    Amendments to administrative coastal development permits issued by the Director of Community Development may be approved by the Director of Community Development upon the same criteria and subject to the same reporting requirements and procedures, including public notice and appeals, as provided for the issuance of administrative coastal development permits in Sections 9.69.110(a) through 9.69.110(f) inclusive.

(2)    If any amendment would, in the opinion of the Director of Community Development, change the nature of the approved project, or change or delete a previously imposed condition of approval, so that it no longer meets the criteria established for treating the application as an administrative coastal development permit pursuant to Section 9.69.030(a), then the application shall thereafter be treated in the manner prescribed in Section 9.69.130 of this Chapter dealing with amendments to permits other than administrative coastal development permits. (Coastal Act/30624; 14 Cal. Code of Regulations/13165).

(g)    The Director of Community Development shall not approve amendments to administrative permits issued by the Executive Director of the Coastal Commission.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 97-05, 9/9/97; Ord. 99-05, 4/27/99)

 

9.69.120 Expiration of Coastal Development Permits.
        Any Coastal Development Permit granted herein shall be conditioned upon the privileges being exercised within 24 months after the effective date thereof, except as otherwise provided within a phasing program contained in: 1) a development agreement entered into between the City and the owners of the subject property; 2) a specific plan applicable to the subject property; or 3) as otherwise provided by resolution approved by the City Council upon recommendation of the Planning Commission. Failure to exercise such permit within such period will automatically cause the coastal development permit to expire, unless an extension of time has been granted as set forth in Section 9.69.140. De Minimis Waivers issued pursuant to Section 9.69.200 of this Chapter have no expiration date, since they are not permits.

        Construction must actually be commenced within the stated period and must be diligently pursued to completion. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 97-05, 9/9/97)

 

9.69.130 Amendments to Coastal Development Permits.
(a)    The Director of Community Development or the Planning Commission (or City Council on appeal), may grant an amendment to a valid Coastal Development Permit issued by the City if, after considering facts presented in the application, by interested parties, and at the hearing (if a hearing is held), the Director or Commission makes all the findings set forth in Section 9.69.070.

(b)    An application for an amendment to a Coastal Development Permit shall be in writing and shall include an adequate description of the proposed amendment, including but not limited to maps or drawings where appropriate. The amendment application shall be filed by the owner of record of the property covered by the permit, the owner’s agent, any person with a legal right, interest, or other entitlement to use the property covered by the permit for the proposed development, or said person’s authorized agent, in accordance with the provisions of Section 9.69.050(a) of this Chapter. The application shall be filed with the Director of Community Development.

(c)    An application for an amendment shall be rejected if, in the opinion of the Director of Community Development, the proposed amendment would lessen or avoid the intended effect of a partially approved or conditioned coastal development permit unless the applicant presents newly discovered material information which could not, with reasonable diligence, have been discovered and produced before the permit was granted.

(d)    In the case of all amendments, the noticing and public hearing requirements of Section 9.69.060 shall apply. The decision of the Director of Community Development or Planning Commission shall contain the findings required in Section 9.69.070 of this Zoning Code made to support that decision.

(e)    The decision of the Director of Community Development or Planning Commission may be appealed pursuant to the procedures specified in Section 9.69.090 of this Chapter and Section 9.61.100 of this Zoning Code. (Coastal Act/30333; 14 Cal. Code of Regulations/13166).

(f)    Amendments to coastal development permits approved by the Coastal Commission, either prior to certification of the local coastal program or on appeal after certification of the local coastal program, shall not be processed by the City and instead shall be processed by the Coastal Commission. (Coastal Act/30333, 30519(a); 14 Cal. Code of Regulations/13166)

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 97-05, 9/9/97; Ord. 99-05, 4/27/99)

 

9.69.140 Extension of Time.
(a)    The expiration and extension of any Coastal Development Permit shall be in accordance with the limitations and procedures specified in Section 9.61.130.

(b)    An application for an extension of time shall be in writing and shall be filed, prior to the expiration date of the permit, by the record owner or by any other person(s) who can demonstrate a legal right, interest, or other entitlement to use the property covered by the permit. The request shall be filed with the Director of Community Development, who may require a public hearing on such application if there is indication of sufficient public interest. The Director shall hold a public hearing, in accordance with the provisions of Section 9.61.050 of this Zoning Code, if the Director determines that there has been a material change of circumstances which may affect the approved project’s consistency with the certified Local Coastal Program since the original granting of the permit. In the case of all extensions, the noticing and public hearing requirements of Section 9.69.060 shall apply. If one-third or more of the full membership of the Planning Commission objects to the granting of the permit extension on the grounds that the proposed development may not be consistent with the certified Local Coastal Program, the application shall be set for a new hearing of the Planning Commission as though it were a new coastal development permit application, in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. The decision of the Director of Community Development or the Planning Commission shall contain the findings of fact relied upon in reaching the decision.

(c)    The decision of the Director of Community Development or Planning Commission may be appealed pursuant to the procedures specified in Section 9.61.100(d) of this Zoning Code. (Coastal Act/30333; 14 Cal. Code of Regulations/13169).

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 97-05, 9/9/97; Ord. 08-04, 3/18/08)

 

9.69.150 Emergency Permits.
(a)    This subsection shall govern procedures for processing an Emergency Coastal Development Permit to perform work to resolve problems resulting from an emergency situation as defined in Section 9.75.050 of this Zoning Code. In the event of a verified emergency, temporary emergency coastal development permit authorization to proceed with remedial measures may be given by the Director of Community Development or his/her designee until such time as a regular coastal development permit application is filed pursuant to Section 9.69.050 of this Zoning Code. Applications for an Emergency Coastal Development Permit shall be made by letter to the Director of Community Development, or in person or by telephone if time constraints do not allow either of the first two alternatives to be used. (Coastal Act/30333, 30624; 14 Cal. Code of Regulations/13136, 13138).

(b)    The following information, to be reported at the time of the emergency (if it is possible to do so), or no later than within three days after the emergency, shall be included in the application to the Director of Community Development:

(1)    Nature of emergency;

(2)    Cause of emergency, insofar as this can be established;

(3)    Location of emergency;

(4)    Remedial, protective, or preventative work required to deal with the emergency; and

(5)    Circumstances during the emergency that appeared to justify the course(s) of action taken or to be taken, including probable consequences of failing to take emergency action. (Coastal Act/30333, 30624; 14 Cal. Code of Regulations/13139).

(c)    Verification. The Director of Community Development shall verify the facts, including the existence and nature of the emergency action, insofar as time allows. (Coastal Act/30333, 30624; 14 Cal. Code of Regulations/13140).

(d)    Granting an Emergency Coastal Development Permit.

(1)    The Director of Community Development shall grant the emergency coastal development permit with reasonable terms and conditions, including an expiration date and the necessity for a regular permit application later, where the Director finds that:

(A)   An emergency exists that requires action more quickly than would be permitted by the normal procedures for acquiring a Coastal Development Permit pursuant to this Chapter, and the development can and will be completed within 30 days unless otherwise specified by the terms of the emergency coastal development permit.

(B)   Public comment on the proposed emergency action has been solicited and reviewed to the extent feasible.

(C)   The proposed emergency work would be consistent with the certified Local Coastal Program.

(2)    The Director of Community Development shall provide public notice of the emergency work, with the extent and type of notice determined by the nature and time constraints of the emergency. If the nature of the emergency does not allow sufficient time for public notice to be given before the emergency work begins, the Director of Community Development shall provide public notice of the action taken, or being taken, as soon as is practical. Public notice of the nature of the emergency and the remedial actions to be taken shall be mailed by first class mail to the Coastal Commission and to all persons whom the Director of Community Development has reason to know would be interested in such action. (Coastal Act/30333, 30624; 14 Cal. Code of Regulations/13142).

(e)    Expiration. An emergency coastal development permit shall be valid for sixty (60) days from the date of issuance by the Director of Community Development. Prior to expiration of the emergency coastal development permit, the permittee shall submit an application for a regular coastal development permit, pursuant to Section 9.69.050 of this Chapter, for the emergency development performed. If the emergency development performed is to be temporary and to be removed after the emergency has passed, the removal of the emergency development shall be included as part of the regular coastal development permit application.

(f)    Report to Planning Commission and Coastal Commission. The Director of Community Development shall report in writing the granting of the emergency coastal development permit to the Planning Commission at its next scheduled meeting, and to the Coastal Commission. The report shall include a description of the nature of the emergency, the development involved, and the person or entity undertaking the development. Copies of the report shall be available at the meeting and shall be mailed to the Coastal Commission and to all persons requesting notification of coastal development permit decisions.

(g)    Limitations.

(1)    The Director of Community Development shall not grant an emergency coastal development permit for any development that falls within either the area of “Coastal Commission Permit Jurisdiction” or the Appeals Area, as shown generally on the Post-Certification Jurisdiction Map. In such areas and for such development, a request for an emergency authorization must be made to the Coastal Commission. Further, a waiver from coastal development permit requirements may also be obtained directly from the Executive Director of the Coastal Commission for development in the Appeals Area that is required to protect life or public property in accordance with Section 30611 of the Coastal Act.

 

 

(2)    For emergency permits issued by the Coastal Commission in the appeals area pursuant to Section 30624 of the Coastal Act, an application for the required follow-up regular coastal development permit for the emergency work shall be submitted to the City, in accordance with the requirements of Section 9.69.050 of this Zoning Code, no later than 60 days from the date of issuance of the emergency permit granted by the Executive Director of the Coastal Commission. The City may process the follow-up regular coastal development permit application concurrently with the Coastal Commission proceeding of the emergency permit application.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 97-05, 9/9/97; Ord. 99-05, 4/27/99)

 

9.69.160 De Minimis Project Waivers From Coastal Development Permit Requirements.
        A coastal development permit application is required for all development as defined in Section 9.75.040 of this Zoning Code, including any development for which a “de minimis” permit waiver is requested even if no other local discretionary approvals are required. For a proposed development that is de minimis as defined in Section 9.69.160(a)(2) below and Section 30624.7 of the Coastal Act, the Director of Community Development may issue a waiver from the coastal development permit requirements of this Chapter subject to all of the provisions of this section.

(a)    Limit of Applicability.

(1)    A proposed development is de minimis only if the Director of Community Development determines that it involves no potential for any adverse effects either individually or cumulatively, on coastal resources and public access and that it will be consistent with the certified local coastal program and the public access policies of Chapter Three of the California Coastal Act. The determination shall be made in writing and based upon factual evidence.

(2)    A Waiver for De Minimis Development shall be granted only for development that:

(A)   Does not fall in a class of appealable development set forth in Section 9.69.090(b) of this Chapter or as defined in Section 9.75.010 of this Zoning Code;

(B)   Is not located adjacent to a public accessway, public recreation areas, or sensitive coastal resource areas;

(C)   Does not fall within an area in which the Coastal Commission retains direct permit review under Section 9.69.030(c) of this Chapter, or for any work that is appealable to the Coastal Commission under Section 9.69.090 of this Chapter; nor

(D)   Involves a structure or similar integrated physical construction which lies partly in and partly outside the appeal area.

(3)    A De Minimis Waiver application may be combined with other local discretionary actions. Since a waiver is not an actual coastal development permit, however, conditions of approval cannot be imposed on the waiver.

(b)    Notice.

(1)    The applicant shall post at the site in compliance with Section 9.69.060(a) of this Chapter.

(2)    Within ten (10) calendar days of accepting an application for a De Minimis waiver or at least seven (7) calendar days prior to the decision on the application, the Director of Community Development shall provide notice, by first class mail, of the pending waiver of permit requirements. This notice shall be provided to all persons who have requested to be on the mailing list for that development project or site or for coastal decisions within the local jurisdiction, to all property owners and residents within one hundred (100) feet of the perimeters of the parcel on which the development is proposed, and to the Coastal Commission.

(3)    The notice shall contain the following information:

(A)   The information listed in Sections 9.69.060(b)(1) through 9.69.060(b)(4) inclusive of this Chapter;

(B)   The date of the hearing at which the De Minimis waiver may become effective;

(C)   The general procedures concerning the submission of public comments either in writing or orally prior to the decision; and

(D)   A statement that a public comment period of sufficient time to allow for the submission of comments by mail will be held prior to the decision.

(E)   A note or a numbering system which clearly distinguishes the application as being for a De Minimis Waiver and not a coastal development permit.

(c)    Findings. The Director of Community Development may only issue a waiver of coastal development permit requirements only if the following written findings are made:

(1)    That the waiver falls within the criteria of Section 9.69.160(a) above;

(2)    The proposed development has no potential for any adverse impacts, either individually or cumulatively, on public access, public recreation, or coastal resources; and

(3)    The proposed development would be consistent with the certified local coastal program.

(d)    Issuance of Waiver: Effective Date.

(1)    A De Minimis waiver of coastal development permit requirements shall not take effect unless the site has been posted and until the waiver has been reported to the Planning Commission, and the Planning Commission has not objected to the issuance of the De Minimis Waiver. If one-third or more of the full membership of the Planning Commission request that the waiver not be effective, the applicant shall be advised that a coastal development permit is required, subject to the provisions for regular coastal development permits of Chapter 9.69 of this Zoning Code, if the applicant wishes to proceed with the development.

(2)    A decision on De Minimis waivers shall not be deemed final and effective until all required findings described in Section 9.69.160(c) above have been adopted.

(e)    Compliance.

(1)    Any deviation from the application and plans on file in the Department of Community Development shall constitute grounds for the City of Dana Point to revoke the De Minimis waiver authorization and to require a coastal development permit for the entire project as well as possible enforcement action and penalties subject to Section 9.69.210 of the Zoning Code.

(2)    Within seven (7) calendar days of the Planning Commission review of the issuance of a De Minimis waiver, the Director of Community Development shall notify the Coastal Commission and any persons who specifically requested notice of such action by mailing, via first class mail, a Notice of Final Action prepared pursuant to Section 9.69.100 of this Zoning Code describing the issuance and effectiveness of the De minimis waiver.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 97-05, 9/9/97; Ord. 99-05, 4/27/99)

 

9.69.170 Enforcement.
        In addition to the enforcement provisions contained in this Chapter, the provisions of Chapter 9 of Division 20 of the Public Resources Code shall also apply with respect to violations and enforcement. (Added by Ord. 97-05, 9/9/97)

 

9.69.180 Format and Content of Coastal Development Permits.
(a)    Coastal development permits shall include the following:

(1)    The applicant’s name;

(2)    The project location;

(3)    The project description;

(4)    The permit number;

(5)    A statement setting out the reasons for the City’s approval of the permit, including the findings required in Section 9.69.070;

(6)    Any other language or drawings, in full or incorporated by reference, that are consistent with the decision to approve the permit, and are required to clarify or facilitate carrying out the intent of the City’s action;

(7)    Any conditions approved by the City;

(8)    Such standard provisions as approved by resolution of the City;

(9)    The signature of the Director of Community Development, and

(10)  The time for commencement of the approved development except that where the City on original hearing or on appeal has not imposed any specific time for commencement of construction pursuant to a permit, the time for commencement shall be two years from the date of the final vote by the local body on the coastal development permit application. Each coastal development permit shall contain a statement that any request for an extension of the time of commencement must be applied for prior to expiration of the permit. (Coastal Act/30333; 14 Cal. Code of Regulations/13156).

(b)    Coastal development permits approved by the Planning Commission or City Council may be in the form of a resolution, provided that all the items described in Section 9.69.180(a) above are contained in the resolution.

(c)    Notice of Receipt and Acknowledgment.

(1)    No building permits shall be issued for development approved by a coastal development permit until the City receives a written acknowledgment signed by the authorized permittee(s) or agent(s) stating that they have received a copy of the coastal development permit and understand and accept its contents, including all conditions of approval.

(2)    The signed acknowledgment should be returned within ten (10) working days following issuance of the coastal development permit but in any case prior to issuance of the building permits.

(Added by Ord. 97-05, 9/9/97)

Chapter 9.71 SITE DEVELOPMENT PERMITS*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 18-07. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


9.71.010 Intent and Purpose.
        This Chapter establishes a process to promote superior aesthetics, design compatibility and high quality site planning. The Site Development Permit process provides for the effective and efficient review of development proposals to ensure compatible and enhanced site and building design throughout the community. This process provides a means to implement the Urban Design Element of the General Plan and the City’s Urban Design Guidelines. Through Site Development Permits the City can achieve excellence and innovation in the design of development projects. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 9.71.020 Site Development Permit Required.
(a)    When no other discretionary permit is required, a Site Development Permit shall be required for all residential development except single-family homes on previously subdivided lots, and for all non-residential developments exceeding two thousand (2,000) gross square feet.

(b)    Applications for Conditional Use Permits, Variances, Coastal Development Permits and other permits and entitlements of this Code will be reviewed with the same attention to design as Site Developments Permits. All such applications are subject to Site Development Permit requirements, except that all coastal development permit applications shall satisfy all requirements of Chapters 9.27 “Coastal Overlay District” and 9.69 “Coastal Development Permit”.

(c)    A Temporary Site Development Permit shall be required for all uses so identified in Chapter 9.39 pursuant to the provisions of Section 9.71.040.

(d)    The Director of Community Development may require that a Site Development Permit be filed for any proposal determined by the Director not to be in clear compliance with General Plan policies.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 97-05, 9/9/97)

 

9.71.030 Procedural Requirements for Site Development Permits.
(a)    Application for Site Development Permits shall be processed in accordance with Section 9.61.040.

(b)    When a Site Development Permit application is performed in conjunction with another discretionary permit review, the Director of Community Development shall conduct the review and shall make a recommendation to the Planning Commission.

 

 

(c)    When an application for a Site Development Permit proposes more than ten thousand (10,000) gross square feet of nonresidential building area or five (5) or more residential dwelling units, the application must be reviewed by the Planning Commission at a public hearing. All other applications may be processed in accordance with the provisions of Section 9.71.034.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94; Ord. 99-04, 3/9/99)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 9.71.034 Minor Site Development Permits.
(a)    Application for Minor Site Development Permits are restricted to the following requests:

(1)    Development with less than ten thousand (10,000) gross square feet of new residential building floor area.

(2)    Four (4) or less residential dwelling units.

(3)    Temporary uses and structures as described in Chapter 9.39.

(4)    Any multifamily projects where a minimum twenty percent (20%) of total units are restricted to be affordable to lower income households or at least forty percent (40%) of total units are restricted to be affordable to moderate income households (for a period of time equal to provisions under State Density Bonus Law (California Government Code Section 65915)).

(5)    Certain types of improvements as may be specified by this Code.

(b)    The submitted requirements for a Minor Site Development Permit application shall be the same as those required in Section 9.61.040(e).

(c)    Decisions on Minor Site Development Permit applications shall be made administratively by the Director of Community Development. The Director shall include a determination of findings and appropriate conditions in the decision. The basis for approval, conditional approval, or denial of a Minor Site Development Permit shall be as specified in Section 9.71.050.

(d)    Subject to a determination by the Director of Community Development, a Minor Site Development Permit application may be placed on the Planning Commission agenda for review.

(e)    Subject to a determination by the Director of Community Development, the noticing requirements for a Minor Site Development Permit may be reduced from the standard five hundred (500) foot radius requirement to a notification of adjacent property owners only. If the item is reviewed by the Planning Commission, then a three hundred (300) foot radius noticing shall be provided.

(Added by Ord. 99-04, 3/9/99; amended by Ord. 10-06, 5/24/10)

 

9.71.040 Procedural Requirements for Temporary Site Development Permits.
(a)    Filing of Application. The items required for filing shall include:

(1)    A complete Application Form.

(2)    An application fee as specified in the current structure of service fees.

(3)    A Site Plan showing the layout of the proposed activity, use, or structure, preferably drawn to scale (five (5) copies).

(4)    A letter of authorization from the property owner(s), if different than the applicant.

(5)    A letter of explanation signed and dated by the applicant demonstrating how the request meets the following criteria for granting a Temporary Site Development Permit.

(A)   That the temporary use applied for is a special event permitted under this Policy.

(B)   That the special event is consistent with the City Zoning Code and will not be incompatible with the City’s future General Plan.

 

(C)   That the site for the special event is adequate in size, shape, and access to accommodate additional demands generated by the proposed use.

 

(D)   That the special event as proposed will protect the safety and general welfare of the community and will not create significant noise, traffic, or other conditions or situations that may be detrimental or incompatible with other permitted uses in the vicinity.

(6)    Submittal requirements for special events shall be as specified in Section 9.39.070(d).

(b)    Noticing. No notice shall be required for Temporary Site Development Permits unless the Director of Community Development determines that such notice is necessary. In making a determination to require noticing, the Director shall specify the form and scope of the required notice. Noticing for special events shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of Section 9.39.070(e).

(c)    Consideration of Application.

(1)    An application shall be submitted to the Director of Community Development no later than thirty (30) days prior to the date of the proposed event.

(2)    The application shall be acted on by the Director of Community Development no later than thirty (30) days from the date the application is accepted for filing.

(3)    The Director of Community Development in consideration shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny any application and shall state findings and reasons for such decision. The Director of Community Development, as appropriate, shall have the authority to attach conditions which directly relate or further the public health, safety, and general welfare and ensure the fulfillment and intent of the City’s Municipal Code.

(4)    If an application is granted subject to conditions, the permit shall become effective only after the conditions have been fulfilled or after the applicant has provided reasonable and sufficient guarantees that the conditions will be fulfilled.

(d)    Appeals.

(1)    Any applicant or affected party may appeal any determination of conditions established by the Director of Community Development.

(2)    Any appeal of the Director’s decision shall be governed by Section 9.61.110.

(e)    Revocation. A Temporary Site Development Permit may be revoked in accordance with Section 9.61.120 or if the permitted use is conducted in a manner which is detrimental to the public peace, health, safety, and welfare of the City, or constitutes a public nuisance.

                When a Temporary Site Development Permit has been revoked, no other Temporary Site Development Permit shall be issued under this policy to the same permittee within one (1) calendar year of the date of revocation.

(f)    Exemptions. The following are specifically exempt from the provisions of this Section:

(1)    Any use which is subject to any other discretionary approval shall not be considered under the provisions of this Section.

(2)    Private events conducted on private residential property which are typical activities ancillary to residential uses shall not be subject to the provisions of this Section but shall be governed by any and all other applicable provisions of the Dana Point Municipal Code and all other applicable laws.

(3)    Non-profit organizations and associations which endorse activities, community events, or fund raisers for non-commercial profit may be exempt from the fees established in this Section, but shall submit the remaining application filing requirements for review and approval by the Director of Community Development. Applicants claiming non-profit status shall include a notice of participation and expected return from all participating non-profit organizations or agencies.

(4)    Any temporary use, structure, or activity which clearly does not intensify the existing permitted use and is ancillary or incidental to the approved use, structure, or activity, shall be exempt from both the filing fee and application requirements. If it is unclear if such an event should be subject to the requirements of this Section, the Director of Community Development shall determine if a proposed use necessitates a Temporary Site Development Permit.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94)

 

9.71.050 Basis for Approval, Conditional Approval, or Denial of a Site Development Permit.
        Approval, conditional approval, or denial of any Site Development Permit application shall be based upon the following factors and principles:

(a)    Compliance of the site design with development standards of this Code.

(b)    Suitability of the site for the proposed use and development.

(c)    Compliance with all elements of the General Plan and all applicable provisions of the Urban Design Guidelines.

(d)    Site and structural design which is appropriate for the site and function of the proposed use(s), without requiring a particular style or type of architecture.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.71.060 Expiration and Extension of a Site Development Permit.
        The expiration and extension of any site development permit shall be in accordance with the limitations and procedures specified in Section 9.61.130.

(Added by Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94)

 

9.71.070 Notice of Hearing.
        Notice of a public hearing to consider a Site Development Permit shall be provided pursuant to Section 9.61.050. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94)

 

9.71.080 Notice of Action.
(a)    For those applications decided by the Director of Community Development, the Director shall notify the applicant, in writing, of the action taken within fifteen (15) days of the decision.

(b)    For those applications decided by the Planning Commission, the Director of Community Development shall notify the applicant, in writing, of the action taken within fifteen (15) days of the Planning Commission decision.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94)

Chapter 9.73 DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS
9.73.010 Authority and Scope.
        This Chapter is adopted pursuant to Government Code Section 65864 et seq. All development agreements entered into after the effective date of this Chapter shall be processed in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.73.020 Intent and Purpose.
        The State Legislature has authorized cities to enter into development agreements which provide greater certainty to developers to proceed with approved projects according to local policies and regulations. A development agreement should include public benefits that extend beyond those already forthcoming through project approvals. The Planning Commission and City Council shall make a finding at the time of consideration for the development agreement that the above purpose has been achieved. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.73.030 Application Forms.
(a)    The Director of Community Development shall prescribe the form of each application, notice and document provided for or required under this Chapter for the preparation, processing and implementation of development agreements. The application shall include as separate documents, and/or concurrent land use actions and supporting documents by reference, the following information:

(1)    Duration of the agreement;

(2)    The permitted uses of the property;

(3)    The density or intensity of use of the property;

(4)    The maximum height and size of proposed buildings;

(5)    Provisions for reservation of dedication of land for public purposes;

(6)    Fiscal impact statement;

(7)    Phasing and project completion date;

(8)    A list of proposed public benefits;

(9)    An assessment of how the development agreement will address the applicable provisions of the City’s Growth Management Element which require that the project will maintain a balance with the required infrastructure needs of the project;

(10)  Consistency with the General Plan and any applicable Specific Plan.

(b)    The Director of Community Development may require an applicant for a development agreement to submit such information and supporting data as the Director of Community Development deems necessary to process the application.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.73.040 Fees.
        The City Council shall establish, and from time to time amend by resolution, a schedule of fees imposed for the filing and processing of each application and document required by this Chapter. The fee may be waived in whole or in part by the City Council. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.73.050 Qualified Applicant.
        An application for a development agreement may only be filed by a person who has a legal or equitable interest in the real property for which a development agreement is sought or the authorized representative of such a person. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.73.060 Proposed Agreement.
        Each application shall be accompanied by the development agreement proposed by the applicant. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.73.070 Filing and Review of Application.
        The Community Development Department shall endorse on the application the date it is received. The Director of Community Development shall review the application and determine the additional requirements necessary to complete the agreement. The Director may reject the application if it is not completed in the manner required by this Chapter. After receiving the required information, the Director of Community Development shall prepare a staff report. The staff report shall analyze the proposed development and shall contain a recommendation as to whether or not the development agreement proposed, or in an amended form, would be consistent with the General Plan and any applicable Specific Plan. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.73.080 Notice.
        The Director of Community Development shall give Notice of Intention to consider adoption of the development agreement and any other public hearing required by law or this Chapter. Notice of Intention to consider adoption of the development agreement may be given concurrently and as a part of the required public hearing notice for consideration of related land use proposal(s). The development agreement may include all or a part of the concurrent approved land use proposal(s). (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.73.090 Processing.
        The Planning Commission shall consider the proposed development agreement and make a recommendation thereon to the City Council in the manner set forth in this Chapter. The Planning Commission shall forward its recommendations to the City Council within thirty (30) days of the time specified for the public hearing in the Notice of Intention. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.73.100 Notice of Intention and Public Hearing.
        All notice required by this Chapter shall be given in the following manner:

(a)    Mailing or delivery to the applicant and to all persons, including businesses, corporations or other public or private entities, shown on the last equalized assessment roll as owning real property within five hundred (500) feet of the property which is the subject of the development agreement or by publication as authorized by Section 65854(b) of the Government Code.

(b)    Mailing by first class mail to any person who has filed a written request therefor with the Director of Community Development.

(c)    Publication at least once in a newspaper of general circulation published and circulated in the City.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.73.110 Failure to Receive Notice.
        The failure to receive notice by any person entitled thereto by law or this Chapter does not affect the authority of the City to enter into a development agreement. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.73.120 Hearing and Findings of the Planning Commission.
        The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed development agreement at the time and place specified in the Notice of Intention. The Planning Commission shall make its recommendation to the City Council in writing. The Planning Commission must make the following findings in order to recommend approval of any development agreement:

(a)    That the proposed development agreement is consistent with the objectives, policies, general land uses and programs specified in the General Plan and any applicable Specific Plan;

(b)    That the proposed development agreement is consistent with the City’s Growth Management Element and adequately provides for the installation and operation of the infrastructure required to service each phase of the subject development;

(c)    That the development proposed in association with the subject development agreement is compatible with the uses authorized in the district in which the real property is located;

(d)    That the proposed development agreement is in conformity with the public necessity, public convenience, general welfare, and good land use practices;

(e)    That the proposed development agreement provides for public benefits to a degree which warrants any concessions granted by the City;

(f)    That the proposed development agreement will in no way be detrimental to the public health, safety, and general welfare;

(g)    That the proposed development agreement will not adversely affect the orderly development of property;

(h)    That the proposed development agreement will have a positive fiscal impact on the City.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.73.130 Hearing by the City Council.
        After the recommendation of the Planning Commission or after the expiration of the time period specified in Section 9.73.090, the Director of Community Development shall give notice of a public hearing before the City Council in the manner provided for in Section 9.73.080. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.73.140 Decision by the City Council.
(a)    After completing the public hearing and consideration of the recommendation, if any, of the Planning Commission, the City Council may accept, modify, or disapprove the proposed development agreement. The City Council may, but need not, refer the matters not previously considered by the Planning Commission during its hearing, back to the Planning Commission for report and recommendation. The Planning Commission shall not be required to hold a public hearing on matters referred back to it by the City Council.

(b)    The development agreement may not be approved unless the City Council can make the findings listed in Section 9.73.120.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94)

 

9.73.150 Approval of Development Agreement.
        The development agreement shall be approved by the adoption of an ordinance. Upon the adoption of the ordinance, the City shall enter into the development agreement by the execution thereof by the City Manager. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.73.160 Amendment and Cancellation.
(a)    The City shall retain the authority to impose new obligations on the part of the developer if it is found that infrastructure deficiencies are found during the life of the development agreement.

(b)    Either the City or the applicant or successor in interest thereto may propose an amendment or cancellation in whole or in part of the development agreement.

(c)    The procedure for proposing and approving an amendment to or cancellation in whole or in part of the development agreement shall be the same as the procedure for entering into a development agreement.

(d)    Except as provided for in Section 9.73.180, the development agreement may only be amended or canceled in whole or in part by the mutual consent of all parties to the development agreement.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.73.170 Recordation.
(a)    No later than ten (10) days after the City enters into the development agreement, the City Clerk shall record with the County Recorder a copy of the development agreement.

(b)    If the parties to the agreement or their successors in interest amend or cancel the agreement, or if the City terminates or modifies the agreement for failure of the applicant to comply in good faith with the terms or conditions of the agreement, the City Clerk shall cause notice of such action to be recorded with the County Recorder.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.73.180 Periodic Review.
(a)    The City Council shall review the development agreement at least every twelve (12) months from the date the development agreement is entered into until expiration of the term of the agreement.

(b)    The Director of Community Development shall give the applicant or successor in interest thereto at least thirty (30) days’ advance notice of the time at which the City Council will review the development agreement.

(c)    The City Council may refer the matter to the Planning Commission for further proceedings or for a report and recommendation.

(d)    The applicant or successor in interest thereto shall demonstrate good faith compliance with the terms of the development agreement.

(e)    If, as a result of such periodic review the City Council finds and determines, on the basis of substantial evidence, that the applicant or successor in interest thereto has not complied in good faith with the terms or conditions of the development agreement, the City Council may commence proceedings to enforce, modify, or terminate the development agreement.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.73.190 Modification or Termination.
(a)    If, upon a finding under Section 9.73.170(e), the City Council determines to proceed with modification or termination of the development agreement, the City Council shall give notice to the applicant or successor in interest thereto of its intention to do so. The notice shall contain:

(1)    The time and place of the hearing;

(2)    A statement as to whether or not the City Council proposes to modify or terminate the development agreement;

(3)    Any proposed modification to the development agreement;

(4)    Other information which the City Council considers necessary to inform the applicant or successor in interest thereto of the nature of the hearing.

(b)    At the time set for the hearing on the modification or termination, the City Council may refer the matter back to the Planning Commission for further proceedings or for report and recommendation. The City Council may take such action as it deems necessary to protect the interests of the City. The decision of the City Council shall be final.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

 

9.73.200 Irregularity in Proceedings.
        No action, inaction or recommendation regarding the proposed development agreement shall be held void or invalid or be set aside by a court by reason of any error, irregularity, informality, neglect or omission as to any matter pertaining to the application, notice, finding, record, hearing, report, recommendation, or any other matters of procedure whatsoever unless after an examination of the entire record the court is of the opinion that the error complained of was prejudicial and that a different result would have been probable if the error had not occurred or existed. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93)

Chapter 9.75 DEFINITIONS AND ILLUSTRATIONS OF TERMS *
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 18-01, 18-07 and 19-01. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


Note
*       For general terminology used throughout the Zoning Code, see Section 9.01.100. For terminology used in the Zoning Code, but not defined in this Chapter or in Section 9.01.100, see the Uniform Building Code or accepted dictionaries of the English language. The Director of Community Development shall interpret all definitions in this Code and Chapter.

 

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 9.75.010 “A” Definitions and Illustrations.
        Abandoned — the cessation of use and maintenance of a property by the owner thereof with no intention of resuming the use of the property. Vacant properties offered for sale or rental, but effectively maintained in an orderly manner shall not be construed to be abandoned.

        Abutting Land — a parcel of land having a common boundary with another parcel of land including parcels which have no common boundary other than a common corner.

        Accessory Building or Structure — a building or structure which is incidental to the principal structure, and not designed for human habitation. Such structures may be attached to or detached from the primary structure. Typical accessory buildings or structures would include garages, gazebos, workshops, sheds and patios.

        Accessory Living Quarters — See Section 9.75.270.

        Accessory Use — a use of a portion of land or building which is customarily and clearly incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the land or building which is located on the same lot as such principal use. Accessory uses typically are very small in proportion to the principal use and associated structures exceed six (6) feet in height.

        Acreage, Gross — the total land area within a defined lot or parcel of land before the exclusion of public rights-of-way, public parks and public school sites.

        Acreage, Net — the total area of a site or lot minus any and all required dedications for public streets and rights-of-way, public parks, school sites, and other facilities.

        Action — the decision made by the review authority on a land use application, including appropriate findings, environmental determination and conditions of approval, where applicable.

        Addition — any construction that is attached to an existing building or facility and which increases the size or capacity of a building or facility in terms of site coverage, height, length, width, or gross floor area.

        Adult Bookstore — See Section 9.75.270.

        Adult Business — See Section 9.75.270.

        Adult Cabaret — See Section 9.75.270.

        Adult Day Care Facility — See Section 9.75.270.

        Adult Day Health Care — See Section 9.75.270.

        Adult Day Health Center — See Section 9.75.270.

        Adult Hotel Motel — See Section 9.75.270.

        Adult Modeling Studio — See Section 9.75.270.

        Adult Picture Arcade — See Section 9.75.270.

        Adult Theater — See Section 9.75.270.

        Affordable Housing — housing which is rented or sold for an amount that is limited by a set percentage of the County median income, adjusted for family size, as reported and updated annually by the Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD). Affordable housing is divided into three (3) categories — Very Low, Low, and Moderate defined as follows:

        Very Low — Housing which rents for an amount not exceeding thirty (30) percent of the total monthly household income for a very low income household; or housing with a total purchase price not exceeding two and one-half (21/2) times the annual household income for a very low income household. A very low income household is defined as a household with an annual income of not more than fifty (50) percent of the County median income.

        Low — Housing which rents for an amount not exceeding thirty (30) percent of the total monthly household income for a low income household; or housing with a total purchase price not exceeding two and one-half (21/2) times the annual household income for a low income household. A low income household is defined as a household with an annual income of not more than eighty (80) percent of the County median income.

        Moderate — Housing which rents for an amount not exceeding thirty (30) percent of the total monthly household income for a moderate income household; or housing with total purchase price not exceeding two and one-half (2½) times the annual household income for a moderate income household. A moderate income household is defined as a household with an income of not more than one hundred twenty (120) percent of the County median income.

        Agent — any person authorized to act for the owner of a property by virtue of a notarized statement of authorization, a proof of contract to purchase, or a lease to the property.

        Aggrieved Person — any person who, in person or through a representative, appeared at a public hearing of the Coastal Commission or City of Dana Point in connection with the decision or action appealed, or who, by other appropriate means prior to a hearing, informed the Coastal Commission or City of Dana Point of the nature of his or her concerns or who for good cause was unable to do either. “Aggrieved person” includes the applicant for a permit and, in the case of an approval of a local coastal program for the City of Dana Point, the City of Dana Point. (Coastal Act/30801).

        Alcoholic Beverage Outlet, Off Sale — See Section 9.75.270.

        Alcoholic Beverage Outlet, On Sale — See Section 9.75.270.

        Alley — a narrow vehicular service way, either public or private, which provides a permanently reserved means of vehicular access to a private or public property. Alleys are typically located along rear property.

        Alteration — any change or rearrangement in the supporting members of an existing building, structure, or improvement such as bearing walls, columns, beams, girders or interior partitions, as well as any change in doors or windows, or any enlargement to or diminution of a building or structure, whether horizontally or vertically, or change in the exterior appearance of any building or structure, or the moving of a building or structure from one location to another.

        Alteration, Structural — any change in the supporting members of a structure such as bearing walls, partitions, columns, beams or girders, floor joists or roof joists, roof rafters, foundations, piles, or similar components.

        Amateur Radio Antenna — any antenna used to receive and/or transmit radio signals on the amateur radio band, as designated by the Federal Communications Commission.

        Amenity — a natural or man-made feature which provides a visual or recreational enhancement for a particular property.

        Animal — unless otherwise stated for a specific situation, “animal” includes birds, fish, mammals, and reptiles.

        Animal Hospital — See Section 9.75.270.

        Animal Shelter — See Section 9.75.270.

        Antenna — an electronic device comprised of one or more integrated elements which receives and transmits radio waves to provide commercial and non-commercial wireless telecommunication services.

        Antenna Facility — see “Commercial Wireless Telecommunication Antenna Facility.”

        Antenna Use Permit — a discretionary land use permit specifically for the entitlement of commercial wireless telecommunication antenna facilities within the City of Dana Point.

        Apartment — two (2) or more rooms with private bath and kitchen facilities comprising an independent self-contained dwelling unit in a building containing more than two (2) dwelling units for rent.

        Apartment Building — a structure containing two (2) or more apartment units which is intended for rental purposes.

        Appeal in the Floodplain Districts — a request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator’s interpretation of any provision of this Chapter or a request for an exemption.

        Appealable Development, Coastal — The following types of development may be appealed to the Coastal Commission pursuant to procedures described in Section 9.69.090:

(1)    Developments approved by the City of Dana Point between the sea and the first public road paralleling the sea or within 300 feet of the inland extent of any beach or of the mean high tide line of the sea where there is no beach, whichever is the greater distance.

(2)    Developments approved by the City of Dana Point not included within paragraph (1) that are located on tidelands, submerged lands, public trust lands, within one hundred (100) feet of any wetland, estuary, or stream, within three hundred (300) feet of the top of the seaward face of any coastal bluff.

(3)    Developments approved by City of Dana Point not included within paragraph (1) or (2) that are located in a sensitive coastal resource area.

(4)    Any development which constitutes a major public works project or a major energy facility, as defined in Section 9.75.130 of this Zoning Code. (Coastal Act/30603(a)).

        Appealable Development — any Coastal Development Permit application that may be appealed to the California Coastal Commission pursuant to the Coastal Act of 1976, as amended. (Coastal)

        Applicant — the owner(s) or lessee(s) of property, or their authorized agents, or person(s) who have contracted to purchase property contingent upon their ability to obtain the required entitlements, who requests in writing and on the appropriate forms, the approval of a permit, license, certificate, or other entitlement from the City.

        Applicant, Coastal — the person, trust, partnership, corporation, other legal entity, or state or local government agency or special district applying for a coastal development permit. (Coastal).

        Application — the form and information fees submitted by an applicant for purposes of requesting an entitlement from a public agency.

        Aquaculture — a form of agriculture that is devoted to the controlled growing and harvesting of fish, shellfish, and plants in marine, brackish, and freshwater. (Coastal Act/30100.2).

        Area of Shallow Flooding — any area designated AO, AH or VO Zone on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). In such zones, the base flood depths range from one (1) to three (3) feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident.

        Area of Special Flood-Related Erosion Hazard — the area subject to severe flood-related erosion losses. The area is designated as Zone E on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).

        Area of Special Flood Hazard — an area having special flood or flood-related erosion hazards, and shown on an FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-30, AE, A99, AH, VO, V1-V30, VE, or V.

        Area of Special Mudslide (i.e., Mudflow) Hazard — the area subject to severe mudslides (i.e., mudflows). The area is designated as Zone M on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).

        Athletic Field — See Section 9.75.270.

        Automobile Wrecking — See Section 9.75.270.

        Awning — a roof-like cover that is attached to, and projects from, the wall of a building for the purpose of shielding from the elements. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94; Ord. 97-05, 9/9/97; Ord. 98-06, 9/22/98; Ord. 03-07, 4/9/03; Ord. 11-02, 2/28/11)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 9.75.020 “B” Definitions and Illustrations.
        Balcony — a platform that projects from the wall of a building, typically above the first level, and is surrounded by a rail, balustrade, or parapet.

        Base Flood — the flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the 100-year flood).

        Basement — living or storage area which is constructed wholly underground, meaning below the exterior finished grade on all sides, with no more than 20% percent of the lineal footage of the exterior wall broken by light wells, no light well wider than four feet and no light well within six feet of another light well. An exception to these provisions, subject to a Minor Site Development Permit, would allow adequate daylighting of one wall to provide vehicular ingress and egress, would permit subterranean residential garages to be considered as a basement for the Ritz Cove (PRD 4) area only. Any structural area meeting this definition shall not be considered a story.

        Basement in the Floodplain Overlay Districts — the area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level on all sides).

        Bay Window — a window or group of windows projecting from a room.

        Beach — a sandy or gravelly portion of land along the edge of the ocean.

        Bed and Breakfast Inn — See Section 9.75.270.

        Bedroom — any habitable room other than a bathroom, kitchen, dining room or living room.

        Berm — a mound of earth, usually two (2) to six (6) feet in height.

        Bicycle Lane (Class II facility) — a corridor expressly reserved for bicycles, existing on a street or roadway in addition to any lanes for use by motorized vehicles.

        Bicycle Path (Class I facility) — a paved path not on a street or roadway and expressly reserved for bicycles traversing an otherwise unpaved area. Bicycle paths may parallel roads but typically are separated from them by landscaping.

        Bicycle Route (Class III facility) — a facility shared with motorists and identified only by signs, a bicycle route has no pavement markings or lane stripes.

        Bikeway — a term that encompasses bicycle lanes, bicycle paths, and bicycle routes.

        Block — a unit of land bounded by streets or by a combination of streets and public land, railroad rights-of-way, waterways or any other barrier to the continuity to development.

        Bluff — see “Coastal Bluff.”

        Body or Hearing Body — the individual or group duly authorized by this Code to take action, grant changes to, relief from, or special consideration under this Code.

        Body Painting Studio — See Section 9.75.270.

        Breakaway Wall — any type of wall, whether solid or lattice, and whether constructed of concrete, masonry, wood, metal, plastic, or any other suitable building materials which are not part of the structural support of the building and which are designed to break away under abnormally high tides or wave action without causing any damage to the structural integrity of the building on which they are used or any buildings to which they might be carried by flood waters. Breakaway walls shall have a safe design loading resistance of not less than ten (10) and no more than twenty (20) pounds per square foot. Use of breakaway walls must be certified by a registered engineer or architect and shall meet the following conditions:

(a)    Breakaway wall collapse shall result from a water load less than that which would occur during the base flood; and

(b)    The elevated portion of the building shall not incur any structural damage due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously in the event of the base flood.

        Buffer Area — an area of land separating two (2) distinct land uses that acts to soften or mitigate the effects of one land use on the other, generally located on the site of the offending land use.

        Building — any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy.

        Building Height, Non-Residential — the vertical distance, measured from the interior of the building, by which a building extends above the existing grade, finished grade, finished pad elevation (excluding subterranean parking structure finished pad elevation), ceiling of uppermost level of subterranean parking structure, or eighteen (18) inches above the flood protection level, whichever is lower, to the top of the roof. Refer to Section 9.05.110 for clarification.

        Building Height, Residential — the vertical distance, measured from the interior of the building, by which a building extends above the existing grade, finished pad elevation (excluding basement finished pad elevation), ceiling of a maximum ten (10) foot high basement, or eighteen (18) inches above the flood protection level, whichever is lower, to the top of the roof. Refer to Section 9.05.110 for clarification.

        Building, Historic — a building listed individually on the National Register of Historic Places by a State or County agency charged with recognition or preservation of historic structures, or by resolution of the City Council as having significant local or regional historical importance and value to the community.

        Building Pad — the level area of a lot designed for the construction of buildings and structures.

        Building, Primary — a building within which the principal use or occupancy of a site is conducted.

        Building Site — a lot or contiguous lots of land which provides the area and open spaces required for construction of a building or buildings, and which abuts a public or private street, alley or easement.

        Bus Turnout — a paved indentation in the curb of a roadway designed to allow buses to pull off to the side and stop while picking up and dropping off passengers. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94; Ord. 96-10, 8/13/96; Ord. 97-05, 9/9/97; Ord. 03-07, 4/9/03)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 9.75.030 “C” Definitions and Illustrations.
        California Coastal Act (or) Coastal Act — the California Coastal Act of 1976, Division 20 of the Public Resources Code (commencing with Section 30000), as amended.

        Camp, Public — See Section 9.75.270.

        Caretaker’s Residence — See Section 9.75.270.

        Cemetery — See Section 9.75.270.

        Carport — a roofed structure providing space for the parking or storage of motor vehicles and enclosed on less than four sides.

        Carrier — a commercial enterprise licensed by the Federal Communications Commission to provide wireless telecommunication services.

 

 

        Cellar — see “Basement.”

        Centerline — the centerline of a street as referred to in this Code shall mean the right-of-way centerline as established by the County Engineer of the County, by the Director of Public Works of the City, or by the State Division of Highways of the State; in any case in which the foregoing definition is not applicable, the Planning Commission shall designate the centerline.

        Certificate of Occupancy — a document issued to allow a building to be occupied or used and certifying that the building or structure has been constructed, or will be used, in compliance with all the applicable municipal codes and ordinances.

        Certified Coastal Land Use Plan — a land use plan which has been effectively certified by the Coastal Commission pursuant to Section 30512 of the Coastal Act as amended. (See definition of “Land Use Plan (LUP amendment), Coastal” in Section 9.75.120 of this Zoning Code). (Coastal).

        Certified Local Coastal Program (LCP) — a local coastal program which has been effectively certified by the California Coastal Commission pursuant to Section 30512 and 30513 of the Coastal Act as amended. (See definition of “Local Coastal Program” in Section 9.75.120 of this Zoning Code). (Coastal).

        Chapter Three Policies or Chapter 3 Policies — those policies of the Coastal Act contained in Chapter Three, commencing with Section 30200, which constitute the standards by which the adequacy of local coastal programs and the permissibility of proposed development subject to the provisions of the Coastal Act is determined.

        Child Day Care Facility — See Section 9.75.270.

        Chimney — a vertical masonry structure extending vertically above the roof of a building for the purpose of carrying off heat, smoke, soot, and/or ash.

        Church — See Section 9.75.270.

        Circulation System Master Plan — the plan which identifies the adopted and proposed routes for all Circulation Element roadways and bikeways within the City.

        Cluster Development — a development in which a number of dwelling units are placed in closer proximity than usual, or are attached, with the purpose of retaining a significant amount of open space area.

        Coastal Access, Bluff Top — provides public access for public viewing of the shoreline along a coastal bluff top area.

        Coastal Access, Lateral — provides public access and use along the shoreline or parallel to the sea.

        Coastal Access, Recreational — provides public access to coastal recreational resources through means other than those provided by bluff top, lateral, trail and/or vertical coastal access, including but not limited to parking facilities, viewing platforms and bluff top parks.

        Coastal Access, Trail — provides public access through a coastal recreational path, including to and along lakes, rivers, streams, freshwater marshes, significant habitat and open space areas or similar resource areas, and which also may link inland recreational facilities to the shoreline.

        Coastal Access, Vertical — provides a public access connection between the first public road, public use area nearest the sea, or trail and the publicly owned tidelands or established lateral access.

 



 

        Coastal Bluff — within the Coastal Zone, coastal bluffs are: (1) those bluffs, the toe of which is now or was historically (generally within the last 200 years) subject to marine erosion; and (2) those bluffs, the toe of which is not now or was not historically subject to marine erosion, but the toe of which lies within an area otherwise identified as an Appealable Area. (Coastal Act/30501, 30620.6; 14 Cal. Code of Regulations/13577(h).

        Coastal Bluff, Bottom — the lower point of a coastal bluff, subject to determination by the Director of Community Development, where there is a distinct or general transition from the vertical edge (bluff face) to a horizontal plain which is the base of the bluff.

        Coastal Bluff Edge — the upper termination of a coastal bluff. When the top edge of the coastal bluff is rounded away from the face of the coastal bluff, the edge shall be defined as that point nearest the coastal bluff beyond which the downward gradient of the land surface increases more or less continuously until it reaches the general gradient of the coastal bluff. In a case where there is a step-like feature at the top of the coastal bluff, the landward edge of the top-most riser shall be considered the bluff edge. The termini of the bluff edge along the seaward face of the bluff shall be defined as a point reached by bisecting the angle formed by a line coinciding with the general trend of the bluff line along the inland facing portion of the bluff. (Coastal Act/30501, 30620.6; 14 Cal. Code of Regulations/13577(h)).

        Coastal Bluff, Face — the portion of a coastal bluff between the top and bottom of the coastal bluff.

        Coastal Bluff, Top — the upper portion of a coastal bluff, subject to determination by the Director of Community Development, where there is a transition from the vertical edge (bluff face) a horizontal plain which is the plateau, or upper elevation of the bluff.

        Coastal Commission — the California Coastal Commission or its successor agency as created pursuant to Division 20 of the Public Resources Code as amended. Whenever the term California Coastal Zone Conservation Commission appears in any law, it means the California Coastal Commission. (Coastal).

        Coastal Commission Permit Jurisdiction Area — all tidelands, submerged lands, and public trust lands (whether filled or unfilled) within the Coastal Zone. (Coastal Act/30519(b)).

        Coastal Dependent Development — any development or use which requires a site on, or adjacent to, the sea to be able to function at all. (Coastal Act/30101).

        Coastal Dependent Use — Any use which requires a site on, or adjacent to, the sea to be able to function at all. (Coastal Act/30101).

        Coastal Development Permit — any license, certificate, approval, or other entitlement for use granted or denied by any public agency which is subject to the provisions of Division 20 of the Public Resources Code as amended. (Coastal Act/30110).

        Coastal Flood Plain Development Study — a report which contains technical criteria and standards necessary to provide protection of property from the ocean along the coastal plain.

        Coastal High Hazard Area — the area subject to high velocity waters, including coastal and tidal inundation or tsunamis. The area is designated on a Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) as Zone V1-V30, VE, V, or AE and is also designated as FP-3.

        Coastal High Hazard Incorporated Area — the area subject to ocean related hazards, including but not limited to high waves, storms, hurricane wave wash, and tsunamis. (Coastal)

        Coastal-Related Development — any development or use that is dependent on a coastal-dependent development or use. (Coastal Act/30101.3).

        Coastal Plan — the California Coastal Zone Conservation Plan prepared and adopted by the California Coastal Zone Conservation Commission and submitted to the Governor and the Legislature on December 1, 1975, pursuant to the California Coastal Zone Conservation Act of 1972 (commencing with Section 27000). (Coastal).

        Coastal Zone — that land and water area of the City of Dana Point, specified on the maps identified and set forth in Section 17 of that chapter of the Statutes of the 1975-76 Regular Session enacting the California Coastal Act of 1976, extending seaward to the state’s outer limit of jurisdiction, including all offshore islands, and extending inland generally 1,000 yards from the mean high tide line of the sea. (Coastal Act/30103(a)).

        Co-Location — the locating of two or more antenna facilities operated by more than one service provider at a single location and mounted to a common antenna structure, wall, roof or other parts of a building.

        Commercial Antenna — an antenna used for commercial enterprise, including, but not limited to, cellular antennas, microwave relay stations, AM/FM broadcasting antennas and UHF/VHF broadcasting antennas.

        Commercial Vehicle — a vehicle customarily used as part of a business for the transportation of goods or people.

        Commercial Wireless Telecommunication Antenna Facility — a facility consisting of one or more antennas that is secured at a fixed and specified location, including any structure designed to support such antenna, which is used for commercial enterprise to provide radio communication services, including, but not limited to, paging services, wireless data services, cellular telephone services, enhanced special mobile radio services (ESMR), personal communication services (PCS), microwave relay stations, AM/FM broadcasting antennas and UHF/VHF broadcasting antennas. Types of antenna facilities include, but are not limited to, rooftop-mounted, wall-mounted and free-standing antenna structure (also known as an “Antenna Facility”).

        Commercial Wireless Telecommunication Services — those wireless telecommunication services offered by commercial carriers licensed by the Federal Communication Commission, including, but not limited to, paging services, wireless data services, cellular telephone services, enhanced special mobile radio services (ESMR), personal communication services (PCS), microwave relay stations, AM/FM broadcasting antennas and UHF/VHF broadcasting antennas.

        Common Area — land in a development held by an association in common or single ownership which is not reserved for the exclusive use or benefit of an individual tenant or owner.

        Common Facility — a non-commercial use established primarily for the benefit and enjoyment of the residential community in which it is located, typically recreation, utility, or service use oriented.

        Communal Housing — See Section 9.75.270.

        Community Care Facility — See Section 9.75.270.

        Community Center — See Section 9.75.270.

        Community Treatment Facility — See Section 9.75.270.

        Conditional Use — a use permitted on a particular site and within a zoning district only upon finding that such use in a specified location will comply with all the conditions and standards for the location or operation of such use as specified in the Code and authorized by the Commission.

        Conditional Use Permit — a permit issued to a property owner allowing a particular use or activity not allowed as a matter of right within a particular district or zone.

        Condominium — an undivided interest in common in a portion of real property coupled with a separate interest in space called a unit, the boundaries of which are described on a recorded final map, parcel map, or condominium plan, in sufficient detail to locate all boundaries thereof. An individual condominium within a condominium may include, in addition, a separate interest in other portions of the real property.

        Conforming — fully meeting the requirements of Chapter 8.02 (Building Regulations) and all property development regulations and requirements prescribed in the applicable zoning district.

        Congregate Care Facility — See Section 9.75.270.

        Congregate Living Health Facility — See Section 9.75.270.

        Construction Trailer — a trailer, the use of which is incidental to new construction on a site, including but not limited to temporary office space for the direction of on-site construction activities.

        Convalescent Facility — See Section 9.75.270.

        Conversion — the change from an individual ownership of existing real property and structure to multiple ownerships of the structure(s), together with a common interest in the land on which the residential, industrial, or commercial buildings are located.

        Courtyard — an open, unoccupied space, which is unobstructed from ground to sky, other than a yard, on the same lot with a building and bounded on two or more sides by the walls of a building.

        Covered Parking — a parking stall(s) within a carport or completely under the overhanging portion of a building.

        Cumulative Effect or Cumulatively — the effect of an individual project in combination with the effects of past projects, other current projects, and probable future projects. (Coastal).

        Curb Elevation — the level of the established curb in front of a building, as measured at the center of the frontage. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94; Ord. 96-10, 8/13/96; Ord. 97-05, 9/9/97; Ord. 98-06, 9/22/98)

 

9.75.040 “D” Definitions and Illustrations.
        Dance Floor — an area which is in excess of three hundred (300) square feet or in excess of fifteen (15) percent of the public area of a building and is used as a dance area, whether as a primary or accessory use.

        Dance Hall/Club — See Section 9.75.270.

        Day Care Center — See Section 9.75.270.

        Day Treatment Facility — See Section 9.75.270.

        Day Care Facilities — see “Congregate Health Care and Residential Facilities, Adult Day Health Care, Adult Day Health Center, Adult Day Care Facility, Child Day Care Facility, Day Care Center, Day Treatment Facility, Family Day Care Home, Family Day Care Home, Large, Family Day Care Home, Small, and Social Day Care Facility.”

        Days — shall always mean consecutive calendar days unless otherwise stated.

        Decibel (db) — a unit used to express the intensity of a sound wave.

        Deck — a platform, either freestanding or attached to a building that is supported by pillars, posts or walls.

        Deck (Floodplain Overlay District) — a concrete or wooden patio located on the front, rear, or sideyards of a structure.

        Dedication — the conveyance by an owner or developer of private land for public use, and the acceptance of land for such use by the governmental agency having jurisdiction over the pubic function for which it will be used.

        Demolish or Destroy — other than immediate replacement or reconstruction, the removal, destruction, wrecking, tearing down, dismantling, or razing of a building or structure to a level where the building or structure is non-functional.

        Density — the number of residential dwelling units per acre of land.

        Density/Intensity Bonus — the granting of additional development potential that allows a specific development to accommodate additional square footage or additional residential units beyond the maximum for which the site is zoned. Density/Intensity Bonuses are granted in exchange for the provision or preservation of a significant and exemplary public benefit at the same site or at another location.

        Density, Gross — the ratio expressed by the number of residential dwelling units divided by gross acreage.

        Density, Net — the ratio expressed by the number of residential dwelling units divided by net acreage.

        Design — a detailed and organized plan of development that includes: (1) architectural features; (2) street alignments, grades and widths; (3) drainage and sanitary facilities and utilities, including alignments and grades thereof; (4) location and size of all required easements and rights-of-way; (5) fire roads and fire breaks; (6) lot size and configuration; (7) traffic circulation and access; (8) parking; (9) grading; (10) land to be dedicated for park or recreation purposes; and (11) such other specific requirements in the plan and configuration of the entire project as may be necessary or convenient to ensure conformity to, or implementation of, the General Plan, Zoning Code, or any adopted Specific Plan.

        Detached Building — any building or structure that does not have a wall or roof in common with any other building or structure.

        Detention Basin — a storage facility for the temporary storage of storm water runoff.

        Development, Coastal — the placement or erection, on land, in or under water, of any solid material or structure; discharge or disposal of any dredged material or of any gaseous, liquid, solid, or thermal waste; grading, removing, dredging, mining, or extraction of any materials; change in the density or intensity of use of land, including, but not limited to, subdivision pursuant to the Subdivision Map Act (commencing with Section 66410 of the Government Code), and any other division of land, including lot splits, except where the land division is brought about in connection with the purchase of such land by a public agency for public recreational use; change in the intensity of use of water, or of access thereto, construction, reconstruction, demolition, or alteration of the size of any structure; including any facility of any private, public, or municipal utility; and the removal of harvesting of major vegetation other than for agricultural purposes, kelp harvesting, and timber operations which are in accordance with a timber harvesting plan submitted pursuant to the provision of the Z’berg-Nejedly Forest Practice Act of 1973 (commencing with Section 4511). As used in this section, “structure” includes, but is not limited to, any building, road, pipe, flume, conduit, siphon, aqueduct, telephone line, and electrical power transmission and distribution line. (Coastal Act/30106).

        Development in the Floodplain Overlay Districts — any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations.

        Development Project — any project undertaken for the purpose of development. Development project includes a project involving the issuance of a permit for construction or reconstruction but not a permit to operate. Development permit does not include any ministerial projects proposed to be carried out or approved by public agencies.

        Directional panel antenna — an antenna component that transmits and receives wireless telecommunication signals from a specific direction and generally has a box-like, panel-style shape.

        Director — the Director of Community Development for the City of Dana Point, unless otherwise specified.

        Discretionary Action — an action taken on a development project based on the individual choice or judgment of the members of the hearing body.

        District — a division or category of zoning which establishes a distinction in land use through a differentiation in development standards and/or land use regulations.

        District, Special — an agency or organization which controls the provision of a public utility or service such as schools, parks, flood control or sewer or water service.

        Drinking Establishment — See Section 9.75.270.

        Driveway — a private roadway or accessway providing direct vehicular access to a garage, parking lot or use which requires vehicular access such as a service station or car wash.

        Drug Abuse Recovery or Treatment Facility — See Section 9.75.270.

        Dwelling, Duplex — See Section 9.75.270.

        Dwelling, Multiple Family — See Section 9.75.270.

        Dwelling, Single Family Attached — See Section 9.75.270.

        Dwelling, Single Family Detached — See Section 9.75.270.

        Dwelling Unit — a self-contained group of interconnected rooms designed, occupied or intended as separate living quarters, with sleeping and sanitary facilities and one cooking facility, provided within a permanent structure or portion thereof, for residential occupancy by a single household, not including hotels, motels or timeshares. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94; Ord. 96-10, 8/13/96; Ord. 97-05, 9/9/97; Ord. 98-06, 9/22/98)

 

9.75.050 “E” Definitions and Illustrations.
        Easement — An interest in real property owned by another that entitles its holder to a specific limited use or privilege.

        Eave — See “Overhang, Roof.”

        Elevation — a scale drawing of the front, rear, or side of a building or structure.

        Emergency, Coastal — for the purposes of Section 9.69.150 (Emergency Permits) of this Zoning Code, “emergency” shall mean, within the Coastal Zone, a sudden unexpected occurrence demanding immediate action to prevent or mitigate loss or damage to life, health, property or essential public services. (Coastal Act/30333, 30624; 14 Cal. Code of Regulations/13009).

        Employment Generation Factors — factors developed for use by the City for projecting the potential employment of any proposed development project.

        Emergency Shelter — See Section 9.75.270.

        Employees’ Quarters — See Section 9.75.270.

        Equestrian Facility — See Section 9.75.270.

        Enclosed Parking Structure — a building or structure used for the parking of motor vehicles, having exterior enclosure walls which have less than twenty-five (25) percent of the total wall area open to the atmosphere at each level that enclose at least two sides of the structure.

        Enclosed Portion of any Structure — an edifice or building of any kind, attached to or detached from the dwelling unit, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together, that serves some functional or aesthetic connection to the primary building.

        Energy Facility — any public or private processing, producing, generating, storing, transmitting, or recovering facility for electricity, natural gas, petroleum, coal or other source of energy. (Coastal)

        Environmental Impact Report (EIR) — a detailed statement setting forth the environmental effects, considerations, and mitigation measures pertaining to a project pursuant to Section 21100 of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), CEQA Guidelines, and local CEQA Guidelines.

        Environmentally Sensitive Habitat Area — any area in which plant or animal life or their habitats are either rare or especially valuable because of their special nature or role in an ecosystem and which could be easily disturbed or degraded by human activities and development. (Coastal Act/30107.5).

        Equestrian Trail — a trail which is designed, improved, and intended to be used for horseback riding purposes.

        Equipment Shelter — an enclosed structure, cabinet, shed or box at the base of a freestanding antenna mount.

        Erosion Control Projects — a plan or proposal of man-made systems, including, but not limited to, dams or diversions, used to decrease damages of erosion caused by storms, wind, wave action and/or flooding.

        Escort — means a person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person.

        Escort Agency — See Section 9.75.270.

        Estuary — all area within the mean high tide line of any coastal water body, usually semi-enclosed by land, having open, partially obstructed or intermittent exchange with the open sea and in which ocean water is at least occasionally diluted by fresh water runoff from the land. (Coastal Act/30501, 30620.6; 14 Cal. Code of Regulations/13577(c)).

        Exception — a grant of relief from the requirements of Chapter 9.31 which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by Chapter 9.31.

        Exceptional Case Approval Procedure — the Exceptional Case Approval procedures shall be required of certain freestanding antenna facilities and any proposed installation which is, in the opinion of the City, of controversial design. Exceptional Case Approval is also required if a wireless carrier wishes to propose an antenna facility contrary to the design. A Variance is required when a proposal is contrary to the setbacks from residential districts or classrooms.

        Existing Use — the use of a lot or structure established at the time of the enactment of this Code. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94; Ord. 96-10, 8/13/96; Ord. 97-05, 9/9/97; Ord. 98-06, 9/22/98))

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 9.75.060 “F” Definitions and Illustrations.
        Fall Zone — the area on the ground within a prescribed radius from the base of a freestanding antenna facility. The fall zone is the area within which there could be a hazard from falling debris or the collapse of the antenna support standard.

        Family Day Care Home — See Section 9.75.270.

        Family Day Care Home, Large — See Section 9.75.270.

        Family Day Care Home, Small — See Section 9.75.270.

 

        Feasible — capable of being accomplished in a successful manner within a reasonable period of time, taking into account economic, environmental, social, and technological factors. (Coastal Act/30108).

        Fence — a solid or open barrier above ground intended to enclose or mark a boundary.

        Fill, Coastal — earth or any other substance or material, including pilings placed for purposes of erecting structures thereon, placed in a submerged area. Examples of fill materials include but are not limited to earth, excavated or dredged materials, sand, gravel, rock, rip-rap, and concrete. (Coastal Act/30108.2).

        First Public Road Paralleling the Sea — that road nearest to the sea as defined in Section 9.75.190, which is: (Coastal Act/30501, 30620.6; 14 Cal. Code of Regulations/13577(i)).

        First Public Roadway — (See “First Public Road Paralleling the Sea”). (Coastal).

        Flood or Flooding — a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: (1) the overflow of flood waters; (2) the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source, and/or; (3) the collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of the ocean or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in this definition.

        Flood Boundary and Floodway Map — the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of flood hazard and the floodway.

        Flood Insurance Rate Map (F.I.R.M.) — the official maps on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones and the floodways applicable to the City.

        Flood Insurance Study — the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the FIRM, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood.

        Flood, 100-Year — the magnitude of a flood expected to occur on the average every 100 years, based on historical data. The 100-year flood has a 1/100, or one (1) percent, chance of occurring in any given year. See “Base Flood.”

        Floodplain — the relatively level land area on either side of the banks of a stream regularly subject to flooding. That part of the floodplain subject to a 100-year flood is designated as an “area of special flood hazard” by the Federal Insurance Administration.

        Floodplain or Flood-Prone Area — any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of flooding).

        Floodplain Fringe — all land between the floodway and the upper elevation of the 100-year flood.

        Floodplain Management — the operation of any overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, and floodplain management regulations.

        Floodplain Management Regulations — zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance, and erosion control ordinance) and other local regulations. The term describes such state or local regulations in any combination thereof, which provide standards for purpose of flood prevention and reduction.

        Floodproofing — any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to structures which eliminate or reduce flood damage to improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures or their contents.

        Floodway — the channel of a river, stream, creek, or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one (1) foot. Also referred to as “Regulatory Floodway.”

        Floor Area Ratio — the total gross floor area, including habitable subterranean floors, but not parking structures, of all buildings on a lot divided by the lot area.

        Floor Area, Gross — the area included within the surrounding exterior finish wall surface of a building or portion thereof, exclusive of courtyards but including stairways, hallways, mechanical rooms, restrooms, and other non-habitable areas.

        Fortune-Telling — See Section 9.75.270.

        Foster Family Home — See Section 9.75.270.

        Freestanding Antenna Facility — any freestanding structure specifically designed to support one or more antennas and any mounting appurtenances mounted on such a structure.

        Fuel Modification Zone — a wide strip of land where flammable native vegetation has been removed and/or modified and partially or totally replaced with drought-tolerant, fire-resistant plants. Fuel modification zones are typically composed of three subzones — a non-combustible zone, a wet zone and a thinning zone.

        Functionally Dependent Use — shall mean a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94; Ord. 97-05, 9/9/97; Ord. 98-06, 9/22/98)

 

9.75.070 “G” Definitions and Illustrations.
        Garage — an enclosed building or structure, or part thereof, used or intended to be used for the parking and storage of motor vehicles.

        Garage, Private — a garage for general public use, whether free or for free.

        Garage, Public — a garage where vehicles are parked or stored for remuneration, hire or sale.

        General Plan — the General Plan, pursuant to Government Code Section 65301, of the City of Dana Point which may be amended from time to time by the City Council.

        Grade — the average of the finished ground level (finished grade) at the center of all exterior walls of a building or, where such walls are parallel to and within five (5) feet of a sidewalk, the average of the finished ground level at the sidewalk, or to the top of curb, where there is no sidewalk.

 

 

        Grade, Existing — the elevation of the ground which exists prior to the start of any site preparation, grading, or construction related to the project being proposed. Existing grade will not be the same as natural grade if the site has been previously graded.

 



 

        Grading, Contour — a grading concept designed to result in earthforms and contours which resemble natural terrain characteristics, with generally curving, non-linear slope banks having variations in the slope ratios of the horizontal and vertical curves.

        Granny Flat — See Section 9.75.270.

        Greenbelt — an open area, cultivated, landscaped or maintained in a natural state, which surrounds development. Greenbelts serve as a buffer between land uses, or mark the edge of an urban or developed area.

        Group Home — See Section 9.75.270.

        Guest Room — any room which is used or designed to provide transient occupancy and sleeping accommodations for one or more guests. Guest rooms occur in hotels, motels, time-shared, bed and breakfast, private clubs, lodges, fraternal organizations, and other transient occupancy uses. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94)

 

9.75.080 “H” Definitions and Illustrations.
        Handicapped Housing — any housing which is designed and constructed to accommodate physically handicapped persons.

        Hazardous Waste Facility — See Section 9.75.270.

        Hazardous Waste Facility Project — an on-site facility and pursuant to Health and Safety Code 25199.1.

        Hedge — a grouping of vegetation, composed exclusively of shrubs or bushes, planted, grown, maintained and shaped in a linear pattern which forms a solid barrier similar in shape and proportion to a fence or wall.

        Helipad — an area of land designed, constructed, properly equipped and authorized by the Federal Aviation Administration to function as a private landing and takeoff facility for helicopters.

        Heliport — an area of land designed, constructed, properly equipped and authorized by the Federal Aviation Administration to function as a public landing and takeoff facility for helicopters.

        Highest Adjacent Grade — the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.

        Home Occupation — See Section 9.75.270.

        Homeowners Association — a community association which is organized within a residential development in which individual owners share common ownership interests and responsibilities for buildings, open space, landscaping, and/or facilities.

        Hospital, Acute Psychiatric — See Section 9.75.270.

        Hospital, Chemical Dependency Recovery — See Section 9.75.270.

        Hospital, General Acute Care — See Section 9.75.270.

        Hospital, Special — See Section 9.75.270.

        Hotel — See Section 9.75.270.

        Household — the permanent residents of a dwelling unit. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94)

 

9.75.090 “I” Definitions and Illustrations.
        Improvement — the construction or addition of one or more features, structures or utilities on a parcel of land.

        Infill — development of vacant land located within areas that are already developed.

        Infrastructure — basic facilities and services needed to sustain development.

        Inland Extent of the Beach — the inland extent of the beach shall be determined as follows: (1) from a distinct linear feature (e.g. a seawall, road, or bluff, etc.); (2) from the inland edge of the further inland beach berm, as determined from historical surveys, aerial photographs, and other records or geological evidence; or (3) where a beach berm does not exist, from the further point separating the dynamic portion of the beach from the inland area as distinguished by vegetation, debris or other geological or historical evidence. (Coastal Act/30501, 30620.6; 14 Cal. Code of Regulations/13577(g)(1), 13577(g)(2)).

        Intermediate Care Facility — See Section 9.75.270.

        Island, Traffic — a raised barrier, sometimes landscaped, located in the right-of-way for the purpose of directing circulation patterns. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94; Ord. 97-05, 9/9/97)

 

9.75.100 “J” Definitions and Illustrations.
        None. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 9.75.110 “K” Definitions and Illustrations.
        Kennel — See Section 9.75.270.

        Kitchen — a room or portion of a room in a structure used for the purpose of preparing meals, containing the necessary appliances, and equipped with a sink and running water. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 9.75.120 “L” Definitions and Illustrations.
        Land Use Decision — a discretionary decision of the City, including the issuance of a land use permit or a conditional use permit, the granting of a variance, the subdivision of property, and the modification of existing property lines pursuant to the Government Code. A land use decision also means a discretionary decision of the City concerning hazardous waste facility project pursuant to the Health and Safety Code.

        Land Use Plan, Coastal — the Land Use Element, Urban Design Element, and Conservation/Open Space Element of the City of Dana Point General Plan. (Coastal Act/30108.5).

        Landscape Coverage — the percentage of the net lot area, excluding the area of the parking lot, which is covered by landscaping as seen from a plan view.

        Landscaping Plan — a plan which indicates the type, size and location of vegetative and accent material proposed for the covering of all areas of a site not covered by a building, including all irrigation and other devices necessary to maintain such landscaping.

        Landscaping — areas devoted to or developed and maintained primarily with native or exotic plant materials including lawn, ground cover, trees, shrubs, and other plant materials. Landscaping may also include small amounts of accessory decorative outdoor landscape elements such as ponds, fountains, and paved or decorated surfaces, (excluding driveways, parking, loading, or storage areas), and sculptural elements, all of which are suitably designed, selected, installed, and maintained to enhance a site.

        Lateral Access — (See “Coastal Access, Lateral”). (Coastal).

        Level of Service (LOS) — a measure of the operational quality of a road or intersection ranging from LOS A (best) to LOS F (worst).

        Livestock — any animal in the bovine (cow), caprine, (goat), equine, (horse), ovine (sheep), or porcine (pig) families.

        Livestock, Domesticated — any animal that requires an animal permit from the applicable animal control agency and can be reasonably kept in a residential environment without damage to the health, safety or welfare of adjacent property owners. Domesticated livestock require continuous registration with a nationally recognized association or organization. A list of approved domesticated livestock shall be kept by the Director of Community Development.

        Loading Space — an off-street space or berth which is on the same lot as the building(s) it services, abuts a street, alley, or other appropriate means of access, and is used for the temporary parking of a commercial vehicle which is being loaded or unloaded with merchandise, materials or people.

        Local Coastal Program (LCP) — a local government’s (a) land use plans, (b) zoning ordinances, (c) zoning district maps, and (d) within sensitive coastal resources areas, other implementing actions, which, when taken together, meet the requirements of, and implement the provisions and policies of the California Coastal Act of 1976 (as amended) at the local level. The Local Coastal Program for the City of Dana Point is comprised of the Land Use Element, Urban Design Element, and Conservation/Open Space Element of the General Plan, the Zoning Code, the Dana Point Specific Plan/Local Coastal Program, and the Capistrano Beach Specific Plan/Local Coastal Program. (Coastal Act/30108.6).

        Locker Facilities — an area containing enclosures that can be locked for storage of clothing and valuables in conjunction with shower facilities.

        Lot — land which abuts at least one public street or any numbered or otherwise designated parcel of land which is shown on: (1) a recorded tract map, (2) a record of survey map recorded pursuant to an approved division of land, or (3) a parcel map.

        Lot, Corner — a lot or parcel of land abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection, or upon two parts of the same street forming an interior angle of less than 135 degrees.

        Lot, Cul-de-Sac — a lot located at any position on the circular portion of a cul-de-sac street.

        Lot, Flag — a lot having access to a street by means of a private driveway access easement, or parcel of land not meeting the requirements of this Code for lot width, but having a dimension of at least twenty (20) feet at its narrowest point.

        Lot, Interior — a lot other than a corner lot.

        Lot, Key — the first interior lot to the rear of a reversed corner lot which is not separated therefrom by an alley.

        Lot, Reversed Corner — a corner lot in which the rear lot line abuts the side lot line of the nearest lot to its rear.

        Lot, Substandard — any lot which does not meet the minimum dimensions required by this Code. The area of any easement which restricts the normal usage of the lot may be included.

        Lot, Through — a lot which fronts upon two streets which do not intersect at the boundaries of the lot.

        Lot Coverage — the maximum percentage of the net lot area which is covered by all the buildings on a lot as seen from a plan view.

        Lot Depth — the average linear measurement between the front and rear lot lines when measured at 90 degree angles from the front lot line.

        Lot Line — the lines bounding a lot as defined herein.

        Lot Line, Exterior Side — a side lot line adjacent to a street.

        Lot Line, Front — the line separating the narrowest street frontage of the lot from the street right-of-way.

        Lot Line, Interior Side — a side lot line not adjacent to a street.

        Lot Line, Rear — the lot line opposite and most distant the front lot line; or in the case of an irregularly shaped lot, a straight line not less than ten (10) feet long, within the lot, and most nearly parallel to and at the maximum distance from the front lot line.

        Lot Line, Side — any lot lines other than the front or rear lot lines.

        Lot Merger — the joining of two or more contiguous parcels of land under one ownership into one parcel pursuant to the Subdivision Map Act.

        Lot Width — the average linear distance between side lot lines when measured parallel to the front lot line.

        Lowest Floor — the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building’s lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of Chapter 9.31.

 



 

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94; Ord. 94-21, 12/13/94; Ord. 97-05, 9/9/97)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 9.75.130 “M” Definitions and Illustrations.
        Major Antenna Use Permit — a Major Antenna Use Permit would be required for certain light standard right-of-way antenna facilities and certain “stealth” antenna facilities that are within setbacks defined herein to residential districts and classrooms. A Major AUP would also be required for all non-stealth design antenna facilities setback further from residential districts, such as rooftop facilities, wall-mounted facilities or other non-freestanding facilities that for whatever reason might not be able to strictly adhere to the requirements for “stealth installations” as specified in Section 9.02.020(b).

        Major Energy Facility — facilities that cost more than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000) with an automatic annual increase in accordance with the Engineering News Record Construction Cost Index, except for those governed by the provisions of Sections 30610, 30610.5, 30611 or 30624 of the California Coastal Act of 1976. (Coastal Act/30333; 14 Cal. Code of Regulations/13012(a)).

        Major Public Works Project — “major public works facilities” are defined as follows:

(1)    Facilities that cost more than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000) with an automatic annual increase in accordance with the Engineering News Record Construction Cost Index, except for those governed by the provisions of Sections 30610, 30610.5, 30611 or 30624 of the California Coastal Act of 1976.

(2)    Notwithstanding the criteria in (1) above, “major public works” also means publicly financed recreational facilities that serve, affect, or otherwise impact regional or statewide use of the coast by increasing or decreasing public recreational opportunities or facilities. (Coastal Act/30333; 14 Cal. Code of Regulations/13012).

        Manufactured Home — a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is depicted for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For floodplain management purposes, the term “manufactured home” also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days.

        Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision — a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for sale or rent.

        Map Act — the Subdivision Map Act of the State of California.

        Market Value — the value of a structure based on market conditions or trends as established by a current or recent appraisal on said property. The term recent is intended to refer to the previous six (6) months.

        Massage Parlor — See Section 9.75.270.

        Mean High Tide Line — the mean high tide line shall be defined as the statistical mean of all the high tides over the cyclical period of 18.6 years, and shall be determined by reference to the records and elevations of tidal benchmarks established by the National Ocean Survey. In areas where observations covering a period of 18.6 years are not available, a determination may be made based on observations covering a shorter period, provided they are corrected to a mean value by comparison with observations made at some suitably located control tide station. (Coastal Act 30501, 30620.6; 14 Cal. Code of Regulations/13577(c)).

        Mean Sea Level — for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on the City’s Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.

        Median — a paved and/or planted area separating a street or highway into two or more lanes of opposite direction travel.

        Menagerie — a collection of wild animals and/or birds.

        Merger — see “Lot Merger.”

        Microcell — an installation that is used on occasion by Carriers which consists typically of small panel antennas (usually two) mounted on poles and light standards within the public right-of-way with fiber-optic cable connecting the antennas.

        Minor Antenna Use Permit — a Minor Antenna Use Permit would be required for light standard right-of-way antenna facilities and certain “stealth” antenna facilities within designated setbacks from residential districts and classrooms. However, unlike those considered through the Major AUP process, these antenna facilities would observe all of the design and siting requirements specified in these regulations.

        Microwave Antenna — a wireless telecommunication facility antenna (most often in the shape of a dish or a drum) that transmits and receives microwave radio signals to provide an electronic line-of-sight interconnection between antennas facilities.

        Mixed Use — the development, in a compact urban form and designed or arranged to ensure land use compatibility, of a structure(s) or site with two or more different land uses including, but not limited to, residential, office commercial, light industrial, business park, recreational, or public.

        Mezzanine — a platform that projects from a maximum of two walls within a structure above the first or second level, is no more than one third of the area of the room in which it is located, and is surrounded by a rail or balustrade.

        Mobilehome — See Section 9.75.270.

        Mobilehome Park — See Section 9.75.270.

        Mobilehome Subdivision — See Section 9.75.270.

        Monopole — a type of freestanding antenna facility comprised of a pole designed to support platforms or arms with cross-beams to mount antennas at a desired height above ground level.

        Motel — See Section 9.75.270.

        Motor Vehicle — a machine capable of self-propulsion, with human guidance, whether for the performance of work or as a mode of transportation.

        Multi-Phase Development — a development project that is constructed in increments, with each increment capable of existing independently of the other. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94; Ord. 97-05, 9/9/97; Ord. 98-06, 9/22/98; Ord. 03-07, 4/9/03)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 9.75.140 “N” Definitions and Illustrations.
        New Construction in the Floodplain Overlay Districts — for floodplain management purposes, structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by the City.

        Noise, Ambient — the all-encompassing noise level associated with a given environment, being a composite of sounds from all sources, excluding alleged offensive noises, at the location and approximate time at which a comparison with alleged offensive noises is to be made.

        Nonconforming Lot — any subdivision of land that was lawfully established and in compliance with all applicable ordinances and laws at the time the property was subdivided, but which, due to a subsequently enacted ordinance or law, no longer complies with all the applicable regulations and standards of the zone in which the property is located.

        Nonconforming Structure — any structure, building, or improvement upon land, other than the land itself, including any sign, that was lawfully established and in compliance with all applicable ordinances and laws at the time the structure, building or improvement was established, but which, due to a subsequently enacted ordinance or law, no longer complies with all of the applicable regulations and standards of the zone in which the structure, building or improvement is located.

        Nonconforming Structure, Illegal — any structure, building, or improvement upon land, other than the land itself, including any sign, that was not established in compliance with all ordinances and laws that were applicable at the time the structure, building, or improvement was established.

        Nonconforming Use — any use of land that was lawfully established and in compliance with all applicable ordinances and laws at the time the use was established, but which, due to a subsequently enacted ordinance or law, no longer complies with all of the applicable regulations and standards of the zone in which the use is located.

        Nonconforming Use, Illegal — any use of land that was not established in compliance with all the ordinances and laws that were applicable at the time the use of land was established.

        Non-Freestanding Antenna Facility — an antenna facility that utilizes a building to mount the antennas at a desired height above ground level. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94; Ord. 98-06, 9/22/98)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 9.75.150 “O” Definitions and Illustrations.
        Omni-directional Whip Antenna — a thin whip-style antenna that can transmit and receive wireless telecommunication signals in all directions, typically less than fifteen (15) feet in length.

        Open Space — See Section 9.75.270.

        Open Space, Active — any parcel or area of land or water which is set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public or private use or enjoyment, or for the use and enjoyment of owners and occupants of land adjoining or neighboring such open space and which contains recreational facilities such as pools and swimming areas, courts and other game areas, playing fields and equipment or other required facilities for various active activities.

        Open Space, Common — land within or related to a development, not individually owned or dedicated for public use, which is designed and intended for the common use or enjoyment of the owners of the development and which may include complementary structures, facilities and improvements such as gazebos, recreational facilities, pools, spas, and game courts.

        Open Space, Passive — any parcel or area of land or water which is essentially unimproved and set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for non-structured recreational activities in order to preserve the natural and aesthetic qualities of the area.

        Open Space, Private — an open space, fenced or otherwise, designed to promote privacy, and which is reserved for the exclusive use of the occupants of a specific dwelling unit.

        Open Space, Public — open space owned and maintained by a public agency for the use and enjoyment of the general public.

        Overhang, Roof — that portion of a roof which extends beyond the vertical facade of a lower wall.

        Overhang, Vehicle — the portion of a parked vehicle which extends beyond a curb and into a landscaped or sidewalk area.

        Overlay Zoning District — a zoning district established by ordinance, which shall be applied to properties in combination with any other zoning district or specific plan or development plan.

        Owners Association — a community association which is organized within a non-residential development in which individual owners share common ownership interests and responsibilities for buildings, open space, landscaping, and/or facilities. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94; Ord. 97-05, 9/9/97; Ord. 98-06, 9/22/98)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 9.75.160 “P” Definitions and Illustrations.
        Parapet — the extension of the main walls of a building above the roof level.

        Parcel — an area of land under one ownership that has been legally subdivided, has a Certificate of Compliance or was combined in accordance with the Subdivision Map Act and which is shown as a single parcel on the latest equalized assessment roll.

        Parcel Map — an instrument, processed in compliance with the Subdivision Map Act, for subdividing property into four (4) or less parcels, condominiums, a community apartment project with four (4) or less units or to convert a dwelling to a stock cooperative containing four (4) or less dwelling units. A parcel map may also be used to create more than four (4) lots where (1) the land before division contains less than five (5) acres, each parcel created abuts a public street and no dedications or improvements are required; (2) each parcel created has a gross area or more than 20 acres or more with approved access to a public street; (3) the land to be subdivided has access to a public street, is zoned for industrial or commercial development and has previous approvals with regard to street widths and alignments; or (4) each parcel created has a gross area of not less than 40 acres or is not less than a quarter of a quarter section.

        Parking Area, Private — an area, other than a street, designed for the parking of vehicles and available for general public use, whether free or for a fee.

        Parking Area, Public — an area, other than a private parking area or street, used for the parking of vehicles and available for general public use, either free or for a fee.

        Parking Stall — a permanent area for the parking of one motor vehicle which meets the minimum dimension and access requirements as established by the City.

        Parking Stall, Off-Street — a permanent parking space which is not located on a dedicated street right-of-way.

        Parking Stall, On-Street — a permanent parking space which is located on a dedicated street right-of-way.

        Parking Structure — a structure that is designed and built for the purpose of providing off-street parking stalls with single or multiple levels which may include secondary uses such as storage, walkways, stairways, elevator shafts, mechanical or electrical equipment rooms and parking management facilities.

        Parking, Subterranean or Underground — a parking structure that is built with a maximum of four (4) feet above the exterior finished grade provided that the four (4) feet is included in the structure’s building height measurement.

        Park, Public — see Section 9.75.270.

        Parkway — the area of a public right-of-way that lies between the curb of a street and the adjacent property line or physical boundary definition such as fences or walls, which is used for landscaping and/or passive recreational purposes.

        Peak-Period — those hours of the business day between 6 a.m. and 10 a.m., and 4 p.m. to 7 p.m. inclusive, Monday through Friday.

        Permit — written governmental permission issued by an authorized official, empowering the holder thereof to do some act not forbidden by law, but not allowed without such authorization.

        Permitted Use — a use listed by the provisions of any particular district as a permitted use within that district and permitted therein as a matter of right when conducted in accord with the regulations established by the Code.

        Person — any individual, firm, co-partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, company, joint stock association, corporation, estate, trust, organization, business, business trust, public agency, school district, State of California, and its political subdivisions or instrumentalities, receiver, syndicate or any group or combination thereof, acting as a unit, including any trustee, receiver or assignee.

        Phase — any independent and contiguous part or portion of a project which is developed as a unit in the same time period.

        Pilaster — an upright architectural member that is structurally a pier, but architecturally is treated as a column.

        Plat — a map representing a tract of land, showing the boundaries and location of individual properties and streets.

        Police Power — the authority of government to exercise controls to protect the public health, safety, morals, and general welfare.

        Porch — a covered pedestrian entrance to a building which is located on the first floor level.

        Porte Cochere — a roofed structure open on at least two sides, through which a motor vehicle may be driven and which is attached to a principal building by a continuous roof leading to the principal entrance.

        Poultry — any domesticated bird which can be kept or raised for eggs or meat.

        Premises — a lot or building site, or a specified portion of a lot or building site, that meets the requirements needed for the location, maintenance and operation of a use on the property.

        Principal Use — a use that constitutes the primary function of a household, building, structure, establishment, or property.

        Property Owner — The legal owner of a parcel of real property.

        Public Access Structures — structures, including but not limited to, stairways, ramps, and bike paths, which provide the general public access to the coast.

        Public Lifeguard Towers — structures owned and operated by a public agency and used as an observation platform/shelter by a certified lifeguard employed to safeguard swimmers at a beach or pool.

        Public Piers — a platform available for use by the general public, extending from a shore over water and supported by piles or pillars, which may be used to secure, protect and provide access to ships, boats, fishing opportunity, or commercial activities.

        Public/Private Local Telecommunication Systems — local wireless telecommunication systems that are utilized only by local businesses, public agencies, utility services and emergency services, not including licensed commercial wireless telecommunication services.

        Public Restrooms — a lavatory available for use by the general public.

        Public Trust Lands — all lands subject to the Common Law Public Trust for commerce, navigation, fisheries, recreation and other public purposes. Public Trust lands include tidelands, submerged lands, beds of navigable lakes and rivers, and historic tidelands and submerged lands that are presently filled or reclaimed, and which were subject to the Public Trust at any time. (Coastal Act/30501, 30620.6; 14 Cal. Code of Regulations/13577(f)).

        Public Vantage Point — any publicly accessible location on dedicated or publicly owned property, including but not limited to roadways, parks, and cultural or recreational facilities, which affords a view of the ocean, a coastal lagoon, a canyon or hillside area, or any other open space area identified in an adopted community plan. (Coastal)

        Public Works — includes the following:

(1)    All production, storage, transmission, and recovery facilities for water, sewerage, telephone, and other similar utilities owned or operated by any public agency or by any utility subject to the jurisdiction of the California Public Utilities Commission, except for energy facilities.

(2)    All public transportation facilities, including streets, roads, highways, public parking lots and structures, ports, harbors, airports, railroads, and mass transit facilities and stations, bridges, trolley wires, and other related facilities.

(3)    All publicly financed recreational facilities, all projects of the State Coastal Conservancy, and any development by a special district.

(4)    All community college facilities. (Coastal Act/30114).

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94; Ord. 94-21, 12/13/94; Ord. 97-05, 9/9/97; Ord. 98-06, 9/22/98)

 

9.75.170 “Q” Definitions and Illustrations.
        Quasi-Public — a use owned or operated by a non-profit institution providing educational, cultural, recreational, religious, or similar types of public programs.

        Queue Area — an area provided for motor vehicles to queue while waiting to obtain goods or services from a drive-through facility. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94)

 

9.75.180 “R” Definitions and Illustrations.
        Radiofrequency (RF) emissions — the emissions created by the radio signals from wireless telecommunication facilities.

        Reception Window — the area within the direct line between a satellite antenna and those orbiting communications satellites carrying available programming.

        Recreational Equipment — structures or devices that stimulate activity through amusement, exercise or play in order to refresh one’s mind or body. Examples include playground equipment (i.e. swings, slides, etc.), park benches, picnic tables, and exercise courses.

        Recreational Vehicle — a vehicle towed or self propelled on its own chassis or attached to the chassis of another vehicle which is designed or used for recreational or sporting purposes. The term recreational vehicle shall include, but not be limited to, travel trailers, pickup campers, camping or tent trailers, motor coach homes, converted trucks or buses, boats, and boat trailers, and all terrain vehicles.

        Recreational Vehicle Park — See Section 9.75.270.

        Recycling Facility — See Section 9.75.270.

        Replacement Cost — the actual cost to replace or reconstruct a damaged structure, facility or feature as determined by the appraisal of a qualified and approved appraiser.

        Residential Care Facility for the Elderly — See Section 9.75.270.

        Residential Facility — See Section 9.75.270.

        Resource Recovery — the process of obtaining materials or energy from waste materials, particularly solid waste.

        Restaurant — See Section 9.75.270.

        Restaurant, Drive-Through — See Section 9.75.270.

        Restaurant, Fast Food — See Section 9.75.270.

        Restaurant, Take-Out — See Section 9.75.270.

        Restaurant, Walkup — See Section 9.75.270.

        Retention Basin — see “Detention Basin.”

        Right-of-Way — a corridor, either public or private, on which a right of passage has been recorded.

        Right-of-Way, Public — any parcel or strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication, prescription or condemnation and intended to be occupied by a road, trail, water line, storm drain, sanitary sewer line and/or other public use.

        Right-of-Way, Ultimate — the boundaries of any future right-of-way shown on an adopted precise plan of highway alignment, or the street rights-of-way shown within the boundary of a recorded tract map, a recorded parcel map or a recorded Site Plan. The latest adopted or recorded document in the above case shall take precedence. If none of these exist, the ultimate right-of-way shall be considered the right-of-way required by the roadway classification as shown on the Circulation System Master Plan of the General Plan. In all other instances, the ultimate right-of-way shall be considered to be the existing right-of-way.

        Riparian Habitat — an environment associated with freshwater watercourses, including perennial and intermittent streams, lakes, and other bodies of fresh water, and characterized by plants and animals which are dependent upon the availability of water in the resource.

        Riverline — relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.

        Roof Deck — a structure that is constructed above the top plate line of a structure, accessed from below the top plate line, and which is designed to function as an outdoor patio or observation area.

        Rooftop-mounted Antenna — an antenna mounted to the roof of an existing building.

        Room — an area within a building that is fully enclosed by walls, a ceiling and a floor, including at least one door way access and which may include a door(s) or window(s).

        Rounding of Quantities — the process whereby, in the calculation of distances, unit density, density bonuses, parking requirements, or other aspects of development or the physical environment, fractional numbers are converted to whole numbers. Where the fractional number is .5 or more, the number shall be rounded up to the next higher whole number. Where the fractional number is less than .5, the number shall be rounded down to the next lower whole number, except as may be otherwise provided in this Code. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94; Ord. No. 98-06, 9/22/98)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 9.75.190 “S” Definitions and Illustrations.
        Sand Dunes — naturally occurring accumulations of sand in ridges or mounds landward of the beach.

        Sanitarium, Health — See Section 9.75.270.

        Sanitarium, Mental — See Section 9.75.270.

        Sanitary Sewers — pipes that carry only domestic or commercial sewage to a treatment plant and into which storm, surface, and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.

        Satellite Dish Antenna — any antenna in the shape of a shallow dish, and appurtenant equipment, used for the reception of communications (television and otherwise) from orbiting satellites or ground transmitters. This definition includes satellite dish antennas of all sizes including those satellite dish antennas less than one (1) meter in diameter.

        Scale, Public — a weighing mechanism, intended to determine the gross weight of motor vehicles, usually large trucks, that is open to the general public.

        Scenic Highway — a roadway designated by the City General Plan as a “scenic highway.”

        Screening — a method of visually shielding or obscuring any abutting or nearby structure, use or mechanical device from another by fencing, walls, berms or densely planted vegetation.

        Sea — the Pacific Ocean and all harbors, bays, channels, estuaries, salt marshes, sloughs, and other areas subject to tidal action through any connection with the Pacific Ocean, excluding nonestuarine rivers, streams, tributaries, creeks, and flood control and drainage channels. (Coastal Act/30115).

        “Second Dwelling Units” — See Section 9.75.270.

        Senior Citizen Housing — See Section 9.75.270.

        Senior Congregate Care Housing — See Section 9.75.270.

        Sensitive Coastal Resources Area — an identifiable and geographically bounded land and water areas within the coastal zone of vital interest and sensitivity. A sensitive coastal resources area includes the following:

(a)    Special marine and land habitat areas, wetlands, lagoons, and estuaries as mapped generally in the Conservation/Open Space Element Figure COS-1.

(b)    Areas possessing significant recreational value.

(c)    Highly scenic areas.

(d)    Archaeological sites designated by the State Historic Preservation Officer.

(e)    Special communities or neighborhoods which are significant visitor destination areas.

(f)    Areas that provide existing coastal recreational opportunities for low-and moderate-income persons.

(g)    Areas where divisions of land could substantially impair or restrict coastal access. (Coastal Act/30116).

        Septic System — a sewage treatment system that includes a settling tank through which liquid sewage flows and in which solid sewage settles and is decomposed by bacteria in the absence of oxygen.

        Setback — the minimum required distance between a building or structure, and a property line.

        Setback Line — a line within a lot, parallel to and measured from a corresponding lot line, forming the boundary of a required yard and governing the placement of buildings/structures and uses on a lot.

        Sexual Encounter/Rap Center — means any business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its primary business purposes, offers any form of consideration: (1) physical contact in the form of wrestling or bumbling between persons of the opposite sex; or (2) activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nudity.

        Shoreline Protective Works — a man-made structure or system of structures, including but not limited to, seawalls, revetments, rip-rap, jetties, groins, breakwaters, cliff retaining walls, or dams or diversion, used to protect the shoreline from damage caused by storms, wave action, erosion, and/or flooding. (Coastal Act/30235).

        Shoreline Setback — the distance from the mean high tide line governing the placement of buildings, structures, parking or uses on a lot.

        Sidewalk — a paved surface or leveled area used as a pedestrian walkway which parallels and is usually separated from, but may be adjacent to, the street.

        Sight Distance Area — an area, generally triangular in shape, located at the corners of a street or highway intersection that is designated to be kept clear of visual obstructions in excess of three (3) feet tall.

        Sign — any representation used to convey information, or to identify, announce, or otherwise direct attention to a business, profession, commodity, service, or entertainment and placed on, suspended from, or in any way attached to, any structure, vehicle, or feature of the natural or man-made landscape.

        Significant Public Views — those views of the ocean, coastline, coastal foothills and other open space areas within the City from public roadways, public recreational land uses and designated scenic highways.

        Single Room Occupancy — See Section 9.75.270.

        Site — any lot or parcel of land or combination of contiguous lots or parcels of land used or intended for a particular use or group of uses.

        Site Development Permit — an approval which is required prior to the development of certain structures or uses in a particular district or zone. This permit is required for most non-restricted uses and is typically utilized to ensure compliance with the district development regulations and to identify necessary improvements, requirements, and dedications.

        Site Plan — a diagram of a property proposed for development as seen from above. The diagram shall be drawn to scale and properly dimensioned. The diagram shall illustrate the existing and proposed uses and structures on the property in accordance with the applicable regulations and shall include lot lines, streets, grades, building sites, landscaping, parking areas, structures, and uses on adjacent parcels, reserved open space and other specific development proposals.

        “Skilled Nursing Facility” — See Section 9.75.270.

        Slope — the degree of deviation of a surface from the horizontal, usually expressed in percent or degrees. The diagram, formulas, and table below are provided for reference.



Slope Percentage = Rise/Run ´ 100

Slope Ratio = Run/Rise = (x) feet run to one foot rise = x:1

 

% Grade

Degrees

Ratio

 

 

 

100.0

45.0

1.0:1

 50.0

26.6

2.0:1

 40.0

21.8

2.5:1

 33.3

18.4

3.0:1

 30.0

16.7

3.3:1

 25.0

14.0

4.0:1

 20.0

11.3

5.0:1

 15.0

 8.5

6.7:1

 12.0

 6.8

8.3:1

 10.0

 5.7

10.0:1

 8.0

 4.6

12.5:1

 6.0

 3.4

16.7:1

 

        Slope Bank — a man-made slope steeper than fifteen (15) percent.

        “Small Family Home” — See Section 9.75.270.

        “Social Day Care Facility” — See Section 9.75.270.

        “Social Rehabilitation Facility” — See Section 9.75.270.

        Solar Energy Systems — a complete design or assembly consisting of a solar energy collector, energy storage facility, and components for the distribution of transformed energy.

        Solid Fence — a fence or wall constructed of materials that are visually opaque.

        “Solid Waste Disposal Facility” — See Section 9.75.270.

        Specified Hazardous Waste Facility Project — an off-site or on-site facility which serves more than one generator of hazardous waste, and pursuant to Health and Safety Code 25199.1(n).

        Specific Plan — a detailed plan for the development of a specific area. It implements the local General Plan by creating a bridge between General Plan policies and individual development proposals. A Specific Plan directs all facets of future development; from the distribution of land uses to the location and sizing of supporting infrastructure, from methods of financing public improvements to standards of development.

        Specified Anatomical Areas — includes any of the following:

(1)    Less than completely and opaquely covered:

(a)    Human genitals, pubic region;

(b)    Buttocks; anus; and

(c)    Female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or

(2)    Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.

        Specified Sexual Activities — includes any of the following:

(1)    The fondling or touching of human genitals, pubic regions, buttocks, anus, or female breasts; or

(2)    Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy; or

(3)    Masturbation, actual or simulated; or

(4)    Excretory functions as part of, or in connection with, any of the activities set forth in subsections 1 through 3 of this Section; or

(5)    Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.

        Stable, Private — See Section 9.75.270.

        Stable, Public — See Section 9.75.270.

        Stairway — a flight, or flights of stairs that are connected by common landings.

        Standards, Development — requirements in the Code that govern building and development including but not limited to lot area, height limits, frontage, setbacks, density, landscaping, and floor area ratio.

        Start of Construction in the Floodplain Overlay Districts — includes substantial improvements and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means with the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the state of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets, and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.

        Stealth Antenna Facility — a commercial wireless telecommunication facility that uses stealth design treatments to completely screen, hide or disguise the antennas and other exposed related equipment to be unobtrusive to the general public.

        Stealth Design — design features used to disguise, screen or hide a commercial wireless antenna facility from public views.

        Stock Cooperative — a corporation that holds title to improved real property, either in fee simple or for a terms of years, in which all or substantially all of the shareholders have a right of exclusive occupancy in a portion of the property, and the right of occupancy is transferable only concurrently with the transfer of the corporate stock.

        Storm Drains — any facilities designed to control, retain or remove surface water runoff.

        Story — that portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above it, except that the topmost story shall be that portion of a building included between the upper surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above. Basements and underground parking structures shall not be considered a story.

        Stream — a natural watercourse identified as a stream on a map adopted pursuant to a certified Local Coastal Program; or as designated by a solid blue line or other symbol on the USGS 7.5 minute quadrangle series map. The bank of the stream shall be defined as the watershed and relatively permanent elevation or acclivity at the outer line of the stream channel which separates the bed from the adjacent upland, whether valley or hill, and serves to confine the water within the bed and to preserve the course of the stream. In areas where the stream has no discernible bank, the boundary shall be measured from the line closest to the stream where riparian vegetation is permanently established. (Coastal)

        Street — an accessible vehicular right-of-way, other than an alley, which affords a primary means of access to abutting property.

        Street, Private — a right-of-way, easement or lot, designated for vehicular access, that is not dedicated to the public and held in private ownership, which provides internal access to or through a property.

        Street, Public — a right-of-way designated for vehicular access that is dedicated to the public.

        Structure — a combination of materials which is assembled for use, occupancy, or ornamentation whether installed on, above, or below the surface of land or water. Includes, but is not limited to any building, road, pipe, flume, conduit, siphon, aqueduct, telephone line, or electrical power transmission and distribution area.

        Structure in the Floodplain Overlay Districts — a walled and roofed building, cabana, or garage, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufacture home.

        Subdivision — the division of a tract of land into defined lots, either improved or unimproved, which can be separately conveyed by sale or lease, and which can be altered or developed pursuant to the Subdivision Map Act. Subdivision includes a condominium project as defined in Section 1350 of the California Civil Code and a community apartment project as defined in Section 11004 of the Business and Professions Code.

        Subdivision, Tract — a subdivision which creates five or more parcels to be developed as a whole by an owner or builder.

        Submerged Lands — lands which lie below the line of mean low tide. (Coastal)

        Substantial Damage — damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

        Substantial Improvement in the Floodplain Overlay Districts — any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, enlargement, expansion, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the “start of construction” of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred “substantial damage,” regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:

(a)    Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living condition; or

(b)    Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic structure.

        For the purpose of this definition, “substantial improvement” is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include either:

(a)    Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or

(b)    Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places.

(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94; Ord. 94-21, 12/13/94; Ord. 96-13, 11/26/96; Ord. 97-05, 9/9/97; Ord. 98-06, 9/22/98)

 

9.75.200 “T” Definitions and Illustrations.
        Temporary Structure — a structure without any permanent foundation or footings which will be removed when the designated time period, activity, or use for which the temporary structure was erected has ceased.

        Temporary Use — a use established for a fixed period of time with the intent to discontinue such use upon the expiration of the time period, which is permitted through the provisions of Chapter 9.39.

        Tenant — the lessee of facility space in a development project.

        Terracing — an erosion control method that uses small hills and contours on the land surface to control flooding and runoff.

        Tidelands — lands which are located between the line of mean high tide and mean low tide. (Coastal Act/30501, 30620.6; 14 Cal. Code of Regulations/13577(d)).

        Topography — the configuration of a surface area, including its relief and the position of natural and man-made features.

        Tot Lot — an improved and equipped play area for small children.

        Townhouse — a single-family attached dwelling organized in a row of at least three such units in which each unit has its own front and rear access to the outside, no unit is located over another unit, and each unit is separated from any other unit by one or more common and fire resistant walls.

        Trail Staging Area — an area designated for the purpose of preparatory activities prior to the use of trail facilities.

        Trail, Riding and Hiking — a path designed for or used by equestrians, pedestrians, and/or cyclists using non-motorized bicycles.

        Trailer — a structure standing on wheels, towed or hauled by another vehicle, and used for short-term human occupation, carrying of materials, goods or objects, or as a temporary office.

        Transportation Demand Management (TDM) — the implementation of programs, plans or policies designed to encourage changes in individual travel behavior. TDM can include an emphasis on alternative travel modes to the single occupant vehicle (SOV) such as carpools, vanpools and transit; reduction or elimination of the number of vehicle trips, or shifts in the time of vehicle commutes to other than the peak-period.

        Travel Trailer — a vehicle, other than a motor vehicle, which is designed or used for human habitation and for travel or recreational purposes, does not at any time exceed eight (8) feet in width and forty (40) feet in length, and may be moved upon a public highway without a special permit or chauffeur’s license without violating any provisions of the California Vehicle Code.

        Travel Trailer Park — an area where spaces are offered to one or more users of travel trailers.

        Trip Reduction — reducing the number of work related trips taken in single occupancy vehicles during the peak period Monday through Friday.

        Triplex — a single family attached or multiple family building containing three dwelling units. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94; Ord. 97-05, 9/9/97)

 

9.75.210 “U” Definitions and Illustrations.
        Unenclosed Portion of any Structure — an outdoor extension of living space, built up or composed of parts joined together not serving as habitable living space.

        Unique Natural Feature — that part of the natural environment which is rare or not duplicated in the city or region.

        Use — the purpose for which land or a building is used, arranged, designed or intended, or for which the land or building is or may be occupied or maintained.

        Utility, Private or Public — any closely regulated agency which, under public franchise or ownership, or under certificate of convenience and necessity, provides the public with electricity, gas, heat, steam, communication, rail transportation, water, sewage collection, or other similar service. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94)

 

9.75.220 “V” Definitions and Illustrations.
        Variance — a discretionary entitlement which permits the departure from the strict application of the development standards contained in this Code and pursuant to the findings required by the California Government Code. This term does not refer to “Administrative Modification of Standards” pursuant to Section 9.61 of this Code.

        Vehicle, Disassembled — a vehicle without hoods, doors, fenders, body panels, headlights, trunk lids, tires, wheels, windows, or windshields, or any other part required for legal operation of vehicle.

        Vehicle, Wrecked — a vehicle which is rendered inoperable as a result of physical damage.

        Vehicular Accessway — a private, non-exclusive vehicular easement affording access to abutting properties.

        Vested Right — a right which has been legally established.

        Violation in the Floodplain Overlay Districts — the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the City’s floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this Chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.

        Visitor Parking — parking stalls provided in a residential development for intermittent use by visitors. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94)

 

9.75.230 “W” Definitions and Illustrations.
        Wall — a solid barrier intended to enclose, separate or surround and typically four (4) inches or more in thickness.

        Wall-Mounted Antennas — antennas mounted directly to the exterior main wall or the exterior penthouse wall of an existing building.

        Wetlands — any land area which may be covered periodically or permanently with shallow water including, but not limited to, saltwater marshes, freshwater marshes, open or closed brackish water marshes, swamps and mudflats. (Coastal Act/30121).

        Wetland Restoration Projects — a plan or proposal to restore wetland areas to their natural functioning capability.

        Window — an opening which is in a wall of a building, designed to allow light and/or ventilation into the building, enclosed by casement or sash and contains glass or other similar transparent or semitransparent material. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94; Ord. 97-05, 9/9/97; Ord. 98-06, 9/22/98)

 

9.75.240 “X” Definitions and Illustrations.
        Xeriscape — landscaping characterized by the use of vegetation which is drought-resistant or low water use in character. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94)

 

9.75.250 “Y” Definitions and Illustrations.
        Yard — an open space on a developed lot that is unoccupied or unobstructed from the ground upwards, and when a yard dimension is given it represents the minimum horizontal distance between the lot line from which the distance must be measured and a line parallel to the lot line.

        Yard, Exterior Side — an area bounded by the required front yard or, where there is no required front yard, the front lot line; the rear lot line, the side street lot line, or the existing or ultimate right-of-way (whichever is greater); and a structural setback line parallel thereto. The measured distance of the yard shall represent the shortest distance between the exterior side lot line and that portion of the main building nearest to the exterior side lot line.

        Yard, Front — the open space extending across the full width of the front of the lot, the depth of which is the horizontal distance between the front lot line and a line parallel thereto on the lot.

        Yard, Interior Side — an area bounded by the required front yard or, where there is no required front yard, the front lot line; the required rear yard or, where there is no required rear yard, to the rear lot line; the interior side lot line and a structural setback line parallel thereto. The measured distance of the yard shall represent the shortest distance between the interior side lot line and that portion of the main building nearest to the interior side lot line.

        Yard, Rear — the open space extending across the full width of the rear of lot, the depth of which is the horizontal distance between the rear lot line and a line parallel thereto on the lot.

        Yard, Side — the space between the main building and the side lot line, extending from the front yard to the rear yard; the measured distance of the yard shall represent the shortest distance between the side lot line and that portion of the main building nearest the line from which the measurement is taken.



(Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94)

 

9.75.260 “Z” Definitions and Illustrations.
        Zero Lot Line — the location of a building on a lot in such a manner that one or more of the building’s sides rest directly on a side lot line.

        Zone Change — a change to the zoning designation or a property or properties on the Zoning Map.

        Zone Text Amendment — a revision, correction or modification to the text of the Zoning Code, including changes to development standards, use regulations or procedures.

        Zoning District — a specifically delineated area or district within a municipality in which regulations and requirements uniformly govern the use, placement, spacing and size of land and buildings.

        Zoning Map — the map or maps which are a part of the Code and delineate the boundaries of zone districts. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94; Ord. 94-21, 12/13/94)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 9.75.270 Definitions of Use.
        The following terms are utilized in the use charts for Chapters 9.09 through 9.23 and are defined here for reference.

        Accessory Living Quarters — shall mean living quarters within the primary structure or an accessory structure for the sole use of persons employed on the premises, relatives or guests of the occupants of the premises, having no kitchen or cooking facilities and not rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling.

        Administrative Office Uses — shall mean establishments which provide administrative, consulting, management, and general services to businesses and individuals. Typical uses would include, but not be limited to, offices of real estate agents, insurance agents, banks and other financial institutions, security and commodity brokers, employment agencies, public utilities, telephone answering services and travel agents.

        Adult Bookstore — shall mean any establishment, which as a regular and substantial course of conduct, displays and/or distributes sexually oriented merchandise, books, periodicals, magazines, photographs, drawings, sculptures, motion pictures, videos, slides, films, or other written, oral or visual representations which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on a matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical parts.

        Adult Cabaret — shall mean a nightclub, bar, lounge, restaurant or similar establishment or concern which features as a regular and substantial course of conduct, any type of live entertainment, films, motion pictures, videos, slides, other photographic reproductions, or other oral, written, or visual representations which are characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical parts.

        Adult Day Care Facility — shall mean any facility which provides nonmedical care to persons 18 years of age or older who are in need of personal services, supervision, or assistance essential for sustaining the activities of daily living or for the protection of the individual on less than a 24-hour basis.

        Adult Day Health Care — shall mean any organized day program of therapeutic, social, and health activities and services provided pursuant to the Health and Safety Code, Chapter 3.3, to elderly persons with functional impairments, either physical or mental, for the purpose of restoring or maintaining optimal capacity for self-care.

        Adult Day Health Center — shall mean a facility which provides adult day health care, or a distinct portion of a licensed health facility in which such care is provided by a specialized unit.

        Adult Entertainment Business — shall mean any business establishment or concern which as a regular and substantial course of conduct performs as an Adult Bookstore, Adult Theater, Adult Motion Picture Arcade, Adult Cabaret, Stripper, Adult Model Studio, Adult Motel/Hotel; or any other business establishment or concern which as a regular and substantial course of conduct offers to its patrons products, merchandise, services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical parts. “Adult Entertainment Business” does not include those uses or activities, the regulation of which is preempted by state law. “Adult Entertainment Business” shall also include any business establishment or concern which, as a regular and substantial course of conduct provides or allows performers, models, actors, actresses, or employees to appear in any place in lingerie or similar attire which does not opaquely cover specified anatomical parts. For the purposes of this Section, a business establishment or concern has established the provision of products, merchandise, services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical parts as a regular and substantial course of conduct when one or more of the following conditions exist:

1.     The area devoted to sexually oriented merchandise and/or sexually oriented material exceeds more than 25 percent of the total display area or floor space area open to the public;

2.     The business establishment or concern presents any type of live entertainment which is characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activity or specified anatomical parts on any ten or more days in a thirty consecutive day period;

3.     Twenty percent (20%) of the businesses revenues are derived from the provisions of services or merchandise characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activity or specified anatomical parts.

        Adult Hotel/Motel — shall mean a hotel or motel, which as a regular and substantial course of conduct provides to its patrons, through the provision of rooms equipped with closed-circuit television or other medium, material which is distinguished or characterized by the emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical parts and which rents, leases, or lets any room for less than a 12-hour period and/or rents, leases or lets any room more than once in a 24-hour period and which advertises the availability of any of the above.

        Adult Model Studio — shall mean any premises where as a regular and substantial course of conduct, there is furnished, provided or procured a figure model or models who pose in any manner which is characterized by its emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical parts for the purpose of being observed or viewed by any person or being sketched, painted, drawn, sculptured, photographed, filmed, or videotaped before any person who pays a fee, or any other thing of value, as a consideration, compensation, or gratuity for the right or opportunity to so observe the model or remain on the premises. Adult Model Studio shall not include any Live Art Class or any studio or classroom which is operated by any public agency, or any private educational institution authorized to issue and confer a diploma or degree under Section 94300 et seq. of the Education Code.

        Adult Motion Picture Arcade — shall mean any business establishment or concern which as a regular and substantial course of conduct provides, for a fee, the use of manually or electronically controlled still, motion picture or video machines, projectors, computer generated or displayed images or other image producing devices which serve less than five (5) persons at any one time and are maintained to display images distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical parts.

        Adult Motion Picture Theater — shall mean a business establishment or concern with one or more viewing rooms with the capacity for fifty (50) or more persons which, as a regular and substantial course of conduct, presents for any form of consideration films, motion pictures, videos, slide photographs, computer generated or displayed images or other pictures or visual reproductions which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical parts.

        Adult Mini-Motion Picture Theater — shall mean a business establishment or concern with one or more viewing rooms with the capacity of more than five (5), but less than fifty (50) persons, where, for any form of consideration, films, motions pictures, videocassettes, slides, computer generated or displayed images or similar graphic reproductions are shown and material whose dominant or predominant character and theme is the depiction of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation is shown on any ten or more days in a thirty consecutive day period.

        Agriculture — shall mean the use of land for the growing plants, flowers, shrubs, trees and/or truck crops. All such uses shall be conducted out-of-doors (no greenhouses) and shall not include any on-site retail sales of agricultural products.

        Alcoholic Beverage Outlet, Off Sale — shall mean any establishment wherein alcoholic beverages are sold, served or given away for consumption off the premises, including, but not limited to, any facility which is applying for or has obtained a Type 20 or 21 license from the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control.

        Alcoholic Beverage Outlet, On Sale — shall mean any establishment wherein alcoholic beverages are sold, served or given away for consumption on the premises, including, but not limited to, any facility which is applying for or has obtained a Type 41, 42, 47, 48, 51, 52 or 53 license from the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control.

        Animal Hospital — shall mean a facility where animals or pets are given medical or surgical treatment and are cared for during the time of such treatment and the accessory use of the premises as a kennel where animals or pets are boarded for compensation.

        Animal Shelter — shall mean a facility providing short-term and long-term boarding for stray animals which may include services such as pet adoption, spay/neuter clinics and the reunion of pets and their owners.

        Athletic Field — shall mean a field established for non-professional recreational activities such as youth sports and adult recreational leagues.

        Automotive Sales or Rental Uses — shall mean establishments which offer motor vehicles, including automobiles, trucks, motorcycles and recreational vehicles such as motorhomes, boats or watercraft, for sale, lease or rent. Typical uses would include, but not be limited to, new or used automobile dealerships, car/truck rental agencies, motorcycle dealerships and recreational vehicle dealers. Such uses may also include accessory repair and service uses.

        Automobile Wrecking — shall mean the dismantling or wrecking of one or more used motor vehicles or trailers; or storage, sale or dumping of one or more dismantled, partially dismantled, obsolete or wrecked vehicles or their parts.

        Bed and Breakfast Inn — shall mean a large single-family dwelling unit, sometimes a small hotel, which provides lodging and breakfast for temporary overnight occupants for compensation.

        Body Painting Studio — shall mean any establishment or business which provides the service of applying paint or any other substance, whether transparent or not, to or on the human body when such body is wholly or partially nude in terms of “specified anatomical areas.”

        “Building Materials Sales and Service Uses” — shall mean establishments that provide retail sales of materials and services for building construction, remodeling or repair and maintenance of home and garden. Typical uses would include, but not be limited to, lumber yards, interior design shops, cabinet shops, carpet sales, garden supply stores, nurseries, pool supply and equipment sales, glass and mirror sales, home improvement centers, paint and wallpaper stores, tile sales and drapery sales.

        “Business Service Uses” — shall mean establishments which provide goods or services primarily to businesses on a retail or wholesale basis. Typical uses would include, but not be limited to, office products and supply stores, parcel/postal services, computer sales and service, and courier/messenger services.

        Camp, Public — shall mean a plot of ground upon which two or more campsites are located and which is established or maintained for use by the general public as temporary living quarters for recreation, education or vacation purposes.

        Caretaker’s Residence — shall mean a dwelling unit accessory to the principal use on a site and intended for occupancy by a caretaker, security guard, worker, or similar person generally requiring residence on the site.

        Cemetery — shall mean property which is used for the interring of the dead, including a columbarium and/or mausoleum.

        Child Day Care Facility — shall mean a facility which provides nonmedical care to children under 18 years of age in need of personal services, supervision, or assistance essential for sustaining the activities of daily living or for the protection of the individual on less than a 24-hour basis. This includes day care centers and family day care homes.

        Church — shall mean an assemblage of people for worship or an institution facilitating worship, which may include personal counseling and education, and the building or buildings where such activities take place.

        “Civic Uses” — shall mean publicly or privately owned and managed facilities for meetings, conventions or exhibitions and other community, social and multi-purpose uses. Typical uses would include, but not be limited to, City administrative offices, community halls, convention centers, animal shelters, police stations, post offices, and governmental offices.

        “Clinical Service Uses” — shall mean establishments which provide physical and mental health services on an out-patient basis. The services may be of preventative, diagnostic, treatment, therapeutic, rehabilitative or counseling nature. Typical uses would include, but not be limited to, medical and health clinics, chiropractic/physical therapy clinics, counselling services and emergency care centers.

        “Commercial Entertainment Uses” — shall mean establishments which provide facilities for entertainment for compensation. Typical uses would include, but not be limited to, video game rooms, movie theaters, arcades, batting cages, skating rinks, shooting galleries, miniature golf courses, and bowling alleys.

        “Commercial Recreation Uses” — shall mean establishments which provide facilities for recreational amusement, pleasure or sport. Typical uses would include, but not be limited to, bicycle rentals, billiard parlors, boat rentals, dance studios, golf courses, health and athletic clubs and youth clubs.

        Communal Housing — shall mean housing for non-family groups with common kitchen and dining facilities but without medical, psychiatric or other care including boarding houses, lodging houses, dormitories, fraternity/sorority houses, communes, and religious homes.

        Community Apartment Project — a shall mean a development in which an undivided interest in land is coupled with the right of exclusive occupancy of any apartment located thereon.

        Community Care Facility — shall mean any facility, or building which is maintained and operated to provide nonmedical residential care, day treatment, adult day care, or foster family agency services for children, adults, or children and adults, including, but not limited to, the physically handicapped, mentally impaired, incompetent persons, and abused or neglected children, and includes residential facilities, adult day care facilities, day treatment facilities, foster family homes, small family homes, social rehabilitation facilities, community treatment facilities, and social day care facilities.

        Community Center — shall mean a facility which provides recreational, cultural or other similar community activities.

        Community Treatment Facility — shall mean any residential facility which provides mental health treatment services to children in a group setting.

        “Construction and Maintenance Service Uses” — shall mean establishments which serve as the administrative and business office of a contractor engaged in construction or maintenance activities being performed off-site. Company vehicles, excluding construction equipment, may be stored outside, but associated equipment and supplies must be stored in a completely enclosed building or an approved off-site storage yard. Typical uses would include, but not be limited to, construction companies, carpentry services, electrical contractors, handyman services, janitorial services, home and business maintenance services, painting contractors, pest control services, tree surgeons, landscape maintenance services, and plumbing contractors.

        Congregate Care Facility — shall mean apartment housing, usually for senior citizens, which is arranged in a group setting that includes independent living and sleeping accommodations in conjunction with shared dining and recreational facilities.

        Congregate Living Health Facility — shall mean a facility with a noninstitutional, home-like environment which provides inpatient care, including medical supervision, 24-hour skilled nursing and supportive care, pharmacy, dietary, social and recreational services, and at least one type of service specified in Section 1250, paragraph (i) of the Health and Safety Code.

        Convalescent Facility — shall mean a State licensed facility which provides long term nursing, dietary, and other medical services except surgery or primary treatments customarily provided in a hospital, to convalescents or invalids.

        “Cultural Uses” — shall mean establishments involved in the collection and exhibition of objects or the performance of works having literary, artistic, historic, natural historic, musical, and/or scientific value for public appreciation. Typical uses would include, but not be limited to, public art galleries, museums, libraries, auditoriums, performance halls, amphitheaters and live arts theaters.

        Dance Hall/Club — shall mean a public hall which is primarily intended for dancing.

        Day Care Center — shall mean a facility which provides non-medical care to children under 18 years of age in need of personal services, supervision, or assistance essential for sustaining the activities of daily living or for the protection of the individual on less than a 24-hour basis. Family day care homes are further divided into the following categories: Small (up to six (6) children) and large (seven (7) or more children). Day care facilities include family day care homes, infant centers, pre-schools, and extended day care facilities.

        Day Treatment Facility — shall mean any facility which provides nonmedical care, counseling, educational or vocational support, or social rehabilitation services on less than a 24-hour basis to persons under 18 years of age who would otherwise be placed in foster care or who are returning to families from foster care.

        Drinking Establishment — shall mean establishments which serve alcoholic beverages such as beer, wine, and liquor for on-site consumption, also known as an Alcoholic Beverage Outlet, On-Site. Typical uses would include, but not be limited to, restaurants that serve alcoholic beverages, bars, pubs, taverns, nightclubs and cocktail lounges.

        Drive-Through Uses — shall mean establishments which include facilities for the provision of goods, services or food to persons who are occupants of a motor vehicle. Typical uses would include, but not be limited to, banks, dairies, or laundries with window service.

        Drug Abuse Recovery or Treatment Facility — shall mean any facility, place, or building which is maintained and operated exclusively to provide 24-hour residential nonmedical services in a group setting to adults, which may include, but need not be limited to, mothers under 18 years of age and their children, who are recovering from alcohol, drug, or drug and alcohol misuse and are currently capable of meeting their life support needs independently, but who temporarily need guidance, counseling, or other alcohol or drug recovery services.

        Dwelling, Duplex — shall mean a structure or structures designed to contain two dwelling units on one lot under single or separate ownership.

        Dwelling, Multiple Family — shall mean a structure or structures designed to contain three or more dwelling units on one lot under a single or separate ownership.

 



 

        Dwelling, Single Family Detached — shall mean a structure designed to contain one dwelling unit on one lot under single ownership.

 

        Eating Establishment, bona fide — shall mean a licensed premises which is maintained in good faith and used for the regular service of meals to patrons which does not contain a separate bar or lounge area. The premises must have suitable kitchen facilities and supply an assortment of foods commonly ordered at various hours of the day.

        Educational Uses — shall mean establishments, public or private, which provide formal academic, artistic or athletic training. Typical uses would include, but not be limited to, art schools, martial arts schools, dance schools, day care centers, gymnastics schools, technical schools, vocational schools and university/college extension programs or satellite facilities.

        Emergency Shelter — shall mean housing with minimal supportive services for homeless persons that is limited to occupancy of six (6) months or less by a homeless person. No individual or household may be denied emergency shelter because of an inability to pay.

        Employees’ Quarters — shall mean living quarters within the primary structure or within a detached accessory structure intended for the sole occupancy of persons employed on the premises, which may include a separate kitchen or cooking facilities, and which shall not be rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling unit.

        Equestrian Facility — shall mean a structure or area provided for the use of and activities involving horses, mules, donkeys, or ponies.

        Escort Agency — shall mean any person or business association who furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes for a fee, tip, or other consideration.

        Family Day Care Home — shall mean a home which regularly provides care, protection, and supervision of 12 or fewer children, in the provider’s own home, for periods of less than 24 hours per day, while the parents or guardians are away. This includes Large and Small Family Day Care Homes.

        Family Day Care Home, Large — shall mean a home which provides family day care to seven to twelve children, including children who reside in the home.

        Family Day Care Home, Small — shall mean a home which provides family day care to one to six children, including children who reside in the home.

        “Food Service Uses, Specialty” — shall mean establishments which prepare and serve a limited menu of specialty foods or beverages, generally not considered to be meals, for consumption either on or off the premises. Typical uses would include, but not be limited to, candy stores, bakeries, delicatessens, donut shops, sandwich shops, ice cream/yogurt shops and coffee houses.

        Fortune-Telling — shall mean the telling of fortunes, forecasting of future events or furnishing of any information not otherwise obtainable by the ordinary process of knowledge, by means of any occult or psychic power, faculty, or force, including, but not limited to, clairvoyancy, clairaudience, cartomancy, phrenology, spirits, tea leaves or other such reading, mediumship, seership, prophecy, augury, astrology, palmistry, necromancy, mind-reading, telepathy, or other craft, art, cards, talisman, charm, potion, magnetism, magnetized article or substance, crystal gazing, or magic, of any kind or nature. Fortune-telling for pay shall mean for a fee, reward, donation, loan, or receipt of anything of value.

        Foster Family Home — shall mean any residential facility providing 24-hour care for six or fewer foster children which is owned, leased, or rented and is the residence of the foster parents, including their family, in whose care the foster children have been placed.

        Furniture Store — shall mean establishments consisting primarily of the display and retail sale of interior furnishings for home and office. Typical uses would include, but not be limited to, large appliances, floor coverings, wall coverings, window coverings, bedding and linens, kitchen and bath fixtures and lamps and lighting fixtures.

 

        “Granny” Flat — shall mean an additional dwelling unit on a parcel designated for a single family residence intended for the sole occupancy of one or two adult persons who are 62 years of age or older pursuant to Government Code Section 65852.1.

        Group Dwelling — shall mean the residential occupancy of a structure by groups of more than five persons who are not related by blood, marriage or adoption, on a weekly or longer basis under a common housekeeping plan or as members of a structured organization. Typical uses would include, but not be limited to, retirement homes, boarding houses and lodging houses.

        Group Home — shall mean any residential care facility for six or fewer persons which is licensed by the State.

        Hazardous Waste Facility — shall mean any facility defined pursuant to Health and Safety Code 25117.1.

        “Heavy Industrial Uses” — shall mean establishments which involve the processing, manufacturing and use of natural resources, raw materials, primary metals or alloys, chemicals, petroleum and petroleum by-products. Typical uses would include, but not be limited to, the manufacture and/or assembly of boats, carpeting and rugs, cellophane products, ceramic products, chemicals, clay products, corrugated paper products, die casting, fuel storage, electric motors, enamel products, engines, glass, heating equipment, metal electroforming/coating, metal products and casting, paint, paper product, petroleum products, plastics and plastic products, prefabricated buildings, rubber products, tire retreading, steel fabrication, steel and sheet metal products, tile, or wire, and sand and gravel yards, or automotive salvage or wrecking yards.

        Home Occupation — shall mean a commercial activity conducted solely by the occupants of a particular dwelling unit in a manner incidental to and indistinguishable from residential occupancy.

        Hospital — shall mean an institution designed within an integrated campus setting for the diagnosis, care, and treatment of human illness, including surgery and primary treatment.

        Hospital, Acute Psychiatric — shall mean a health facility having a duly constituted governing body with overall administrative and professional responsibility and an organized medical staff which provides 24-hour inpatient care for mentally disordered, incompetent, or other patients referred to in Division 5 or Division 6 of the Welfare and Institutions Code. Such care shall include, but need not be limited to the following basic services: medical, nursing, rehabilitative, pharmacy, and dietary services.

        Hospital, Chemical Dependency Recovery — shall mean a health facility which provides 24-hour inpatient care for persons who have a dependency on alcohol or other drugs, or both alcohol and other drugs. Such care shall include, but not be limited to, the following basic services: patient counseling, group therapy, physical conditioning, family therapy, outpatient services, and dietetic services.

        Hospital, General Acute Care — shall mean a health facility having a duly constituted governing body with overall administrative and professional responsibility and an organized medical staff which provides 24-hour inpatient care, including the following basic services: medical, nursing, surgical, anesthesia, laboratory, radiology, pharmacy, and dietary services.

        Hospital, Special — shall mean a specialized health facility having a duly constituted governing body with overall administrative and professional responsibility and an organized medical or dental staff which provides inpatient or outpatient care in dentistry or maternity.

        Hotel — shall mean a structure or group of structures containing six (6) or more guest rooms or suites offering transient lodging accommodations to the general public, with most rooms gaining access through a common lobby and an interior hallway(s). Such a facility may include incidental services that customarily are provided by a hotel such as food service, recreational facilities, retail services provided for the convenience of hotel guests and banquet, reception, and meeting facilities.

        Institutional Uses — shall mean establishments of a non-profit or quasi-public use status.

Typical uses include, but are not limited to, libraries, public or private schools, hospitals, municipally owned or operated buildings, structures or lands used for public purposes.

        Intermediate Care Facility — shall mean a health facility which provides inpatient care to ambulatory or non-ambulatory patients who have recurring need for skilled nursing supervision and need supportive care, but who do not require availability of continuous skilled nursing care.

        Kennel — shall mean any lot or property where four or more dogs, cats, or other small animals over the age of four months are kept, whether such keeping is for pleasure, profit, breeding, or exhibiting, including places where said animals are boarded, kept, bred, or trained.

        “Light Industrial Uses” — shall mean establishments which are quiet, non-polluting operations wholly contained within a structure or screened from public view. Typical uses would include, but not be limited to, the manufacture, assembly, processing or production of apparel and garments, brushes, cameras, candy/confectionery, canvas products, clocks, computers, cutlery, dental equipment, drugs and pharmaceuticals, foods, electronics, glass (edging and beveling), jewelry, medical equipment, musical instruments, optical products, orthopedic devices, precision instruments, scientific instruments, and watches.

        Live Art Class — shall mean any premises on which all of the following occur: there is conducted a program of instruction involving the drawing, photographing, or sculpting of live models exposing specified anatomical parts; instruction is offered in a series of at least two (2) classes; the instruction is offered indoors; an instructor is present in the classroom while any participants are present; and pre-registration is required at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance of participation in the class.

        “Live Entertainment Uses” — shall mean establishments which provide the facilities and environment for entertainment, including any act, play, revue, pantomime, scene, dance act, or song and dance act, or any combination thereof, performed by one or more persons whether or not they are compensated for the performance. Typical uses would include, but not limited to, dance halls, dinner theaters, discotheques, nightclubs, playhouses, theaters and restaurants with dance floors.

        “Major Automotive Uses” — shall mean establishments which provide major repair and maintenance related to motor vehicles. Typical uses would include, but not be limited to, auto body repair shops, auto glass shops, automotive painting shops, customizing shops, engine rebuilding, speed shops and transmission shops.

        “Marine Uses” — shall mean establishments which provide goods and services, on a retail or wholesale basis, for marine related activities. Typical uses would include, but not be limited to, boat rental, boat storage, fishing supply stores, surfboard sales and repair, scuba equipment sales and service, marine supply sales, sail making and repair and jet ski repair.

        “Massage Establishment” — shall mean any establishment having a fixed place of business where any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, joint venture, or combination of individuals engages in, conducts, carries on or permits to be engaged in, conducted or carried on for consideration, massages, baths, or health treatments involving massages, or baths as regular functions.

        “Medical Office Uses” — shall mean establishments which provide medical services to individuals. Typical uses would include, but not be limited to, offices of doctors, dentists, chiropractors and veterinarians.

        “Medium Industrial Uses” — shall mean establishments which involve moderately intensive industrial operations. Typical uses would include, but not be limited to, the manufacture, packing, processing, or assembly of abrasives, adhesives, appliances, audio/visual products, automotive parts, beverage production, bicycles, books, cabinets, candles, cork products, cosmetics, film, electrical appliances, electrical or neon signs, floor covering, fur products, furniture, ink, leather, mattresses, sash and doors, seafood, shoes, soap, textiles, toiletries, tools, toys, window shades, and wood products and shall include welding and machine shops, bottling plants, breweries (not including micro-breweries) and dry cleaning plants.

        “Membership Organizations” — shall mean establishments which provide facilities for the meeting and activities of members of philanthropic, social, business or fraternal organizations, but excludes those customarily carried on as businesses. Typical uses would include, but not be limited to, union halls, fraternities and sororities, boys and girls clubs, and lodge halls.

        “Minor Automotive Uses” — shall mean establishments which provide routine care and maintenance related to motor vehicles. Typical uses would include, but not be limited to, brake shops, tire stores, muffler shops, alignment shops, car washes (full service or self service), detail shops, radiator shops, upholstery shops, service stations, stereo installation shops, tune-up services and oil and lubrication services.

        “Minor Repair Service Uses” — shall mean establishments which provide service and repair of appliances and other similar utility items for business and personal uses. Typical uses would include, but not be limited to, fix-it shops, jewelry and watch repair, household appliance repair, locksmith shops, stereo and television repair and upholstery shops.

        “Mixed Use Center” — shall mean a combination of certain types of retail, office, residential and light industrial uses which, because of the nature of their operation or access and space needs, are compatible and can be located within a common development area.

        Mobilehome — shall mean a structure which is transportable in one or more sections, designed and equipped to contain not more than two dwelling units, to be used with or without a foundation system. Mobilehome does not include a recreational vehicle, commercial coach, or factory-built housing.

        Mobilehome Park — shall mean any area or tract of land where two or more spaces are permitted to be rented or leased or held out for rent or lease to accommodate two or more manufactured homes or mobilehomes used for human habitation.

        Mobilehome Subdivision — shall mean any mobilehome park where spaces are owned instead of rented, leased or held out for rent.

        Motel — shall mean an establishment otherwise defined as a hotel with at least twenty-five (25) percent of all rooms having direct access to the parking areas without the necessity of passing through the main lobby of the building.

        Nursery — See “Building Materials Sales and Service Uses.”

        Open Space — shall mean any parcel or area of land or water set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public or private use or enjoyment.

        “Open Space Uses” — shall mean land which will remain essentially undeveloped and provide for preservation of an environment suitable to wildlife and flora indigenous to the area as well as an environment for food production, outdoor recreation and facilities for the public benefit. Typical uses would include, but not be limited to, beaches, coastal bluffs, riparian areas, and slope areas.

        “Park, Public” — shall mean an open space area intended for public recreation use which is operated by a public agency.

        “Performer” — shall mean any dancer, model, entertainer, and/or other person who publicly performs any specified sexual activities or publicly display any specified anatomical part in adult entertainment businesses.

        “Personal Service Uses” — shall mean establishments which provide services to an individual related to personal care and appearance, or the cleaning or repair of personal effects, excluding motor vehicles. Typical uses would include, but not be limited to, antique restoration, barber shops and beauty salons, cosmetologists (including incidental facial and scalp massage) mortuaries and funeral parlors, shoe repair, dry cleaning, laundromats, reducing salons, nail salons, tailors, and pet grooming. Massage therapy, and similar such uses, may be considered a personal service use provided that the massage services are administered by a medical practitioner, chiropractor, acupuncturist, acupressurist, or physical therapist appropriately licensed by the State of California.

        “Photographic, Reproduction and Graphic Service Uses” — shall mean establishments which provide services involving technical skills, training or talents for the reproduction of printed, graphic or audio/visual materials for businesses, individuals or the general public. Typical uses would include, but not be limited to, printing establishments, blueprint companies, lithographic services, motion picture studios, photographic studios, photographic laboratories, photocopy companies, radio/televisions studios and recording studios.

        “Professional Office Uses” — shall mean establishments which provide professional or technical services to businesses and individuals. Typical uses would include, but not be limited to offices of accountants, architects, accountants, designers, engineers, interior decorators, landscape architects, photographers and planners.

        “Public Land Uses” — shall mean land and/or facilities owned, operated and maintained by public agencies for the use and enjoyment of the general public. Typical uses would include, but not be limited to, beaches, parks and open space.

        “Public Utility Uses” — shall mean a business organization, such as a public service corporation, performing or providing some public service subject to special governmental regulations, usually a protected monopoly. Typical uses would include, but not be limited to, public utility buildings, structures or facilities for the provision of sewer, water, telephone, gas, electric, or television cable service, city or county maintenance/utility service yards, communication equipment buildings, electrical distribution and transmission substations, microwave antenna/tower, natural gas distribution and control stations, public utility service yards, radio/television transmitters, sewage treatment plants, telephone repeater stations and water treatment and distribution facilities.

        “Recreational Uses” — shall mean establishments providing active or passive recreational activities and their incidental support facilities. Typical uses would include, but not be limited to, athletic clubs, health clubs, dance studios, game courts, golf courses, golf driving ranges, gymnasiums, swimming pools, private or public recreational facilities and parks.

        “Recreational Vehicle Park” — shall mean an area used or intended to be used for camping by recreational vehicles.

        “Recycling Facility” — shall mean any center for the collection of recyclable materials. A recycling facility does not include temporary storage containers on property used solely for the recycling of material generated by the approved uses on that property. Recycling facilities include reverse vending machines, small collection recycling facilities, mobile recycling units and large collection recycling facilities. With the exception of reverse vending machines, a recycling facility may only be located within an established convenience zone.

        “Religious Uses” — shall mean establishments which provide facilities for public assembly involving worship and ceremonies that pertain to a system of religious beliefs. Typical uses would include, but not be limited to, churches, synagogues and temples.

        “Research and Development Uses” — shall mean establishments which provide facilities for testing, investigating or evaluating natural or physical elements or social sciences and include engineering and development activities with the objective of creating end products. Typical uses would include, but not be limited to, research, design or testing laboratories for aeronautics, automobiles, computer products development, controls, engineering services, materials testing, medical/dental, and electronics.

        Residential Care Facility for the Elderly — shall mean a housing arrangement chosen voluntarily by persons 60 years of age or over, or their authorized representative, where varying levels and intensities of care and supervision, protective supervision, personal care, or health-related services are provided, based upon their varying needs, as determined in order to be admitted and to remain in the facility.

        Residential Facility — shall mean any family home, group care facility, or similar facility determined by the State Director of Social Services, established for 24-hour nonmedical care of persons in need of personal services, supervision, or assistance essential for sustaining the activities of daily living or for the protection of the individual.

 

        Restaurant — shall mean an establishment which prepares and sells foods and/or beverages for immediate consumption, including but not limited to, dining rooms, cafes, cafeterias, coffee shops, and pizza parlors.

        Restaurant, Drive-Through — shall mean a restaurant which includes one (1) or more drive-through lanes for the ordering and receipt of foods and/or beverages by patrons remaining in their vehicles.

        Restaurant, Fast Food — shall mean a restaurant whose principal business is the sale of a pre-prepared or rapidly prepared food directly to the customer in a ready-to-consume state for consumption either on or off the premises.

        Restaurant, Take-Out — shall mean a restaurant where foods and/or beverages are sold directly to the customer in a ready to consume state for consumption off-site. A take-out restaurant provides no more than four (4) tables and sixteen (16) seats, either inside or outside, for on-site consumption.

        Restaurant, Walkup — shall mean a restaurant where the serving and consumption of foods and/or beverages is made available to patrons outside the confines of a building. A walkup restaurant provides only a limited amount of seating (up to sixteen (16) seats) for on-site consumption.

        Retail Sales Uses — shall mean establishments which provide general retail sales of goods and services for the community at large. Typical uses would include, but not be limited to, antique sales, appliance sales and repair, art supplies, automotive parts stores, bicycle sales and service, book stores, camera sales and service, clock sales, clothing sales, coin and stamp sales, computer and electronics stores, convenience stores, department stores, drug stores, feed and grain stores, fishing supply stores, florist shops, furniture sales, gift shops, grocery and food stores, gun shops, hardware stores, hobby shops, jewelry stores, liquor stores, machine and tools sales, medical/dental equipment sales, music stores, newsstands, optical products sales, pawnshops, pet shops and pet supply stores, commercial animal rescue shops, photo finishing and photo supply stores, shoe stores, sporting goods stores, stationery stores, television/stereo sales, toy stores and video sales/rental stores.

        Sanitarium, Health — shall mean an institution where patients, other than the mentally disoriented or mentally incompetent, are housed and where medical or post-surgical treatment is provided.

        Sanitarium, Mental — shall mean an institution for the recuperation and treatment of the mentally disordered or the mentally incompetent victims of drug addiction.

        Sanitary Sewer Facility — shall mean any facility used in the treatment, disposal, collection, reclamation, reuse or any other use commonly accepted in industry practice in the handling of raw sewage.

        Second Dwelling Unit — shall mean an additional dwelling unit on a lot which is zoned for single family or multiple family use and which contains an existing single family dwelling. The unit is not intended for sale and may be rented. The additional dwelling unit may be attached or detached from the primary residence and must be developed pursuant to Government Code Section 65852.2.

        Senior Citizen Housing — shall mean licensed housing for persons sixty-two (62) years of age or older, or unlicensed housing for persons fifty-five (55) years of age or older, including such housing facilities as retirement villas, apartments, condominiums, etc., but not including state licensed rest homes, group homes, convalescent hospitals, etc., which are regulated by other provisions of this Code.

        Senior Congregate Care Housing — shall mean a structure(s) providing residence for senior citizens (sixty (60) years of age or older) with separate bedroom(s) and/or living quarters and including a central or private kitchen, dining, recreational, and other accessory facilities.

        Sexually-Oriented Material — shall mean any element of sexually-oriented merchandise, or any book, periodical, magazine, photograph, drawing, sculpture, motion picture film, or other written, oral, or visual representation characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specific sexual activities or specified anatomical parts. This definition also includes, but is not limited to, sexual novelties depicting, designed or shaped as specified anatomical parts or which depict specific sexual activities.

        Sexually-Oriented Merchandise — shall mean sexually-oriented implements and paraphernalia, such as, but not limited to: dildos, auto sucks, sexually-oriented vibrators, edible underwear, benwa balls, inflatable orifices, anatomical balloons with orifices, simulated and battery operated vaginas, and similar sexually-oriented devices which are designed or marketed primarily for the stimulation of human genital organs or sadomasochistic activity.

        Single Room Occupancy — shall mean a cluster of guest units within a residential hotel for weekly or longer tenancy providing sleeping or living facilities for one person per unit, in which sanitary facilities may be provided within the units, and cooking facilities may be shared within the hotel.

        Skilled Nursing Facility — shall mean a health facility which provides skilled nursing care and supportive care to patients whose primary need is for availability of skilled nursing care on an extended basis.

        Small Family Home — shall mean any residential facility providing twenty-four (24) hour care for six (6) or fewer foster children who have mental disorders or developmental or physical disabilities and who require special care and supervision as a result of their disabilities.

        Social Day Care Facility — shall mean a community based group program designed to meet the needs of functionally impaired adults through an individual plan of care in a structured comprehensive program that provides a variety of social and related support services in a protective setting on less than a twenty-four (24) hour basis.

        Social Rehabilitation Facility — shall mean any residential facility which provides social rehabilitation services for no longer than eighteen (18) months in a group setting to adults recovering from mental illness who temporarily need assistance, guidance, or counseling.

        Solid Waste Disposal Facility — shall mean any authorized facility or location where disposal of solid waste occurs.

        Specified Anatomical Parts — shall mean:

a.     Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals; pubic region; buttocks; or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or

b.     Exposed human male genitals or human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, regardless of whether they are completely and opaquely covered.

        Specified Sexual Activities — shall mean:

a.     Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory function in the context of a sexual relationship, any of the following depicted sexually-oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerastia; or

b.     Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; or

c.     Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or masturbation; or

d.     Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; or

e.     Masochism, erotic or sexually-oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; or

f.      Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexually-oriented contact with an animal by a human being; or

g.     Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation; or

 

h.     Striptease; or any act involving the public removal of clothing to the point where specified anatomical parts are displayed; or the public appearance of any person in a state where specified anatomical parts are displayed, or the public appearance of any person where specified anatomical parts are only covered by attire commonly referred to as pasties or a G-string, or any other opaque covering which does not expose the areola or nipples of the female breast, and while covering the natal cleft and pubic area covers less than one (1) inch on either side of the entire length of the natal cleft and two (2) inches across the pubic area. For the purposes of this definition, appearance in “public” shall include a situation when a single employee, agent or other non-patron of the adult entertainment business is in the presence of a single patron of the adult oriented business.

        Stable, Private — shall mean an accessory structure for the keeping of equine animals including horses, mules or ponies for the exclusive use of the occupants of the premises.

        Stable, Public — shall mean a structure for the keeping of equine animals including horses, mules or ponies, which are boarded for compensation.

        Storage Yard Uses — shall mean establishments where construction materials and/or equipment are stored within an enclosed building or properly screened yard. Typical uses would include, but not be limited to, automobile/RV storage, contractor storage yards, equipment sales and rentals, equipment storage, garden equipment sales and storage yards, heating/ventilation/air conditioning equipment storage yards, impound yards, machinery storage yards, plumbing supply yards and truck storage.

        Supportive Housing — shall mean housing with no limit on length of stay, that is occupied by the target population and that is linked to on- or off-site services that assist the supportive housing resident in retaining the housing, improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live and, when possible, work in the community.

        Swap Meet — shall mean any indoor or outdoor place, location, or activity where, on a temporary, intermittent or otherwise non-permanent basis, new or used goods or secondhand personal property is offered for sale or exchange to the general public by a multitude of individual licensed vendors, usually in compartmentalized spaces; and, where a fee may be charged to prospective buyers for admission, or a fee may be charged for the privilege of offering or displaying such merchandise. The term swap meet is interchangeable with and applicable to: flea markets, auctions, open air markets, sidewalk sales, farmers markets, or other similarly named or labeled activities, but the term does not include normal intermittent and incidental retail operations of supermarkets or department stores.

        Tattoo Parlor — shall mean any premises used for the business of marking or coloring the skin with tattoos, and all furnishings, equipment, instruments, dyes and inks, and other facilities maintained therein incidental to such use.

        Transitional Housing and Transitional Housing Development — shall mean buildings configured as rental housing development, but operated under program requirements that call for the termination of assistance and recirculation of the assisted unit to another eligible program recipient at some predetermined future point in time, which shall be no less than six (6) months.

        Transportation Uses — shall mean establishments which provide local and regional passenger transportation by bus, boat or rail with terminal facilities. Typical uses would include, but not be limited to, bus stations, ferry service facilities, train stations and park and ride facilities.

        Video Arcades or Game Rooms — shall mean establishments which provide six (6) or more video games, virtual reality devices or computers for the use and enjoyment of the general public.

        Warehousing and Storage Uses — shall mean establishments which provide facilities for the storage of trade goods, personal goods, or service products and equipment in an enclosed structure. Typical uses would include, but not be limited to, cold storage plants, freight terminals, moving and storage facilities, parcel delivery services, warehouses, and mini-warehouses. (Added by Ord. 93-16, 11/23/93; amended by Ord. 94-02, 1/11/94; Ord. 94-09, 5/24/94; Ord. 94-1, 12/13/94; Ord. 96-10, 8/13/96; Ord. 03-06, 4/9/03; Ord. 03-07, 4/9/03; Ord. 10-06, 5/24/10; Ord. 12-02, 1/31/12)

Chapter 9.77 ON-SHORE SUPPORT FACILITIES FOR OFF-SHORE OIL DRILLING — APPROVALS REQUIRED
9.77.010 Purpose.
        The purpose of this Chapter is to protect the unique and picturesque coastline along the City of Dana Point and to prevent Dana Point from becoming an oil port or other logistical base for off-shore oil operations. (Added by Ord. 92-06, 6/23/92)

 

9.77.012 Findings of Need for Chapter.
        This Chapter is needed for the following reasons:

(a)    The City of Dana Point’s coastal zone is an environmentally sensitive area which can be irreparably harmed by the seepage of environmental contaminants such as untreated petrochemical products.

(b)    The City of Dana Point’s coastal zone is a heavily populated residential area.

(c)    An on-shore oil facility placed within the City of Dana Point’s coastal zone would be in close proximity to a high concentration of residences.

(d)    In the normal course of operations, oil facilities increase traffic and produce irritating and unpleasant odors.

(e)    The City of Dana Point is a small community with many unique and environmentally sensitive habitat areas.

(f)    The City of Dana Point is located in a physical setting with spectacular visual qualities. The visual resources of the community serve as valuable assets to both City residents and visitors.

(g)    Tourism is an important part of the City’s economy with the quality of the beaches and the beautiful visual resources being a prime factor in the success of the tourist industry. Oil and gas development off-shore could have a disastrous effect on beaches within the City and the tourist industry.

(h)    Support facilities for off-shore oil and gas development cannot be accommodated in the City of Dana Point. The City’s approved Local Coastal Programs contain no sites designated for on-shore support facilities associated with off-shore oil development. Any site in the City would have debilitative effects on the local economy and environment.

(Added by Ord. 92-06, 6/23/92)

 

9.77.014 On-Shore Support Facility Defined.
        “On-Shore Support Facility” or “On-Shore Oil Facility” shall mean any structure or development created for the purpose of storing, transporting, or processing liquid petroleum products or natural gas products which operates directly or indirectly in support of any off-shore oil or gas exploration, development, drilling, pumping, or production. Nothing herein provided shall preclude the development of, transportation to, or storage of petroleum products and natural gas products for the retail sale of the same within the City limits. (Added by Ord. 92-06, 6/23/92)

 

9.77.016 Application for and City Council Findings Necessary for On-Shore Support Facilities.
        Whenever any person, partnership, group, firm, or corporation seeks an amendment to the Dana Point General Plan, the Dana Point Zoning Ordinance, any approved Specific Plan, or any applicable Local Coastal Program to permit the development within the City’s coastal zone of any on-shore support facility for off-shore oil drilling, the City Council shall hold a public hearing to determine if:

(a)    The proposed amendment is consistent with the coastal policies contained in Public Resources Code Sections 30200 through 30265.5;

(b)    The proposed amendment is consistent with the City’s General Plan;

(c)    The proposed amendment is consistent with the Dana Point Zoning Ordinance;

(d)    The proposed amendment is consistent with any applicable Specific Plan;

(e)    The proposed amendment is consistent with any applicable Local Coastal Program;

(f)    The proposed amendment and underlying development will not pose a significant danger or threat to life, injury, or property of residents of the neighborhood, community, or City;

(g)    The benefits of the proposed amendment and underlying development clearly outweigh the possible adverse environmental effects;

(h)    There are no feasible alternatives to the proposed amendment and underlying development; and,

(i)     The location and approval of the on-shore support facilities identified in the proposed amendment and underlying development at the particular location clearly outweigh any potential harm to public health, safety, peace, morals, comfort and general welfare of persons residing or working in the neighborhood or community and will not be detrimental or injurious to property in the neighborhood, community, or to the general welfare of the City.

(Added by Ord. 92-06, 6/23/92)

 

9.77.018 City Council Approval, Submission to Voters.
(a)    If after concluding the public hearing, the City Council is able to make the findings set forth in Section 9.77.016 above, the City Council shall submit the proposed amendment to a vote of the people at either a special election or the then upcoming general election in accordance with Elections Code Section 4017.

(b)    If the proposed amendment receives a majority of vote of those voters casting ballots on the measure, the proposed amendment shall be deemed adopted. The amendment shall be effective ten (10) days following City Council certification of the election canvass.

(c)    If the proposed amendment fails to receive a majority vote of those voters casting ballots on the measure, the amendment shall have failed passage. The applicant or his/her successor-in-interest shall not thereafter file a subsequent application for a proposed amendment which is substantially the same or similar to the one which failed passage for a period of one (1) year.

(d)    The person, partnership, group, firm, or corporation seeking any such amendment hereunder shall pay, to the extent permitted by law, any and all costs associated with the special or general election required herein. The City Council is hereby authorized to require the posting of a bond, letter of credit, or similar security as a condition precedent to calling an election on the proposed amendment.

(Added by Ord. 92-06, 6/23/92)

 

9.77.020 City Council Action Required and Authorized to Effectuate Purposes of this Chapter.
        The City Council of the City of Dana Point is hereby authorized and directed to enact any further Ordinances, Resolutions, policies, or other documents necessary to give effect to or further the purposes of this Chapter. (Added by Ord. 92-06, 6/23/92)

 

9.77.022 Limitations of Chapter.
        The initiative Ordinance election provided for by this Chapter is intended to extend only to those legislative acts which may be validly exercised by the City Council or the People of the City of Dana Point in connection with the amendment to the City of Dana Point’s General Plan, the City of Dana Point’s Zoning Ordinance, any applicable Specific Plan, or any applicable Local Coastal Program to provide for the development of on-shore support facilities for off-shore oil drilling. This Chapter is not intended and shall not be construed to apply to any activity or program which is regulated by federal or state law to the extent that such application of this Chapter would conflict with such law. It is the intention of the City Council and the People of the City of Dana Point that this Chapter be interpreted to be compatible with federal and state enactments. (Added by Ord. 92-06, 6/23/92)

 

9.77.024 Amendments to Chapter.
        With the exception of recodification into any comprehensive Municipal or Zoning Code, this Chapter may only be amended or repealed by a majority vote of the People of the City of Dana Point. (Added by Ord. 92-06, 6/23/92)

Title 10 ANIMAL CONTROL, WELFARE AND LICENSING REQUIREMENTS
Chapter 10.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 10.02 DISEASE CONTROL
Chapter 10.03 ANIMAL LICENSES
Chapter 10.04 DOGS AND CATS
Chapter 10.05 VICIOUS ANIMALS
Chapter 10.06 ANIMALS AT LARGE
Chapter 10.07 WILD, EXOTIC, NONDOMESTIC ANIMALS
Chapter 10.08 HUMANE TREATMENT
Chapter 10.09 ANIMAL SHELTER AND IMPOUNDMENT
Chapter 10.10 COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS
Chapter 10.11 PRIVATE ESTABLISHMENTS
Chapter 10.12 DISPOSAL OF DEAD ANIMALS
Chapter 10.14 BIRD SANCTUARY

Chapter 10.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
10.01.010 Definitions.
        As used in this Title:

        “Adoption fee” means any compensation or monetary exchange for the purpose of taking ownership or custody of an animal.     

        “Animal” means any vertebrate creature, domestic or wild, including, but not limited to, birds, fishes, reptiles and nonhuman mammals.

        “Animal menagerie” means a place where wild and/or exotic animals are kept or maintained for any commercial purposes.

        “Animal services officer” means any person designated by the General Manager of the Authority as a law enforcement officer who is qualified to perform such duties under the laws of this State.

        “Animal shelter” means any facility operated by the cities served by the Authority or its authorized agents for the purpose of impounding or caring for animals held under the authority of this Title or State law.

        “Approved rabies vaccine” means a vaccine which is approved for use in the animal concerned by the California Department of Health.

        “Approved research institution” means a college, hospital, university or research laboratory conducting research under humane conditions, if the General Manager so finds and certifies in writing.

        At large. A dog or cat shall be deemed to be “at large” when off the property of the owner and not under restraint.

        “Auction” means any place or facility where animals (excluding dogs and cats) are regularly bought, sold or traded, except for those facilities otherwise defined in this Title. This definition does not apply to individual sales of animals by owners.

        “Authority” means the person or persons designated to enforce the provisions of this Title. The Authority refers to the Coastal Animal Services Authority.

        “Birth control measures” means the surgical alteration of female and male cats and dogs, popularly referred to as spaying and neutering; utilization of approved mechanical birth control devices, such as intrauterine devices; chemical birth control agents as approved by the Southern California Veterinary Medical Association.

        “Board of Directors” means the policy-making body for the Authority consisting of elected officials from each jurisdiction served by the Authority and support staff.

 

        “Care and Evaluation Committee” means an advisory committee to the General Manager or the Authority, whose purpose is to make recommendations to improve the quality of life and future well being of animals.

        “Cat” means and includes domesticated members of the species Felis Catus. This definition excludes other members of the family Felidae.

        “Charitable auction” means any and all auctions carried out by a charitable organization for the purpose of fundraising.

        “Charitable organization” means a non-profit organization which qualifies under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code as a charitable organization.

        “Circus” means a commercial variety show featuring animal acts for public entertainment.

        “Coastal Animal Services Authority” or “CASA” means a joint powers authority created to facilitate the animal control, welfare, and licensing requirements of the cities served.

        “Commercial” means operated or carried on primarily for financial gain.

        “Commercial animal establishment” means any pet shop, commercial animal rescue shop, grooming parlor, animal auction, animal dealer who operates for profit, riding school or stable, zoological park, circus, performing animal exhibition, commercial kennel/cattery, or animal shelter.

        “Commercial animal exhibition” means any display containing one (1) or more animals which are exposed to public view for entertainment, instruction or advertisement, excluding fairs, livestock shows, rodeos, purebred dog and pedigree cat shows, obedience trials and competitions, field trials, and any other fair or exhibition intended to advance agricultural arts and sciences.

        “Commercial animal rescue shop” means a commercial establishment that offers dogs and/or cats for a non-profit adoption fee, and such dogs and/or cats are made available to the establishment by non-profit humane societies, animal shelters, bona fide animal rescue organizations, or the San Clemente-Dana Point Animal Shelter.

        “Commercial breeder” means an owner/lessor/breeder of dogs and cats who is licensed to breed animals for resale, individually or in litter lots, whether any of these animals are also kept for personal use.

        “Commercial exhibitor” means any person exhibiting any animals to the public for compensation, such term including carnivals, circuses and animal acts exhibiting such animals whether operated for profit or not.

        “Commercial kennel/cattery” means any person maintaining, for profit, an establishment where animals of any species are kept for the purpose of breeding, grooming, boarding, or exhibiting such animals; or selling animals of any species (excluding dogs and cats); or engaged in the training of dogs.

        “Dangerous animals” means any animal of a species which presents a threat to the safety of persons or property, as determined by the General Manager.

        “Dealer” means any person who, for compensation or profit, buys for resale any animals (excluding dogs and cats), whether alive or dead, for research, experimentation, testing or exhibition (except as an exhibitor as herein described) or for use as pets.

        “Dog” means and includes domesticated members of the species Canis Familiaris. This definition excludes other members of the family Canidae.

        “Enclosed space” means a space other than a motor vehicle enclosed by four (4) walls of such dimensions that the animal could not escape the enclosure.

        “Euthanasia” means the humane death of an animal brought about by an authorized person and by a method approved by the Authority and the local veterinary doctors.

        “Garbage” means any waste consisting in whole or in part of animal wastes resulting from the handling, preparing, cooking and consuming of food, including the offal from animal carcasses or parts thereof.

        “General Manager” means the individual serving as the director of the Authority.

        “Grooming parlor” means any place where animals are groomed, clipped, bathed, or otherwise conditioned as pets and/or for show in exchange for a fee except as a service offered by commercial or service kennel and cattery, or by a licensed veterinary hospital.

        “Guard dog (sentry dog)” means any dog utilized, on a commercial basis, to guard any property within the cities served by the Authority, including guarding against fire or theft or both.

        “Guide dog” means a properly trained dog certified by a licensed guide (Seeing Eye) dog agency and actually being used by a blind person.

        “Horse stable” means any location where three (3) or more horses are maintained for any purpose.

        “Humane society” means any nonprofit organization existing for the purpose of prevention of cruelty to animals, incorporated under the laws of any U.S. State.

        “Impounded” means having been received into the custody of any animal shelter, or into the custody of the General Manager or authorized agent or deputy.

        “Infectious disease” means any infectious, contagious or communicable disease sufficiently dangerous to the public health or to the health of animals within the cities served by the Authority to warrant putting into effect the provisions of this Title and any rules or regulations adopted pursuant thereto.

        “Kennel” means any premises wherein any person engages in the business of boarding, breeding, letting for hire, or training for a fee, animals of any species; or buying and/or selling animals of any species (excluding dogs and cats).

        “Kitten” means any Felis Catus under four (4) months of age.

        “License” means a fee collected by the Authority program for: (a) commercial establishments keeping animals; (b) commercial establishments providing services related to animals; (c) commercial establishments selling domestic or nondomestic animals (excluding dogs and cats); and (d) individual household pets.

        “Licensing authority” means the General Manager of the Authority or any designated representative thereof charged with administering the issuance and/or revocation of permits and licenses under the provisions of this Chapter.

        “Livestock” means any domesticated animals including cattle, horses, ponies, stallions, colts, geldings, mares, sheep, rams, lambs, bulls, bullocks, steers, heifers, cows, calves, mules, jacks, jennets, burros, goats, kids, swine, confined and domesticated hares and rabbits, poultry, and equines which are kept in captivity or under the control or ownership of any person for any purpose.

        “Neutered” means rendered permanently incapable of reproduction. To be acceptable, the neutering must be certified to by a licensed veterinarian.

        “Nuisance” means a condition in which an animal: damages, soils, defiles or defecates on private property other than the owner’s or on public walks and recreation areas unless such waste is immediately removed and properly disposed of by the owner; causes unsanitary, dangerous or offensive conditions; causes a disturbance by excessive barking if confirmed by three (3) independent witnesses, or other noise making; or chases vehicles, or molests, attacks or interferes with persons or other domestic animals on public property.

        “Operator” means the legal owner or person in actual control of any activity involving animals.

        “Owner” means the actual custodian of an animal, whether or not that person is the legal owner, the caretaker, or merely the possessor of an animal. Legal ownership is established by a person being registered as the owner on a license or other legal document.

        “Performing animal exhibition” means any spectacle, display, act or event other than circuses, in which performing animals are used.

        “Permit” means an authorization from the Authority or any city served by the Authority, stipulating conditions under which nondomesticated animals may be kept in commercial and private establishments.

        “Person” means any individual or business, partnership, firm, joint stock company, corporation, association, society, trust, estate, other legal entity, and every officer, agent or employee thereof who own, harbor, or keep animals within the cities served by the Authority.

        “Pest breeding hazard” means the accumulation, existence or maintenance of any substance, matter, material or condition resulting in the breeding of flies, cockroaches, rats or other insects or rodents in an amount or manner such as to endanger public health or safety, or to create unreasonable interference with the comfortable enjoyment and use of life and property by others.

        “Pet” means any animal kept for pleasure rather than utility.

        “Pet shop” means any person, partnership or corporation, whether operated separately or in connection with another business enterprise, that buys for resale and sells at retail, any species of animal (excluding dogs and cats) bred by others, whether as owner, agent, or on consignment, and that sells or offers to sell to the general public at retail.

        “Poultry” means all domesticated fowl and all game bird which are held in captivity.

        “Primary enclosure” means any structure used to immediately restrict an animal or animals to a limited amount of space, such as a room, pen, run, cage, compartment or hutch.

        “Private animal owner” means a person having bred, adopted or purchased a dog, cat or other animal permitted by this Title, for his or her personal use and enjoyment, and who keeps or maintains said animal within the cities served by the Authority for a period of more than seven (7) days.

        “Private animal refuge” means owners and harborers of unwanted animals of any species, including cross-breeds, who provide food, shelter, confinement, licensing, and spaying/neutering for a group of animals.

        “Private breeder” means a dog or cat owner/fancier who breeds an occasional litter of purebred animals for his or her personal use and enjoyment, from animals personally owned or leased for the breeding, who neither sells the resultant offspring for resale to commercial outlets, nor for purposes of research, testing or laboratory experimentation.

        “Private exhibitor” means any organization sponsoring and all persons participating in fairs, livestock shows, rodeos, purebred dog and cat shows, obedience trials, field trials, and any other fairs or exhibitions intended to advance agricultural arts and sciences.

        “Private kennel/cattery” means the home and premises of a person who owns four (4) or more dogs and/or cats that are four (4) months of age or older for the pleasure and enjoyment of the owner.

        “Public nuisance” means any animal or animals which (a) molests passersby or passing vehicles; (b) attacks other animals; (c) trespasses on school grounds; (d) is repeatedly at large; (e) damages private or public property; or (f) barks, whines or howls in an excessive, continuous or untimely fashion.

        “Puppy” means any Canis Familiaris under four (4) months of age.

        “Quarantine” means the strict confinement of an animal upon the premises of the owner or elsewhere as approved by the General Manager.

        “Registration” means the method of identifying animals through an identification number at the animal shelter. It shall not be the same as a license.

        Restraint. A dog or cat shall be considered under “restraint” if it is within the real property limits of its owner or secured by a leash or lead or under the control of a responsible person.

        “Riding school or stable” means any place which has available for hire, boarding and/or riding instruction, any horse, pony, donkey, mule or burro.

        “Run” means floor or surface and cage, exclusive of the sleeping box, used to continually contain or maintain dogs or cats.

        “Spayed” means rendered permanently incapable of reproduction. To be acceptable, the spaying must be certified to by a licensed veterinarian.

        “Stockyard” means any stockyard, corral or premises wherein public trading in livestock is carried on, or where yarding, feeding and watering facilities are provided and where federal, state or local inspection is maintained for the inspection of livestock for infectious diseases.

        “Unaltered” means an animal which has not been spayed or neutered.

        “Veterinarian” means a veterinarian with a valid license to practice veterinary medicine, dentistry and surgery, issued by the Board of Examination Veterinarian Medicine of the State of California.

        “Veterinary medical facility” means any establishment maintained and operated by a licensed veterinarian for surgery, diagnosis and treatment of diseases and injuries of animals.

        “Vicious animal” means any animal or animals that constitute a physical threat to human beings or other animals. An animal is “known to be vicious” when said animal has previously attacked either a person engaged in a lawful activity or another animal and such attack causes an injury involving a breaking of the skin, when that animal has caused a person of reasonable sensitivities, engaged in a lawful activity to believe that he or she or a domestic animal in his or her custody and under proper restraint are in imminent danger of great bodily harm, or when that animal has been declared to be vicious pursuant to the provisions of this Title.

        “Vivisection” means the cutting of or operation on a living animal usually for physiological or pathological investigations.

        “Wild/exotic animals” means animals which are being kept for exhibition purposes or as private pets including monkeys, raccoons, skunks, fox, snakes, leopards, panthers, tigers, lions, birds or any other warm-blooded animal which can normally be found in the wild state.

        “Zoo” means a collection of living animals for public display.

        “Zoological park” means any facility, other than a pet shop or kennel, displaying or exhibiting one (1) or more species of nondomesticated animals operated by a person, partnership, corporation or government agency. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96; amended by Ord. 12-01, 1/31/12; Ord. 12-02, 1/31/12)

 

10.01.020 Responsibility for Administration.
        The General Manager of the Authority is charged with the administration of the provisions of this Title. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.01.030 Rules and Regulations.
        The General Manager, with approval of the Authority Board of Directors, and with approval of city councils served by the Authority, may promulgate any necessary rules and regulations for the administration of the provisions of this Title. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.01.040 Enforcement.
        The General Manager, duly authorized deputies, and agents are hereby empowered and it shall be their duty to enforce the provisions of this Title and any statute relating to animal control, unless otherwise provided by law. Authority officers may arrest any person without a warrant whenever they have reasonable cause to believe that the person to be arrested has committed a misdemeanor in their presence which is a violation of any such statute or ordinance. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.01.050 Interference.
        No person shall interfere with, oppose or resist any authorized person charged with the enforcement of this Title while such person is engaged in the performance of his or her duties. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.01.060 Firearms Authorized.
        The General Manager and animal services officers are authorized to carry loaded rifles, shotguns, and tranquilizer equipment, issued by the Authority, while acting in the course and scope of their employment. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.01.070 Violations.
        (a)    Infraction. Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter is guilty of an infraction, except as set forth in Subsection (b) of this Section.

        (b)    Misdemeanor. Any person who violates any provision of Sections 10.04.060 and 10.05.010 is guilty of a misdemeanor. Moreover, any person who violates any other provision of this Title and the violation occurs within one (1) year of the occurrence of two (2) other separate violations of this Title by that person is guilty of a misdemeanor.

        (c)    Separate Offense. Each day on which a violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.01.080 Inspections.
        The General Manager or authorized agent is empowered to inspect any building or other property for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this Title or any statute relating to animal control. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.01.090 Complaints.
        Upon receiving a complaint from any person alleging a violation of this Chapter and upon receiving the name and address of the owner and/or custodian of the animal, if known, an investigation to determine whether a violation exists may be made. If the investigation discloses a violation of the provisions of this Title, prosecution may be initiated against the owner and/or custodian. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.01.100 Record Keeping.
        It shall be the duty of the General Manager to maintain all records related to or required by this Title and to attempt to identify any impounded, found or turned in animal via registration check, identification tags, lost reports, and via diligent search for any tattoo marks. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

Chapter 10.02 DISEASE CONTROL
10.02.010 Vaccination Required.
        Every person owning or harboring a dog, four (4) months of age or older, for fifteen (15) or more days, shall have such dog vaccinated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian. Said person shall maintain a current vaccination certificate. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.02.020 Certificate.
        Each duly licensed veterinarian, after vaccinating any dog, shall sign certificate of vaccination containing all information required by the County Health Officer. The veterinarian shall present the certificate to the owner of the vaccinated dog, which the owner shall retain in his or her possession. The veterinarian shall also deliver a list of vaccinated dogs to the Authority on a monthly basis. He or she shall retain a record of all animals that have been vaccinated. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.02.030 Deferment of Vaccination.
        The vaccination requirement for rabies shall not apply to a dog if a licensed veterinarian has examined the dog and certified at such time rabies vaccine may endanger the dog’s health because of its age, infirmity, debility or other physiological considerations, and said dog is kept in the house or in a fenced yard adequate to confine the animal at all times. The deferment shall be valid only during the period that vaccination would endanger the dog’s health as said period is shown by the certificate of a licensed veterinarian. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.02.040 Display of Certificate.
        No person who owns or harbors any dog shall fail or refuse to exhibit his or her copy of the rabies vaccination certificate, anti-rabies inoculation deferment form upon demand of any person charged with the enforcement of this Title. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

Chapter 10.03 ANIMAL LICENSES
10.03.010 Registration Required.
        Every person owning or having custody of any dog four (4) months of age or older shall procure for said dog a South Orange County Animal Services Authority dog license. Guard (sentry) dogs are not excepted. Each such guard (sentry) dog must be individually licensed and each dog shall be wearing its license securely fastened to a collar or harness whether or not the dog is kenneled within the cities served by the Authority. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.03.020 Thirty-Day Time Limit.
        Application for registration must be made within thirty (30) days after obtaining a dog four (4) months of age or older, or within thirty (30) days of establishing residence within the cities served by the Authority. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.03.030 Proof of Rabies Vaccination.
        No dog shall be licensed without proof of approved rabies vaccination. Rabies vaccination certificates must be signed by licensed veterinarian and be valid for the entire registration period. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.03.040 License Period.
        Licenses shall be issued for a period of twelve (12) months. Registrations may be issued for periods of time less than the minimum twelve (12) month period of time if the animal’s rabies certificate expires sooner than the minimum registration period. No license may expire later than the expiration date of the rabies vaccination. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.03.050 Animal License Fee.
        A fee not to exceed the cost of Authority services relating to dogs, shall be paid to the Authority for each license required by this Title as provided by resolution of the city councils served by the Authority. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.03.060 Fee Adjustment.
        Senior citizens over sixty-two (62) years of age may register their animals for one-half (1/2) the regular fee. Any person whose dog has been spayed or neutered shall pay one-half (1/2) of the application registration fee; provided, that a certificate of sterilization issued by a licensed veterinarian is presented with the registration application. Such fee shall not apply to any dog while kept or maintained exclusively within a commercial kennel or by a recognized animal rescue organization. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.03.070 Fee Exemption.
        No registration fee shall be required for the following:

        (a)    Guide dogs for the blind;

        (b)    Dogs honorably discharged from the Armed Forces of the United States;

        (c)    Dogs in the care, custody and control of nonresidents who are traveling through, or temporarily staying in, the cities served by the Authority for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days, or dogs temporarily brought into the cities served by the Authority for the purpose of being entered in a dog show or exhibition, provided such dogs are so entered and not kept elsewhere;

        (d)    Dogs used in crime detection or apprehension by police officers;

        (e)    Dogs housed in duly licensed animal shelter or commercial animal rescue shop prior to adoption; or

        (f)    Dogs maintained in an approved research institution or kennel, provided said dog is owned by the owner or operator of said research institution or kennel. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96; amended by Ord. 12-02, 1/31/12)

 

10.03.080 License or Registration Application.
        The owner shall state at the time application is made, and upon standard printed forms of application provided for such purpose, his or her name, address, telephone number, and the name, breed, color, age and sex of each animal for which application is made. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.03.090 Issuance.
        Upon collection of the license or registration fee, a dated receipt will be issued stating the name, address and telephone number of the owner, tag number, description of the animal, and the expiration date of the rabies vaccination, together with a registration tag stamped with a serial number year and name of the Authority. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

 

10.03.100 Display of License.
        Each dog required to be licensed shall wear at all times the current license tag assigned to that dog, except when the dog is: (a) physically confined within the premises of the owner or other person authorized to have custody; (b) confined in a vehicle or cage; (c) participating in any dog exhibition, field trial or competition; or (d) confined in a licensed kennel or veterinary hospital, in which case the license tag number shall be recorded and placed nearby so that it is readily identifiable with the dog to which it belongs; or if not licensed, that fact shall be clearly indicated on the facility’s records. Nothing herein contained, however, shall be construed to relieve the necessity of having a current tag for each dog. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.03.110 Unauthorized Removal.
        A license tag shall not be removed from any dog without the consent of the owner thereof. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.03.120 Lost License Tag.
        In case any license tag is lost or destroyed, replacement may be obtained upon showing such proof as may be required and upon payment of the replacement fee. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.03.130 Dog License Renewal.
        Licenses not purchased or renewed within thirty (30) days after expiration, or the date on which they become due, shall be considered delinquent and a late fee as determined by the Authority shall be added to the cost of the new license. The General Manager or authorized agent may waive the above late fee if he or she determines the applicant made a reasonable effort to comply with the above deadline. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.03.140 Cat Licensing.
        Cats over four (4) months of age may be registered with the Authority in the same manner in which dogs are licensed. Cats must have current rabies vaccination valid for the entire one (l) year registration period. The obtaining of such a license shall be optional on the part of the owner, except as provided in Section 10.03.190. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.03.150 Displaying Proof of Vaccination.
        Every person shall, upon demand by any person charge with enforcing the provisions of this Chapter, exhibit any current rabies vaccination certificate or dog or cat license tag issued to said person pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.03.160 Nontransferable Registration.
        Animal registrations are not transferrable or refundable. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.03.170 False or Stolen Documents or Tags.
        No person shall make use of or have in his or her possession a stolen, counterfeit or forged dog or cat license receipt, dog or cat license tag, rabies vaccination certificate, anti-rabies inoculation-deferment form, or other form issued in accordance with this Title. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.03.180 Counterfeit Tag.
        It is unlawful for any person to attach any current license tag to any dog or cat, which tag was not issued for said dog or cat, or to counterfeit or imitate a dog tag, or to attach a counterfeit or imitation tag to any dog or cat; and it is unlawful for any person to make any false statement as to any fact required in connection with the securing and issuance of a dog or cat tag. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.03.190 Animal Permit Required.
        Any person owning or having custody of four (4) or more licensed dogs and/or four (4) or more cats that are four (4) months of age or older, for any purpose other than a commercial purpose shall file an application for a private kennel/cattery/animal refuge permit with the Authority or any city served by the Authority. The General Manager or authorized agent shall issue a permit for the keeping of such animals under the following conditions: (a) upon receipt of the fee established by the Authority; and (b) when, in the opinion of the General Manager, such animals may be kept or maintained without endangering the safety and comfort of such animals and the inhabitants of the neighborhood; and (c) the owner or custodian has complied with any other applicable laws, including zoning regulations. Each such animal shall be individually licensed. The permit shall specify the number and types of animals authorized to be kept thereunder and may contain any conditions regarding the keeping of animals thereunder deemed necessary by the General Manager or authorized agent. Animal permits shall be nontransferable and must be renewed annually. Failure to comply with the aforementioned requirements or any conditions imposed by the General Manager shall constitute cause for denial or revocation of such permit. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

Chapter 10.04 DOGS AND CATS
10.04.010 Restraint of Dogs.
        No person owning or having charge, care, custody or control of any dog shall cause or permit, either willfully or through failure to exercise due care or control, any such dog to be upon any:

        (a)    Private property unless such dog be restrained thereon by a fence, wall, substantial chain or leash not exceeding six (6) feet in length, other appropriate physical restraint, or is under the charge of a person competent to exercise care, custody and control over such dog; or

        (b)    Highway, street, alley or other public property unless such dog be restrained by a substantial chain or leash not exceeding six (6) feet in length, and is under the charge of a person competent to exercise care, custody, and control over such dog, unless the owner or operator of such public property grants written permission for such dog to be on such property without such chain or leash. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.04.020 Dogs on Public Property.
        No owner or person in charge or in control of any dog, except a blind person with his or her guide dog, shall permit or allow such dog to be within or upon public school property, public beaches, public access ways to the beach, parks, municipal pier or municipal golf course, except where authorized by a city served by the Authority. This Section, however, does not prohibit the use of dogs on school property for teaching other school uses when approved by the school officials. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.04.030 Females in Season.
        During the breeding period, every person owning or having charge of any female cat or dog shall strictly confine said animal in a building or other secure enclosure in such a manner that they cannot come into contact with other animals except for planned breeding. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.04.040 Running on Owner’s Premises.
        The provisions of this Chapter do not prohibit dogs from running at large on the premises of the owner or person having charge of such dog, nor do they prohibit dogs, other than unspayed female dogs during breeding period, from running at large on any property with the permission of the owner of such property. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.04.050 Working Dogs.
        A working dog, performing acts such as herding under the control and supervision of owner handler shall not be considered as unleashed while performing his or her duties. A hunting, obedience, tracking or show dog shall not be considered unleashed while performing in the above capacities. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.04.060 Public Protection from Dogs.
        Dog owners and custodians of dogs shall, at all times, take all reasonable precautions to prevent their dogs from biting, attacking or attempting to bite any person or from interfering with the use of public or private property. Any person owning or having custody or control of a vicious dog commits a violation of this Code if, as a result of that person’s failure to exercise ordinary care, the dog bites, attacks, wounds or otherwise injures or kills a human being and the owner or custodian knew or should have known of the vicious or dangerous nature of the dog. It is unlawful for any person to fail to comply with this Section. However, nothing in this Section shall authorize the bringing of a criminal action pursuant to a violation of this Section if the bite, attack, attempted bite, injury or threat was sustained by person who, at the time, was committing a wilful trespass upon the premises occupied by the owner or custodian or the dog, or was committing or attempting to commit a crime upon the premises occupied by the owner or custodian of the dog, or was teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog or who has, in the past, teased, tormented, abused or assaulted the dog. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.04.070 Beware of Dog Notice.
        Whenever the General Manager or authorized agent receives a report of a dog with a disposition of propensity to attack or bite any person or animal without provocation, he or she may require a sign to be placed by the owner stating the following: “Beware of Dog.” (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

Chapter 10.05 VICIOUS ANIMALS
10.05.010 Vicious Animals.
        The owner or person having possession, custody, charge or control of an animal that the owner or person having possession knew or should have known was vicious shall be guilty of a misdemeanor when ever the animal: (a) is found to be outside of a house or fully enclosed space, unless that animal is muzzled and on a leash or similar restraint no longer than five (5) feet in length and under the control of a responsible person; or (b) is found not to be under the restraints ordered by the General Manager. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.05.020 Investigation of a Vicious Animal.
        Whenever it is reported to the General Manager or authorized agent that an animal has attacked either a person engaged in a lawful activity or another animal, or caused a person of reasonable sensitivities to believe that he or she or a domestic animal in his or her custody and under proper restraint are in imminent danger of great bodily harm, the General Manager shall cause the incident to be investigated. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.05.030 Declaration of Vicious Animal.
        If, after reviewing the applicable facts, the General Manager or authorized agent determines that an animal either engaged in an unprovoked attack on either a person conducting a lawful activity or another properly restrained animal or caused a person of reasonable sensitivities to believe that he or she or domestic animal in his or her custody and under proper restraint was in imminent danger of great bodily harm, the animal shall be declared to be vicious and the owner shall be notified of that fact in writing. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.05.040 Criteria for Declaring a Vicious Dog.
        The General Manager or authorized agent shall declare a dog to be vicious when said dog:

        (a)    Has attacked or bitten a person causing death or substantial physical injury; or

        (b)    Has killed or inflicted substantial physical injury to a domestic animal, without provocation, while off the owner’s or custodian’s property; or

        (c)    Is owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose of dog fighting or is a dog trained for dog fighting; or

        (d)    Has twice within a one-year period bitten, attacked or attempted to bite a person; or

        (e)    Has twice within a one-year period chased or approached a person upon the streets, sidewalks or any public or private property in an apparent attitude of attack. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.05.050 Exceptions to Declaration of a Vicious Dog.
        No dog may be determined to be a vicious dog if:

        (a)    Any such bite, threat, injury or damage was sustained by a person who, at the time, was committing a willful trespass upon the premises occupied by the owner or custodian of the dog, or was committing or attempting to commit a crime upon the premises occupied by the owner or custodian of the dog, or was teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog or who has, in the past, teased, tormented, abused or assaulted the dog; or

        (b)    Said dog is used in military or police work and while they are actually performing in that capacity. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.05.060 Conditions of Harboring a Vicious Animal.
        No person shall harbor an animal declared to be vicious under the provisions of this Chapter without first satisfying the conditions imposed upon the harboring of that vicious animal by the General Manager or authorized agent. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to: (a) keeping the animal confined to a house or an area enclosed by four (4) walls of such dimensions that the animal cannot escape except during periods when the animal is muzzled, on a leash of less than five (5) feet in length, and in the physical control of a responsible person; and (b) tattooing the animal with an identifying mark and registering the animal with the General Manager or authorized agent; and (c) obtaining a bond or insurance in such amount as the General Manager or authorized agent determines is adequate to protect the public; and (d) notifying the Authority in writing within twenty-four (24) hours if the animal escapes, dies, injures a person or animal, or if the owner and animal move to a new location. A vicious animal shall be seized and impounded in an appropriate animal control facility, until the owner complies with the conditions imposed on harboring a vicious animal, or the impound period expires as provided in Section 10.09.070. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.05.070 Impounding Vicious Animals.
        When an unattended animal is suspected of being vicious, or an animal has been declared to be vicious and the owner has not complied with the conditions of harboring the vicious animal imposed upon the owner by the General Manager or authorized agent, an animal services officer may seize the animal and impound it at an appropriate animal control facility. As soon as is practicable, the animal’s owner shall be informed that the animal has been impounded. If the animal poses an immediate physical threat to persons or other animals during the seizure or impoundment period, the animal may be immobilized by drug, or if such a method is not readily available, the animal may be killed. Any impounded vicious animal shall be kept for a period of not more than fourteen (14) calendar days. The General Manager may extend this period if he or she determines that it is likely that the owner will comply with the conditions imposed upon harboring the vicious animal within five (5) working days of the end of the impoundment period. If the owner has not complied with the conditions at the time the impoundment period, or any extension thereof, has expired, the animal shall be euthanized. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.05.080 Hearing to Contest Viciousness.
        The owner of an animal that has either been impounded on suspicion of being vicious or has been declared to be vicious under this Chapter may request a hearing to contest the determination of viciousness or the conditions imposed upon harboring the animal by submitting a written request with the applicable administrative hearing fee to the General Manager. At the hearing, the owner may introduce evidence to show that the animal is not vicious or that the imposed conditions are inappropriate. The General Manager shall set the hearing date within thirty (30) days of receiving the written request and notify the owner by certified mail of the date, time and place of the hearing. After weighing all the evidence, the General Manager shall render a decision. That decision shall be final. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

Chapter 10.06 ANIMALS AT LARGE
10.06.010 Keeping Animals or Fowl Near Residences.
        It is unlawful for any person to keep or maintain on his or her premises or premises leased or occupied any animals, birds, fish, mammals or reptiles within one hundred (100) feet of any other family residence, his or her own not included, except as follows: (a) if expressly allowed by the Zoning Code in the jurisdictions served by the Authority; (b) domestic pets, including dogs, cats, caged birds, fish aquariums or other similar household pets; (c) the use shall be deemed commercial if more than three (3) adult dogs, cats or other similar household pets are maintained on one (1) property. Animals shall be deemed adults at four (4) months of age. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.06.020 Trespassing.
        No person owning or having charge, care or custody of any animal shall permit such animal to trespass or be upon any private property of another person without consent of such person. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.06.030 Property Damage.
        No person owning or having charge, care or custody of any animal shall permit such animal to damage or destroy the property of another person other than that of the owner of such an animal. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.06.040 Disturbing the Peace.
        It is unlawful for any person to keep, maintain or permit on any lot, parcel of land or premises under his or her control, any animal, which may by any sound or cry disturb the peace and comfort of the inhabitants of the neighborhood or interfere with the reasonable and comfortable enjoyment of life and property. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.06.050 Excreta Nuisance Prohibited.
        It is unlawful for the owner or person having charge, custody or control of any animal to permit, either wilfully or through failure to exercise due care or control, any such animal create a nuisance by leaving its excreta and to allow such nuisance to therefore remain on the following: (a) any public park or beach in the jurisdictions served by the Authority; (b) a public sidewalk, parkway or any other public property; (c) any entranceway, stairway or wall immediately abutting on a public sidewalk; (d) the floor of any theater, shop, store, office building or other building used by the public; (e) on any improved private property other than that of the owner or person who has custody or control of such animal; (f) the floor of any common hall in any apartment house, tenement house, motel or other multiple dwelling. Any owner or person found in violation of this Section shall be fined fifty dollars ($50.00), payable to the Authority for each violation. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.06.060 Tying Animals to Trees.
        No person shall tie any animal to any shrub or tree growing along any public sidewalk or street of any city served by the Authority. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

Chapter 10.07 WILD, EXOTIC, NONDOMESTIC ANIMALS
10.07.010 Permit.
        No person shall keep or maintain any wild, exotic or nondomesticated animal within the boundaries of the cities served by the Authority without first obtaining a permit from the General Manager or authorized agent. In addition to all information required in the application, the applicant shall substantiate to the satisfaction of the General Manager the following facts:

        (a)    That the wild/exotic or nondomesticated animal at the location proposed will not jeopardize, endanger or otherwise constitute a menace to the public health, safety or general welfare; and

        (b)    That the proposed site is adequate in size and shape to accommodate the number and type of animals for which the permit is requested without harm to the animals or material detriment to the use, enjoyment, or valuation of the property of other persons located in the vicinity of the site. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.07.020 Wild Animal Permit Fee.
        The fee for a wild/exotic or nondomesticated animal permit shall be set by resolution of the city councils served by the Authority. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.07.030 Wild Animals to be Confined.
        No person owning or having charge, custody or control or possession of any wild/exotic or nondomesticated animal, or while operating any wild animal establishment, shall permit or allow the same to be or run at large upon public or private property in such a manner as to endanger the life or limb of any person lawfully entering such premises. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.07.040 Temporary Display of Transported Animals.
        This Chapter shall not apply to any wild/exotic or nondomesticated animal caged in a safe and humane manner while being transported through the cities served by the Authority or while such animal is within the cities served by the Authority under the control of a circus, carnival, traveling show, or collection of animals for exhibition licensed by the cities served by the Authority. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.07.050 Permit Required to Keep Bees.
        It is unlawful for any person to have, keep or maintain any hive or swarm of bees within the cities served by the Authority without a permit. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to the keeping of bees within an educational institution for study or observation or within a physician’s office or laboratory for medical research, treatment or other scientific purposes, provided they are not permitted to fly at large. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.07.060 Revocation of Permit.
        The General Manager may revoke any such permit for the violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.07.070 Prohibiting of Feeding Wildlife.
        No person shall feed or in any manner provide food for nondomesticated mammalian predators such as coyotes (Canis Latrans). This Section shall also include a ban on feeding raccoons, foxes, skunks and opossums. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.07.080 Prohibiting of Feeding Wildlife—Exceptions.
        (a)    When an owner is in legal possession of a nondomesticated animal that is kept under a valid certificate/permit issued by the Authority or cities served by the Authority.

        (b)    When a person provides food and water for a trapped, injured or unweaned nondomesticated animal during the time the agency in charge is notified and the animal has been picked up. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.07.090 Prohibiting of Feeding Wildlife—Fines.
        Every violation of Section 10.07.070 shall be an infraction punishable by a fine of: (a) fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first violation; and (b) one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the second violation. This fine shall immediately be payable to the South Orange County Animal Services Authority. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

Chapter 10.08 HUMANE TREATMENT
10.08.010 Abandoning Animals.
        It is unlawful to abandon any animal, dead or alive, within the boundaries of the cities served by the Authority. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.08.020 Poisoning Animals.
        It is unlawful to place, leave or expose, in any place accessible to any domestic animals with the intent to kill or harm such animals, any poisonous substance or ingredient, or any edible or any other substance or ingredient which has in any manner been treated or prepared with any poisonous substance or ingredient. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.08.030 Unlawful Use of Equipment.
        It is unlawful to use any equipment, device, substance or materials on animals that is, or could be, injurious or cause unnecessary cruelty to any animal. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.08.040 Animals Struck by Vehicles.
        Any person who, as the operator of a motor vehicle, strikes a domestic animal, shall render such assistance as may be possible and shall immediately report such injury or death to the animal’s owner. In the event the owner cannot be ascertained and located, such operator shall attempt to obtain emergency care for the animal and at once report the accident to the Authority. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.08.050 Animals as Contest Prizes or Charitable Auction Items.
        No person or charitable organization shall offer, give away or auction off any animal as a prize or item in any contest, lottery, drawing or charitable auction. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96; amended by Ord. 12-02, 1/31/12)

 

10.08.060 Animal Sales in Public Places.
        (a)    It is unlawful to offer for sale, exchange or give away dogs or cats in public places such as in front of stores, at swap meets or auctions.

        (b)    This section shall not apply to:

        (1)    A publicly operated animal control facility or animal shelter that gives away dogs or cats for an adoption fee;

        (2)    A private, charitable, nonprofit humane society or animal rescue organization that gives away dogs or cats for an adoption fee; or

        (3)    A dog or cat that is sold pursuant to Section 10.09.180 of this Title. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96; amended by Ord. 12-02, 1/31/12)

 

10.08.070 Unattended Animals.
        (a)    It is unlawful to leave an animal unattended and without proper food, water, and shelter for a period of more than twenty-four (24) hours.

        (b)    In addition to the prohibition contained in Subsection (a) of this Section, it shall also be unlawful to do any of the following:

        (1)    Place a dog or allow a dog to remain on unoccupied property for a period of twenty-four (24) hours or more regardless of whether the dog is provided proper food, water and shelter. For the purposes of this section, “unoccupied property” shall mean the following:

        (A)   Residential property which is not actually and legally being used as a residence at such time as the dog is on the property. Examples could include, but are not limited to, residential property currently under construction and residential property not then being resided in by a person who can be and is responsive to complaints about the animal disturbing the peace of the neighborhood.

        (B)   Commercial property under construction or commercial property otherwise vacant.

        (c)    Exceptions: Subsection (b)(1) of this Section shall not apply to the following:

        (1)    The placement of a licensed guard dog on property once the licensed guard dog company obtains a permit from the City or its designee for the placement of guard dogs on the property;

        (2)    A dog remaining on the property of a resident who goes on vacation or otherwise temporarily does not occupy the property but leaves the animal under the care and supervision of another person who regularly checks on the animal at least once every twenty-four (24) hours and who can and will be responsive to complaints about the animal disturbing the peace of the neighborhood.

        (d)    Dogs found in violation of this Chapter may be impounded by the Animal Authority until claimed by the property owner. The animal will not be released until the property is legally occupied or other suitable arrangements acceptable to the Director are made for the placement of the animal. All related impound, storage or other fees must be satisfied before the release of the animal. In the event the property owner fails to claim the animal within ten (10) working days of notification of impound, the animal will be considered abandoned. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96; amended by Ord. 06-05, 8/23/06)

 

10.08.080 Sale as Novelty Prohibited.
        It is unlawful for any unlicensed business or person to display, sell, offer for sale, barter or give away any rabbits, baby chicks, ducklings or other fowl: (a) as pets or novelties, whether or not dyed, colored or otherwise artificially treated; (b) which have been dyed, colored, or otherwise treated so as to impart to them an artificial color; (c) under two (2) months of age in any quantity less than six (6); (d) unless such person provides proper brooder facilities for the care of such fowl during the time they are in possession of such person. This Section shall not be construed to prohibit the display or sale of rabbits, natural chicks, ducklings, or other fowl in proper facilities by dealers, hatcheries, or stores engaged in the business of selling the same to be raised for food purposes. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

Chapter 10.09 ANIMAL SHELTER AND IMPOUNDMENT
10.09.010 Animal Shelter.
        The San Clemente Animal Shelter shall serve as the animal shelter for the jurisdictions served by the Authority. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.09.020 Animals Subject to Impoundment.
        The General Manager or authorized agent may take into custody:

        (a)    Any animal kept and maintained contrary to the provisions of this Title, any of the codified ordinances of the cities served by the Authority, any codified ordinance of the County of Orange or any California statute;

        (b)    Any animal running at large contrary to the provisions of this Title or any statute;

        (c)    Sick, injured, stray, unwanted animals, for which the owner or custodian cannot be found or is unable or unwilling to provide proper care;

        (d)    Animals quarantined for which no other place of quarantine is acceptable to the General Manager;

        (e)    Animals delivered or requested to be impounded by a peace officer, or public officer or employee as defined in Penal Code Section 836.5;

        (f)    Any wild animal found to be at large upon any public property, or upon request of the owner or tenant, found to be at large on private property;

        (g)    Animals impounded pursuant to Section 10.05.070 of this Title;

        (h)    Any other animal authorized to be impounded pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.09.030 Retention Without Owner’s Consent.
        No person shall, without the consent of the owner, hold or retain possession of any animal without reporting the possession of such animal to the Authority within four (4) hours, and giving his or her name, address, telephone number, if any, and a true description of the animal, and then surrendering such animal to the General Manager or authorized agent upon demand. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.09.040 Notification of Owner.
        The General Manager or authorized agent will attempt to notify owners of lost or impounded registered dogs or cats through public notice, private communication where the owner is known, or when a tattoo is found, notification of the tattoo registry. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.09.050 Impounding Animals at the Shelter.
        The General Manager or authorized agent shall place all animals taken into custody in the animal shelter if the owner cannot be, upon initial contact, identified and contacted and the animal returned home, except that animals impounded pursuant to Section 10.09.020(f) of this Chapter may be summarily destroyed. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.09.060 Transporting of Impounded Animals.
        All animals taken into custody shall be humanely transported in specifically designed ventilated and properly maintained vehicles. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.09.070 Impoundment Period for Licensed Animals.
        Animals wearing current valid license tags, which are impounded pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, shall be held for a period of ten (10) working days. Said animals shall be held for redemption by the owner and not be declared abandoned unless: (a) the person to whom the current tag for such animal was issued so directs; (b) ten (10) working days have elapsed since such person was notified of his or her animal’s whereabouts by telephone; (c) ten (10) working days have elapsed since the owner was notified by United States mail, first class postage paid, at such person’s last known address, informing such person of the whereabouts of his or her animal; (d) where animals bearing a tattoo is found, and after ten (10) working days have elapsed, the tattoo registry and the Authority have made all efforts to notify the owner; (e) where other identification of any type is found, and after ten (10) working days have elapsed, the Authority has made all efforts to notify the owner. At the end of the ten (10) working-day period, animals not claimed by their owners may be declared abandoned and may be placed for adoption or disposed of in a humane manner according to the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.09.080 Impoundment Period for Unregistered Animals.
        Impounded animals not bearing identification of any type may be deemed unregistered and shall be held in custody for a period of five (5) calendar days. At the end of the prescribed period, unregistered animals not claimed may be declared abandoned and may be placed for adoption or disposed of in a humane manner according to the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.09.090 Unauthorized Removal of Animals from Custody.
        No person shall remove any animal from the custody of the Authority with permission from the General Manager or authorized agent to do so. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.09.100 Redemption of Registered Animals.
        Registered animals may be redeemed by the owner or his or her authorized agent upon payment or the impound fees, care and feeding charges, and any veterinary costs. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.09.110 Redemption of Unregistered Animals.
        Unregistered animals may be redeemed by the owner or his or her authorized agent upon payment of the registration fees, impound fees, care and feeding charges, and any veterinary costs, and upon proof of rabies vaccination. Any person claiming ownership of any unregistered impounded animal shall be required to present proof of ownership satisfactory to the General Manager. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.09.120 Adoption of Unredeemed Animals.
        Any impounded animal that is not redeemed within period of time prescribed in the provisions of this Chapter may be considered abandoned and placed for adoption. Animals may be adopted by private individuals upon payment of a placement fee, rabies vaccination fee, animal registration fee, and a sterility deposit, if applicable. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.09.130 Owner’s Right to Redeem Animal from Purchaser.
        The owner of any impounded animal may, at any time within thirty (30) days after adoption from the animal shelter, redeem such animal from the person who adopted it by paying him or her a sum equal to the amount paid to the Authority as described in Section 10.09.120, and in addition thereto a sum equal to reasonable care and feeding charges per day for the number of days from the date of the adoption to and including the date of redemption by the owner. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.09.140 Record of Impounded Animals.
        The General Manager or authorized agent shall keep a record of each animal impounded, the date of receipt of such animal, the date and manner of disposal, and if redeemed, reclaimed or adopted, the name of the person redeeming, reclaiming or adopting such animal, the address and telephone number of such person, and the amounts of all fees received or collected for or because of the impounding, reclaiming or adoption thereof, together with the number of any tag, and the date of any registration issued upon the redemption or adoption of any such animal. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.09.150 Euthanasia.
        Animals may be euthanized in a humane manner as prescribed in the provisions of this Chapter and upon advice of the Animal Care and Evaluation Committee. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.09.160 Adoption by Approved Organizations.
        Under special provision, specific breed clubs and humane organizations approved by the General Manager shall have the option of adopting available animals for the purposes of placement from the animal shelter. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.09.170 Sheltering by Approved Organizations.
        Specific animal clubs and humane organizations approved by the General Manager may be allowed to assume the responsibility of caring for lost and stray animals providing they have facilities for proper confinement, shelter and care of such animals. Such organizations shall notify the General Manager within four (4) hours after obtaining any animal so sheltered, giving a true description and any identification. Such organizations shall assume responsibility for placement of such animals in homes after sheltering them for a minimum of fourteen (14) days, during which time they will make every attempt to locate and notify the owner. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.09.180 Sale of Unclaimed Animals.
        If no person claims the animal or animals impounded under this Section within five (5) days or if a person does appear and claims the animal or animals but fails to pay the expenses as provided in this Chapter, the General Manager shall proceed to sell or cause to be sold such animal or animals, except bovines or equines, at public sale in accordance with general procedure provided in the law concerning the sale or execution of personal property. If the animal impounded under the provisions of the Chapter is of a value less than ten dollars ($10.00) as determined by the General Manager and has not been claimed, the General Manager may dispose of said animal, except bovines and equines, at private sale without notice. In the alternative, the General Manager may dispose of said animal, except bovines and equines, in humane manner. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.09.190 Research and Vivisection.
        No animal may be donated or sold for the purpose of research and vivisection. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.09.200 Redemption of Unaltered Animals.
        The City Council finds that there exists a serious pet overpopulation problem that has resulted in a threat to public safety and health within the City, inhumane treatment of animals, euthanasia of animals at the area animal shelters and escalating costs for animal care and control. Further, Council finds that uncontrolled breeding is the cause and, without action aimed at the source, this problem and its serious consequences will remain unabated. Council finds that part of the solution is for any unaltered animal that is found at large, running loose, or unrestrained off the owner’s property on multiple occasions be required to be spayed or neutered at the owner’s expense before being returned to the owner, unless the owner provides documentation that the animal is subject to one of the enumerated exceptions to this provision.

        (a)    When an unaltered animal is impounded on two (2) or more occasions in a three (3) year period, the owner may not redeem the unaltered animal until one of the following occurs:

        (1)    The animal is spayed or neutered at the expense of the owner by a veterinarian selected by the Authority. Such expense may include additional fees due to extraordinary care required;

        (2)    The animal is spayed or neutered by another Authority approved veterinarian. The owner may arrange for another Authority approved veterinarian to spay or neuter the animal, and shall pay to the Authority the cost to deliver the animal to the chosen veterinarian. The veterinarian shall complete and return to the Authority within ten (10) days, a statement confirming that the animal has been spayed or neutered and shall release the animal to the owner only after the spay or neuter procedure is complete;

        (3)    At the discretion of the General Manager or authorized agent, the animal may be released to the owner if the owner signs a statement under penalty of perjury, representing that the animal will be spayed or neutered and that the owner will submit a statement within ten (10) days, signed by the veterinarian, confirming that the animal has been spayed or neutered;

        (4)    The owner provides a letter to the Authority from a licensed veterinarian certifying that the animal’s health would be best served by spaying or neutering after a specified date; or that due to age, poor health, or illness it is unsafe to spay or neuter the animal. This letter shall include the veterinarian’s license number, and the date by which the animal may be safely spayed or neutered, if ever; or

        (5)    The owner provides documentation to the Authority that:

        (A)   The animal is a breed approved by and is registered with a registry or association recognized by the Authority, whose program and practices are consistent with the humane treatment of animals, and the animal is actively used to show or compete and has competed in at least one (1) show or sporting competition hosted by or under the approval of the recognized registry or association within the last two (2) years, or is being trained or groomed to show or compete and is too young to have yet competed;

        (B)   The animal has earned, or if under three (3) years old, is actively being trained and in the process of earning, an agility, carting, herding, protection, rally, hunting, working, or other title from a registry or association approved by the Authority;

        (C)   The animal is being trained or has been appropriately trained and is actively used in a manner that meets the definition of guide, signal or service animal as set forth in Subdivisions (d), (e), and (f) of Section 365.5 of the Penal Code, or the animal is enrolled in a guide, signal or service animal breeding program administered by a person licensed under Chapter 9.5 (commencing with Section 7200) of Division 3 of the California Business and Professions Code; or

        (D)   The animal is appropriately trained or is in the process of being trained and is actively used by law enforcement agencies or the military for law enforcement, military or rescue activities.

        (b)    Costs of Impoundment.

        (1)    The owner of the unaltered animal shall be responsible for the costs of impoundment, which shall include daily board costs.

        (2)    The costs of impoundment shall be a lien on the animal, and the unaltered animal shall not be returned to its owner until the costs are paid. If the owner of an impounded unaltered animal does not pay the lien against the animal in full within the designated impoundment period, the animal shall be deemed abandoned to the Authority in accordance with Sections 10.09.070 and 10.09.080. (Added by Ord. 12-01, 1/31/12)

Chapter 10.10 COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS
10.10.010 License Required.
        No person shall conduct or operate within the cities served by the Authority any commercial breeding or boarding kennel or cattery, pet shop, commercial animal rescue shop, grooming parlor, commercial stable, riding academy, pony ride, guard dog and/or sentry dog service, zoo, animal menagerie, animal exhibition, rodeo, circus, pet show, miscellaneous animal or reptile establishment or operate as an animal dealer, without first obtaining a license from the Authority. For the purposes of this Section, guard dog and/or sentry dog services located outside the cities served by the Authority, but providing services within said cities on a regular basis shall be included. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96; amended by Ord. 12-02, 1/31/12)

 

10.10.020 Application for License or Permit.
        Each application for a commercial license or permit required by this Chapter shall be in writing upon a form to be furnished by the Authority, and shall contain such information as the Authority shall require. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.10.030 Commercial License Fee.
        A fee for a license or permit required by the provisions of this Chapter shall be set by resolution of the City Council served by the Authority, and shall be paid to the Authority before a license is issued. Thereafter, unless otherwise provided, each fee shall be paid annually in accordance with such resolution. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.10.040 Investigation.
        The General Manager or authorized agent shall conduct an inspection of the intended business location and facilities and prepare a report for inclusion with the application for an original license or a renewal. He or she may issue a license to the applicant if he or she finds that:

        (a)    The keeping of animals, or the conduct of operation of the business for which the license is requested and at the place set forth in the application, will not violate any law or ordinance of the cities served by the Authority, or any law of the State; and

        (b)    The keeping of animals, or the conduct or operation of the business for which the license is requested, will not endanger the health, peace or safety of the community; and

        (c)    The premises and establishment where animals are to be kept are in a clean and sanitary condition, and that animals will not be subject to suffering, cruelty or abuse; and

        (d)    The applicant has not had a similar license revoked within one (1) year prior to the application. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.10.050 Duration of License.
        Licenses and permits issued under the provisions of this Chapter shall expire on the date specified in the resolution of the City Council served by the Authority. The license or permit may be revoked or suspended for cause in accordance with this Chapter prior to the expiration date. The license or permit also becomes void if the holder thereof changes the location of his or her place of business or sells, assigns, transfers or otherwise disposes of such business or his or her interest therein for a period of thirty (30) days or more. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.10.060 Commercial License Renewal.
        Each license or permit issued under this Chapter shall be renewed within thirty (30) days after the expiration thereof. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.10.070 Revocation or Suspension of License.
        Any license or permit issued under the provisions of this Chapter may be revoked or suspended if the General Manager finds that the licensee, his or her agency or employee has: (a) been convicted of any offense involving the violation of Sections 596, 597, 598 and 599 of the Penal Code of the State of California, or of any provision of this Title; or (b) at the place for which the license was issued, failed to provide any animal in his or her possession, care or control with proper and sufficient food, drink, shelter or protection, or subjected any such animal to suffering, cruelty or abuse; or (c) failed to maintain the premises in a clean and sanitary condition; or (d) violated any rule or regulation made pursuant to the provisions of this Title; or (e) falsified facts on the license application. If a license has been denied or revoked for cause, the General Manager shall not accept a new application by the same person for the same activity at the same location less than six (6) months after such denial or revocation, unless the applicant affirmatively shows and the General Manager finds, by inspection and/or investigation, that the grounds upon which the first application was denied or the license was revoked no longer existed. On revocation of a license, no part of the fee is refundable. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.10.080 Display of License.
        All licenses and permits under the provisions of this Chapter shall be displayed in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.10.090 Animal Records.
        The holder of a commercial kennel or grooming parlor license shall keep available for inspection on the premises a record that shall show the name, current address and telephone number of the owner of each animal kept at the kennel or parlor, the date such animal entered the kennel or parlor, description of the animal, including age, name, breed, sex, and color, and the name of the veterinarian approved by the owner. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.10.100 Permitted Number of Animals.
        At any time there are more animals than a kennel or cattery license allows, the person operating such kennel or cattery must obtain a new license permitting the keeping of the greater number of animals. The former license shall be canceled and a credit for the canceled license fee shall be allowed on the new license. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.10.110 Rules and Regulations.
        The General Manager may, in the rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this Title, establish reasonable standards requiring any place for which a license is granted to be maintained in a clean, sanitary and humane condition. A copy of such rules and regulations shall be furnished to each applicant for a license on the filing of the application. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.10.120 Emergency Information.
        Each commercial establishment shall have posted in such a place as to be legible from the exterior of the building, names, addresses, and telephone numbers of persons to be notified in case of emergency. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.10.130 Humane Animal Care.
        Every person who owns, conducts, manages or operates any commercial animal establishment for which a license is required, shall comply with each of the following conditions:

        (a)    No dog or cat shall be brought or shipped into the City for the purpose of resale and no such dog or cat shall be offered for sale by any pet shop or dealer;

        (b)    Every dog or cat offered for adoption must be examined by a State licensed veterinarian and be certified free of congenital defects, distemper, worms, skin disease, skin and ear mites, and other diseases or conditions which would be injurious to the animal or a potential owner;

        (c)    Every dog or cat offered for adoption shall have been vaccinated against distemper, parvo virus enteritis, and feline pan leukopenia by a state licensed veterinarian. A certificate providing the name of the veterinarian and the date and treatment must be provided to the purchaser at the time of adoption;

        (d)    No animal shall be transported by a commercial kennel, pet shop, commercial animal rescue shop or dealer, whether by private or public means, unless housed in a container designed for that purpose including provisions for adequate ventilation and food and water;

        (e)    No animals shall be without attention for more than eighteen (18) consecutive hours;

        (f)    Every reasonable precaution shall be used to insure that animals are not teased, abused, mistreated, annoyed, tormented or in any manner made to suffer by any person or means;

        (g)    Every animal establishment shall isolate sick animals sufficiently so as not to endanger the health of other animals;

        (h)    Every building or enclosure wherein animals are maintained, shall be constructed of materials easily cleaned and shall be kept in a sanitary condition. The building shall be properly ventilated to prevent drafts and to remove odors. Heating and cooling shall be provided as required, according to the physical needs of the animals, with sufficient light to allow observation of animals and sanitation;

        (i)     Any animal shall be taken to a veterinarian for treatment if the General Manager or authorized agent finds this is necessary in order to maintain the health of the animal and orders the owner or custodian to do so;

        (j)     All animal rooms, cages, kennels, shipping containers, and runs shall be of sufficient size to provide adequate and proper accommodations and protection from the weather for the animals kept therein. As a minimum, sufficient space must be provided for every animal within an enclosure to separately and together, stand up, lie down, and turn around in a natural position; and

        (k)    No animals bearing evidence of malnutrition, ill health, unhealed injury or having been kept in an unsanitary condition shall be displayed to the public. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96; amended by Ord. 12-02, 1/31/12)

 

10.10.140 Prohibition on Retail Sale of Dogs and Cats.
        (a)    No commercial animal establishment shall, for the purposes of resale or retail, display, sell, deliver, offer for sale, barter, auction, or otherwise transfer or dispose of dogs or cats in the City on or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Section.

        (b)    A commercial animal establishment that, for the purposes of resale or retail, displayed, sold, delivered, offered for sale, bartered, auctioned, or otherwise transferred or disposed of dogs or cats in the City of Dana Point as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Section, and whose operations complied with all applicable provisions of the Dana Point Municipal Code, may continue to display, offer for sale, barter, auction, or otherwise transfer or dispose of dogs and cats until the one (1) year anniversary of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Section.

        (c)    This Section shall not apply to:

        (1)    A licensed commercial breeder approved by and registered with a registry or association recognized by the Authority, whose program and practices are consistent with the humane treatment of animals;

        (2)    A dog or cat owner who breeds an occasional litter of dogs or cats, provided that he or she does not sell the resultant offspring for resale to commercial outlets, nor for purposes of research, testing or laboratory experimentation;

        (3)    A publicly operated animal control facility or animal shelter;

        (4)    A private, charitable, nonprofit humane society or animal rescue organization;

        (5)    A publicly operated animal control agency, nonprofit humane society, or nonprofit animal rescue organization that operates out of or in connection with a commercial animal establishment; or

        (6)    A dog or cat that is sold pursuant to Section 10.09.180 of this Title.

        (d)    Nothing in this Section shall prevent a commercial animal establishment or its owner, operator or employees from providing space and appropriate care for animals owned by a publicly operated animal control agency, nonprofit humane society, or nonprofit animal rescue agency and maintained at the commercial animal establishment for the purpose of adopting those animals to the public. (Added by Ord. 12-02, 1/31/12)

Chapter 10.11 PRIVATE ESTABLISHMENTS
10.11.010 Permit Required.
        Any person owning or having custody of four (4) or more licensed dogs and/or four (4) or more cats four (4) months of age or older, shall file an application for a private kennel/cattery/animal refuge permit with the Authority in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.11.020 Private Establishment Permit Fee.
        A fee not to exceed the cost of Authority services relating to dogs, shall be paid to the Authority for each license required by this Chapter as provided by resolution of the City Council served by the Authority. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.11.030 Animal Records.
        The holder of a private kennel/cattery or animal refuge shall keep available for inspection his or her permit and a record of all animals by name, breed, sex, color and age. In addition, he or she shall post in a visible place the name, address and telephone number of a family member with a different address, a veterinarian, or other party who can be contacted in case of emergency, to assume the care of the animals on the premises. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.11.040 Revocation of Permit.
        Registration privileges for private kennels/catteries/animal refuges shall be revoked in all cases whose registrants are found guilty by a court of:

        (a)    Inhumane and cruel treatment of animals;

        (b)    Violations of health and sanitation codes;

        (c)    Willful failure to notify owners of presence of their lost animals, to check for identification marks such as registered tattoos, refusal to return duly identified animals to their rightful owners;

        (d)    Failure to comply with mandatory vaccination or neutering provisions or implementation of other approved birth control measures for any animals prior to their release to new owners;

        (e)    Violation of noise and nuisance ordinances; or

        (f)    False statements on their application forms. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.11.050 Provision—Lifespan.
        All animals lawfully licensed and maintained under the provisions of this Title shall be permitted to live out their natural lifespan even in the event of future ordinance changes. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

Chapter 10.12 DISPOSAL OF DEAD ANIMALS
10.12.010 Disposal of Dead Animals.
        The owner of any animal which dies shall dispose of the carcass of such animal in a sanitary manner as prescribed by the General Manager or authorized agent within twenty-four (24) hours after said owner has knowledge of the animal’s death. No person shall bury any dead animal in the cities served by the Authority unless approved by the General Manager. It shall be the duty of the General Manager or authorized agent to take custody of all dead animals from the owner when requested. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.12.020 Notification of Owner.
        Whenever a deceased animal picked up by an animal services officer carries identification of any kind, the owner shall be notified and the notice posted at the shelter giving such information in an easily visible location. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

 

10.12.030 When Owner is Unknown.
        The General Manager shall be responsible for the disposal of all dead animals whose ownership cannot be established. (Ord. 96-01, 1/9/96)

Chapter 10.14 BIRD SANCTUARY
10.14.010 Findings and Determinations.
        The Council finds and determines that:

        (a)    The designation of the City of Dana Point as a bird sanctuary will be beneficial to the community in that the protection of birds will afford varied and changing opportunities for the observation of one of nature’s interesting species for present and future generations; and

        (b)    That the presence and health of a varied bird population contributes to the benefit and enjoyment of Dana Point’s natural environment. (Added by Ord. 97-06, 9/9/97)

 

10.14.020 Dana Point a Bird Sanctuary.
        The City is hereby established and designated as a bird sanctuary. (Added by Ord. 97-06, 9/9/97)

 

10.14.030 Molesting Birds Prohibited.
        No person shall trap, hunt, shoot, molest, injure, or kill any bird or damage, destroy, or otherwise tamper with the nests or eggs of any wild bird within the geographical boundaries of the City. Birds not protected under this chapter include rock doves (pigeons), European starlings, and house sparrows. Any violation of this chapter shall be illegal and shall constitute a misdemeanor which may be punished in accordance with Section 1.01.200 of the Dana Point Municipal Code. (Added by Ord. 97-06, 9/9/97)

 

10.14.040 Nuisances—Remedies.
        Should the Council find and determine by Resolution that certain birds protected under this chapter have become so numerous or destructive in a particular area so as to constitute a menace and danger to the public health and safety, the Council may provide for such remedies as may be deemed appropriate under the circumstances. (Added by Ord. 97-06, 9/9/97)

Title 11 PEACE, MORALS AND SAFETY
Note
Chapter 11.10 NOISE CONTROL
Chapter 11.15 FIRES
Chapter 11.32 CURFEW REGULATIONS
Chapter 11.40 INTOXICATION
Chapter 11.50 PROHIBITION OF TRESPASSES UPON PRIVATE PROPERTY
Chapter 11.60 ALARM SYSTEMS, FALSE ALARMS
Chapter 11.70 LOITERING AND DISORDERLY CONDUCT
Chapter 11.80 GAMBLING
Chapter 11.90 AGGRESSIVE AND OTHER PROHIBITED SOLICITATION
Chapter 11.95 PROHIBITING REMOVAL OR POSSESSION OF SHOPPING CARTS

Note
*       Sections from the Codified Ordinances of the County of Orange have been adopted by reference. For information on these sections, contact the Office of the City Clerk.

Chapter 11.10 NOISE CONTROL
11.10.002 Declaration of Policy.
        In order to control unnecessary, excessive and annoying sounds in residential areas within the City, it is hereby declared to be the policy of the City to prohibit such sounds generated from all sources as specified in this Chapter.

        It is determined that certain sound levels are detrimental to the public health, welfare and safety, and contrary to public interest. (Added by Ord. 92-11, 11/24/92)

 

11.10.004 Definitions.
        The following words, phrases and terms as used in this chapter shall have the meaning as indicated below:

        “Ambient noise level” means the all encompassing noise level associated with a given environment, being a composite of sounds from all sources, excluding the alleged offensive noise, at the location and approximate time at which a comparison with the alleged offensive noise is to be made.

        “Cumulative period” means an additive period of time composed of individual time segments which may be continuous or interrupted.

        “Decibel (dB)” means a unit which denotes the ratio between two (2) quantities which are proportional to power: the number of decibels corresponding to the ratio of two (2) amounts of power is ten (10) times the logarithm to the base ten (10) of this ratio.

        “Dwelling unit” means a single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.

        “Emergency machinery, vehicle or work” means any machinery, vehicle or work used, employed or performed in an effort to protect, provide or restore safe conditions in the community or for the citizenry, or work by private or public utilities when resorting utility service.

        “Fixed noise source” means a stationary device which creates sounds while fixed or motionless, including but not limited to industrial and commercial machinery and equipment, pumps, fans, compressors, generators, air conditioners and refrigeration equipment.

        “Grading” means any excavating or filling of earth, material, or any combination thereof, conducted at a site to prepare said site for construction or other improvements thereon.

        “Impact noise” means the noise produced by the collision of one mass in motion with a second mass which may be either in motion or at rest.

        “Mobile noise source” means any noise source other than a fixed noise source.

        “Noise level” means the “A” weighted sound pressure level in decibels obtained by using a sound level meter at slow response with a reference pressure of twenty (20) microNewtons per square meter. The unit of measure shall be designated as dB(A).

        “Person” means a person, firm, association, copartnership, joint venture, corporation or any entity, public or private in nature.

        “Residential property” means a parcel of real property which is developed and used either in part or in whole for residential purposes, other than transient uses such as hotels and motels.

        “Simple tone noise” means a noise characterized by a predominant frequency or frequencies so that other frequencies cannot be readily distinguished.

        “Sound level meter” means an instrument meeting American National Standard Institute’s Standard S.4-1971 for Type 1 or Type 2 sound level meters or an instrument and the associated recording and analyzing equipment which will provide equivalent data.

        “Sound pressure level” of a sound, in decibels, means twenty (20) times the logarithm to the base ten (10) of the ratio of the pressure of the sound to a reference pressure, which reference pressure shall be explicitly stated. (Added by Ord. 92-11, 11/24/92)

 

11.10.006 Noise Level Measurement Criteria.
        Any noise level measurements made pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter shall be performed using a sound level meter as defined in Section 11.10.004. (Added by Ord. 92-11, 11/24/92)

 

11.10.008 Designated Noise Zone.
        The entire City is hereby designated as “Noise Zone 1.” (Added by Ord. 92-11, 11/24/92)

 

11.10.010 Exterior Noise Standards.
        (a)    The following noise standards, unless otherwise specifically indicated, shall apply to all or any sound or noise which is received on residential property occupied by another person within a designated noise zone:

 

NOISE STANDARDS

 

Noise Zone

Noise Level

Time Period

 

 

 

1

55 dB(A)

7:00 a.m.—10.00 p.m.

 

50 dB(A)

10:00 p.m.—7:00 a.m.

 

In the event the alleged offensive noise consists entirely of impact noise, simple tone noise, speech, music, or any combination thereof, each of the above noise levels shall be reduced by five (5) dB(A).

        (b)    It is unlawful for any person at any location within the City to create any noise, or to allow the creation of any noise on property owned, leased, occupied, or otherwise controlled by such person, when the foregoing causes the noise level, when measured on any residential property, to exceed:

        (1)    The noise standard for a cumulative period of more than thirty (30) minutes in any hour; or

        (2)    The noise standard plus five (5) dB(A) for a cumulative period of more than fifteen (15) minutes in any hour; or

        (3)    The noise standard plus ten (10) dB(A) for a cumulative period of more than five (5) minutes in any hour; or

        (4)    The noise standard plus fifteen (15) dB(A) for a cumulative period of more than one minute in any hour; or

        (5)    The noise standard plus twenty (20) dB(A) for any period of time.

        (c)    In the event the ambient noise level exceeds any of the first four (4) noise limit categories above, the cumulative period applicable to said category shall be increased to reflect said ambient noise level. In the event the ambient noise level exceeds the fifth noise limit category, the maximum allowable noise level under said category shall be increased to reflect the maximum ambient noise level. (Added by Ord. 92-11, 11/24/92)

 

11.10.012 Interior Noise Standards.
        (a)    The following interior noise standards, unless otherwise specifically indicated, shall apply to any sound or noise which is received on residential property occupied by another person within a designated noise zone:

 

INTERIOR NOISE LEVEL

 

Noise Zone

Noise Level

Time Period

 

 

 

1

55 dB(A)

7:00 a.m.—10:00 p.m.

 

45 dB(A)

10:00 p.m.—7:00 a.m.

 

In the event the alleged offensive noise consists entirely of impact noise, simple tone noise, speech, music, or any combination thereof, each of the above noise levels shall be reduced by five (5) dB(A).

        (b)    It is unlawful for any person at any location within the City to create any noise, or to allow the creation of any noise on property owned, leased, occupied, or otherwise controlled by such person, when the foregoing causes the noise level, when measured within any dwelling unit on any residential property, to exceed:

        (1)    The interior noise standard for a cumulative period of more than five (5) minutes in any hour; or

        (2)    The interior noise standard plus five (5) dB(A) for a cumulative period of more than one minute in any hour; or

        (3)    The interior noise standard plus ten (10) dB(A) for any period of time.

        (c)    In the event the ambient noise level exceeds either of the first two (2) noise limit categories above, the cumulative period applicable to said category shall be increased to reflect said ambient noise level. In the event the ambient noise level exceeds the third noise limit category, the maximum allowable noise level under said category shall be increased to reflect the maximum ambient noise level. (Added by Ord. 92-11, 11/24/92)

 

11.10.014 Special Provisions.
        The following activities shall be exempted from the provisions of this Chapter:

        (a)    Activities conducted on the grounds of any public or private nursery, elementary, intermediate or secondary school or college;

        (b)    Outdoor gatherings, public dances and shows; provided said events are conducted pursuant to a license or permit duly issued by the City;

        (c)    Activities conducted on any park or playground, provided such park or playground is owned and operated by a public entity;

        (d)    Any mechanical device, apparatus or equipment used, related to or connected with emergency machinery, vehicle or work;

        (e)    Noise sources associated with construction, repair, remodeling, or grading of any real property, provided said activities do not take place between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays, including Saturday, or at any time on Sunday or a Federal holiday, with the exception of work on Pacific Coast Highway between the San Juan Creek Bridge and Crystal Lantern which is defined in Subsection (k) of this Section;

        (f)    All mechanical devices, apparatus or equipment which are utilized for the protection or salvage of agricultural crops during periods of potential or actual frost damage or other adverse weather conditions;

        (g)    Mobile noise sources associated with agricultural operations, provided such operations do not take place between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays, including Saturday, or at any time on Sunday or a Federal holiday;

        (h)    Mobile noise sources associated with agricultural pest control through pesticide application; provided, that the application is made in accordance with restricted material permits issued by or regulations enforced by the Agricultural Commissioner;

        (i)     Noise sources associated with the maintenance of real property, provided said activities take place between 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on any day except Sunday or a Federal holiday, or between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on Sunday or a Federal holiday;

        (j)     Any activity to the extent regulation thereof has been preempted by State or Federal law;

        (k)    Noise sources associated with the construction, street repairs, utility work, striping work, signal work, maintenance work including, but not limited to, landscape and tree maintenance, and any other noise generating activity related to construction or maintenance of Pacific Coast Highway between the San Juan Creek Bridge and Crystal Lantern, at any time. (Added by Ord. 92-11, 11/24/92; amended by Ord. 06-06, 8/23/06)

 

11.10.016 Schools, Hospitals and Churches—Special Provisions.
        It is unlawful for any person to create any noise which causes the noise level at any school, hospital or church while the same is in use to exceed the noise limits as specified in Section 11.10.010 prescribed for the assigned noise zone in which the school, hospital or church is located, or which noise level unreasonably interferes with the use of such institutions or which unreasonably disturbs or annoys patients in the hospital, provided conspicuous signs are displayed in three (3) separate locations within one-tenth (1/10) of a mile of the institution indicating the presence of a school, church or hospital. (Added by Ord. 92-11, 11/24/92)

 

11.10.018 Violations—Misdemeanors.
        Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor in accordance with Section 1.01.200 of the Municipal Code. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. In addition, a violation of this chapter is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance, in accordance with Municipal Code Section 1.01.240. The provisions of this Chapter shall not be construed as permitting conduct not prescribed herein and shall not affect the enforceability of any other applicable provisions of law. (Added by Ord. 92-11, 11/24/92)

Chapter 11.15 FIRES
11.15.010 Fires.
        No person shall kindle, build, light or maintain, or authorize to be kindled, built or maintained, a fire in any place other than facilities specifically designed and built for that purpose or for which a permit has been issued by the Building Official of the City of Dana Point. Any fire that is built, lit, kindled or maintained pursuant to a permit issued by the City Building Official shall comply with all applicable permits and other regulations of air pollution control authorities and all other laws, rules and regulations. The Orange County Fire Authority may issue special permits for fires in such places or locations as may be deemed safe or which do not interfere with the public welfare provided prior approval has been granted by the City of Dana Point.

        The use of flammable or combustible liquids (except for approved charcoal lighter fluid) are strictly prohibited. In addition, the California Fire Code as adopted through City ordinance is fully enforceable and must be adhered to. Fires are to be attended by persons over twenty‐one (21) years of age at all times until extinguished. A portable fire extinguisher or other approved equipment or method of extinguishing the fire shall be available for immediate use. Fires shall be fully extinguished before vacating the area.

        Any violation of this section shall be unlawful and is a misdemeanor. This regulation does not apply to use of portable BBQs, portable fireplaces, fire rings, or similar devices in the private yards of one- and two-family dwellings or in other areas approved by the City where use of the device does not pose an elevated risk of uncontrolled fire. (Added by Ord. 94-12, 8/23/94; amended by Ord. 18-08, 10/16/18)

Chapter 11.32 CURFEW REGULATIONS
11.32.010 Definitions for Curfew Provisions.
        For purposes of this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed below:

        (a)    “Curfew hours” means the period from 11:00 p.m. any evening of the week until 6:00 a.m. the following day.

        (b)    “Emergency” means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.

        (c)    “Establishment” means any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, any place of amusement or entertainment.

        (d)    “Guardian” means:

        (1)    A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or

        (2)    A public or private agency with which a minor has been placed by a court.

        (e)    “Minor” means any person under eighteen (18) years of age, who is not on active duty in the armed forces of the United States nor otherwise emancipated pursuant to the law.

        (f)    “Operator” means any individual, firm, association, partnership, limited partnership, limited liability company, or corporation operating, managing, or conducting any establishment.

        (g)    “Parent” means a person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent of another person.

        (h)    “Public place” means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, facilities, and shops.

        (i)     “Remain” means to:

        (1)    Linger, stay, or be present; or,

        (2)    Fail to leave the premises when requested to do so by a peace officer, the owner, operator, or other person in control of the premises.

        (j)     “Responsible adult” means a person at least eighteen (18) years of age, authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor.

        (k)    “Serious bodily injury” means bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. (Added by Ord. 98-05, 7/28/98)

 

11.32.020 Curfew Restrictions.
        (a)    It is unlawful and a misdemeanor, subject to punishment in accordance with Section 1.01.200 et seq. of this Code, for any minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the City of Dana Point during the curfew hours.

        (b)    It is unlawful and a misdemeanor, subject to punishment in accordance with Section 1.01.200 et seq. of this Code, for any parent, guardian, or responsible adult of a minor knowingly to permit, or by insufficient control to allow, the minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the City of Dana Point during curfew hours.

        (c)    It is a defense to prosecution under Section 11.32.020(a) or (b) that the minor was:

        (1)    Accompanied by the minor’s parent, guardian, or by a responsible adult;

        (2)    On an errand at the direction of the minor’s parent, guardian, or a responsible adult without any detour or stop;

        (3)    In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;

        (4)    Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;

        (5)    Involved in an emergency;

        (6)    On the sidewalk abutting the minor’s residence;

        (7)    Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by a public entity, a civic organization, or another similar entity or organization that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by a public entity, a civic organization, or another similar entity or organization that takes responsibility for the minor; or

        (8)    Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution and the corresponding provisions of the California State Constitution.

        (d)    Each violation of this Chapter shall constitute a separate offense. (Added by Ord. 98-05, 7/28/98)

 

11.32.030 Enforcement of Curfew Regulations.
        (a)    Every law enforcement officer is authorized and empowered to demand from any person whom he or she has reasonable cause to believe is a minor who is violating Subsection (a) of Section 11.32.020 and does not come within Subsection (c) of Section 11.32.020 that such person give his or her name and address, and the name of his or her parent(s), guardian(s), or other responsible adult(s), if any, who has the care and custody of such person, and furnish proof of his or her age and that he or she comes within the provisions of subdivision (c) of Section 11.32.020.

        (b)    If, after demanding the information described in Subsection (a) of this Section, the law enforcement officer still has reasonable cause to believe the person is a minor who is violating Subsection (a) of Section 11.32.020 and does not come within Subsection (c) of Section 11.32.020, the law enforcement officer is authorized and empowered to take any or more than one of the following actions:

        (1)    To issue a warning to such person and his or her parent(s) or guardian(s) about the consequences of violation of Section 11.32.020;

        (2)    To take such person into custody and transport him or her to his or her residence or to another place where he or she will be supervised by a responsible adult;

        (3)    To communicate with the parent(s) or guardian(s) of such person and demand from any of them the information described in Subsection (a) of this Section;

        (4)    To communicate with the parent(s) or guardian(s) of such person and demand of any of them that he or she take the person to the person’s residence or to any place where the person will be supervised by a responsible adult;

        (5)    To issue to such person a notice to appear before the Juvenile Court, a Juvenile Court referee, or a juvenile traffic hearing officer, as appropriate;

        (6)    To take such person into temporary custody in accordance with Welfare and Institutions Code Section 625, as limited by Welfare and Institutions Code Section 207;

        (7)    To take such other action or actions as are permitted by the laws of the State of California and are deemed necessary by the law enforcement officer to safeguard the well being of such person.

        (c)    A law enforcement officer shall not take any of the enforcement actions described in Subsection (b) of this Section unless the law enforcement officer reasonably believes that the person with respect to whom the action(s) is taken is violating Subsection (a) of Section 11.32.020 and, based upon any responses and other circumstances, has no defense under Subsection (c) of Section 11.32.020. (Added by Ord. 98-05, 7/28/98)

 

11.32.040 Failure of Parent or Guardian to Take Minor to Safe Place During Curfew Hours.
        It is unlawful and a misdemeanor, subject to punishment in accordance with Section 1.01.200 et seq. of this Code, for any parent or guardian to fail to take a minor to his or her residence or to a place where he or she will be supervised by a responsible adult, during the curfew hours when so demanded by any law enforcement officer in accordance with Subsection (b)(4) of Section 11.32.030. (Added by Ord. 98-05, 7/28/98)

 

11.32.050 Supervision of Young Minors.
        It is unlawful and a misdemeanor, subject to punishment in accordance with Section 1.01.200 et seq. of this Code, for a parent or guardian to leave a minor under the age of fourteen (14) years at the minor’s residence or at any other place without the supervision of a competent and responsible person between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following day. (Added by Ord. 98-05, 7/28/98)

 

11.32.060 Penalty.
        Any person violating the provisions of Section 11.32.020, 11.32.040, or 11.32.050 or any other provision of this Chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to punishment in accordance with Section 1.01.200 et seq., of this Code. Minors shall be dealt with in accordance with juvenile court law and procedure. (Added by Ord. 98-05, 7/28/98)

Chapter 11.40 INTOXICATION
11.40.010 Public Intoxication in Public Places Prohibited.
        It is unlawful for any person to appear at any public place or at any place open to public view or on any public street, alley, highway, court, park, railway, plaza, or public square in a state of drunkenness, intoxication or under the influence of a controlled substance. (Added by Ord. 18-05, 9/4/18)

 

11.40.020 Intoxication on Private Premises.
        It is unlawful for any person to be on any private premises or in any private house in a state of drunkenness or intoxication to the annoyance of others. (Added by Ord. 89-18, 7/11/89)

 

11.40.030 Consumption of Alcoholic Beverages in Public Prohibited.
        (a)    The drinking of any intoxicating liquor, fermented malt beverage, or beverage containing an alcoholic content in excess of one percent by volume, unless specifically permitted by the prior written approval of the City, shall be prohibited:

        (1)    On any street, roadway, boulevard, alley, parking lot, sidewalk, public right-of-way, or public property in the City;

        (2)    Under any bridge or on any vacant, unimproved, or undeveloped land in the City;

        (3)    In the public parking, loading, and access areas of any commercial shopping center in the City;

        (4)    On any grounds owned by or under the control of a public school district or public park district within the City, or within a distance of three hundred (300) feet from any exterior boundary of such grounds, except on private residential property or within a properly licensed commercial establishment; and

        (5)    Within any public park, recreational area, playground, or recreation facility in the City.

        (b)    The possession of any open container which contains any intoxicating liquor, fermented malt beverage, or beverage containing an alcoholic content in excess of one (1) percent by volume, unless specifically permitted by the prior written approval of the City, shall be prohibited:

        (1)    On any street, roadway, boulevard, alley, parking lot, sidewalk, public right-of-way, or public property in the City;

        (2)    Under any bridge or on any vacant, unimproved, or undeveloped land in the City;

        (3)    In the public parking, loading, and access areas of any commercial shopping center in the City;

        (4)    On any grounds owned by or under the control of a public school district or public park district within the City, or within a distance of three hundred (300) feet from any exterior boundary of such grounds, except on private residential property or within a properly licensed commercial establishment; and

        (5)    Within any public park, recreational area, playground, or recreation facility in the City.

        (c)    Penalties. Any person violating or failing to comply with Dana Point Municipal Code Section 11.40.030(a) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and subject to punishment as set forth in the Municipal Code. Any person violating or failing to comply with Dana Point Municipal Code Section 11.40.030(b) shall be guilty of an infraction, and subject to punishment as set forth in the Municipal Code. (Amended by Ord. 02-07, 6/11/02)

 

11.40.040 Consumption of Alcoholic Beverages on Homeowner Association Properties Prohibited.
        No person shall drink any intoxicating liquor, or any fermented malt beverage, or have in his or her possession any open container which contains an intoxicating liquor or malt beverage, upon property, including greenbelt areas, common walkways, and common driveways, owned or controlled by a homeowner’s association where:

        (a)    The homeowner’s association has requested in writing that the City extend its drinking prohibition upon the homeowner’s association’s property; and

        (b)    The homeowner’s association has posted on the property a notice in substantially the following form:

 

“Drinking of liquors, beers, or other fermented beverages on this property, including greenbelt areas, common walkways, and common driveways, is prohibited and subject to criminal prosecution and a fine of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000).”

 

(Added by Ord. No. 89-18, 7/11/89)

 

11.40.050 Urination and Human Waste.
        No person shall urinate or defecate on private property in any area exposed to the public view, or on any public street, sidewalk, alley, park, or other public place, except in a public or private restroom. (Added by Ord. No. 89-18, 7/11/89)

Chapter 11.50 PROHIBITION OF TRESPASSES UPON PRIVATE PROPERTY
11.50.010 Trespass on Private Property Prohibited.
        (a)    No person shall remain upon any private property or business premises, after being notified by the owner, owner’s agent, lessee, or by a peace officer acting at the request of any of the above to remove oneself from the property. For purposes of this Section, the term “lessee” includes a tenant in lawful possession of real property.

        (b)    No person, without permission, express or implied, from the owner, owner’s agent, or lessee, shall enter upon the private property or business premises after having been notified by the owner, owner’s agent, or lessee to keep off or stay away from the property.

        (c)    No person shall enter or remain upon posted private property without the permission, expressed or implied, of the owner, owner’s agent, or lessee of such posted property or premises.

        (d)    Exceptions. This Section shall not apply in any of the following instances:

        (1)    Where its application results in or is coupled with an act prohibited by the Unruh Civil Rights Act or any other provision of law relating to prohibited discrimination against any person on account of sex, race, color, religion, creed, ancestry, national origin, disability, medical condition, marital status, or sexual orientation;

        (2)    Where its application results in or is coupled with an act prohibited by Section 365 of the California Penal Code or any other provision of law relating to duties of innkeepers and common carriers;

        (3)    Where its application would result in an interference with or inhibition of peaceful labor picketing or other lawful labor activities;

        (4)    Where its application would result in an interference with or inhibition of any other exercise of a constitutionally protected right of freedom of speech such as, but not limited to, peaceful expressions of political or religious opinions, not involving offensive personal conduct; or

        (5)    Where the person who is upon another’s private property or business premises is there under claim or color of legal right. This exception is applicable, but not limited to, the following types of situations involving disputes wherein the participants have available to them practical and effective civil remedies, such as: marital and post-marital disputes, child custody or visitation disputes, disputes regarding title to or rights in real property, landlord-tenant disputes, disputes between members of the same family or between persons residing upon the property concerned up until the time of the dispute, employer-employee disputes, business-type disputes such as those between partners, debtor-creditor disputes, and instances wherein the person claims rights to be present pursuant to a valid order, decree, or process of a court.

        (e)    As used in this Section, “posted property” means any property which contains at each corner and entrance a posted sign three (3) feet above the normal ground level. Each sign shall be composed of wood, metal or other equally substantial material, the face of which is not less than one square foot in area, and upon which, in legible letters not less than two (2) inches in height in black against a white background, appear the words “PRIVATE PROPERTY—NO TRESPASS” or words conveying a similar message. The sign may also contain words such other words as may be desired which indicate that trespassers are subject to prosecution. Where the area of such property exceeds one acre, the notice shall also be posted at intervals of not more than three hundred (300) feet along or near the boundaries thereof. (Added by Ord. 07-05, 4/3/07)

Chapter 11.60 ALARM SYSTEMS, FALSE ALARMS
11.60.010 Definitions.
        Wherever used within this Chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning set forth below:

        “Alarm agency” means any person who is employed by an alarm business, whether directly or indirectly, whose duties include any of the following: selling, maintaining, leasing, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving, installing, or monitoring any alarm system on any building, place, or premises.

        “Alarm business” means any person, firm, or corporation engaged in selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving, installing, or monitoring any alarm system or causing to be sold, maintained, serviced, repaired, altered, replaced, moved, installed, or monitored any alarm system in or on any building, place, or premises.

        “Alarm system” means any electronic device designed for the detection of an unauthorized entry on premises, or for alerting others of the commission of an unlawful act, or both, and when actuated, emits a sound or transmits a signal to indicate that an emergency exists, and to which police are expected to respond.

        “Alarm subscriber” means a person contracting with an alarm business for the leasing, servicing, or maintaining of an alarm system, or who owns, uses, or maintains a proprietor alarm.

        “Audible alarm” means a device designed to emit an audible sound to alert others of an unauthorized entry onto property, an unauthorized entry into a structure, or the commission of a robbery.

        “False alarm” means an alarm signal which causes response by the Sheriff-Coroner where an emergency situation does not exist. “Response” means arrival at the location of the alarm. “False alarm” does not include an alarm signal activated by earthquake, extraordinary weather conditions, or other act of God.

        Sheriff-Coroner” means the Orange County Sheriff’s Department and the City of Dana Point Police Services. (Added by Ord. 09-03, 5/9/09)

 

11.60.012 Direct Dial Telephone Devices.
        No person shall lease, maintain, service, repair, alter, replace, move, install or use any alarm system which automatically direct dials the telephone number of the Sheriff-Coroner. (Added by Ord. 09-03, 5/9/09)

 

11.60.014 Direct Alarms.
        Direct alarm systems shall not be connected to the Sheriff-Coroner except with the permission of the Sheriff-Coroner. (Added by Ord. 09-03, 5/9/09)

 

11.60.016 Responsibilities of Alarm System Subscribers.
        (a)    When an alarm system has been activated for an alarm subscriber, the alarm business which provides the subscription service shall arrange at all times to have an alarm agency with the ability to be present at the location of the alarm within one (1) hour after being requested to do so by a representative of the Sheriff-Coroner. The subscriber of an alarm system which is not part of a subscription service shall designate a person to be available to respond to the protected premises within one (1) hour after being requested to do so by a representative of the Sheriff-Coroner.

        (b)    The alarm subscriber of any alarm system shall maintain the alarm equipment in proper working order at all times.

        (c)    For every alarm system, the alarm subscriber or the alarm business which provides subscription service shall furnish to the Sheriff-Coroner the names, addresses and telephone numbers of as many persons as are deemed necessary by the Sheriff-Coroner to call in the event of an emergency. The subscriber or alarm business shall communicate to the Sheriff-Coroner immediately in writing any changes occurring in any of the names, addresses or telephone numbers provided to the Sheriff-Coroner. (Added by Ord. 09-03, 5/9/09)

 

11.60.018 Automatic Shutoff Requirements, Audible Alarms.
        All audible systems shall, after activation, limit the generation of the audible sound to a maximum of fifteen (15) minutes when the alarm system is protecting a residential premises, and thirty (30) minutes when an alarm is protecting any other premises. This limitation shall be incorporated into the equipment at the protected location. Said system may include an automatic resetting device causing the subject system to re-arm upon automatic shutoff. (Added by Ord. 09-03, 5/9/09)

 

11.60.020 False Alarms, Prevention and Reimbursement of Costs.
        An alarm subscriber may become liable to reimburse the Sheriff-Coroner for responding to excessive false alarms emitted by his or her alarm system. As a contract City, the City participates in the Sheriff-Coroner’s False Alarm Fee Program, which establishes a fee for the Sheriff-Coroner’s response to three (3) and subsequent false alarms at the same residence or business in a calendar year. The Sheriff-Coroner shall collect costs from any alarm subscriber of an alarm system which is not maintained in accordance with the requirements of this Section and which, by reason thereof, signals excessive false alarms. As used in this Section, “costs” means the costs of the Sheriff-Coroner in responding to a false alarm, which costs shall be determined by the City Council by resolution. (Added by Ord. 09-03, 5/9/09)

 

11.60.022 Intentional False Alarms—Penalties—Reimbursement of Costs.
        No person shall intentionally initiate a false alarm except for purposes of testing an alarm system and then only after having given the Sheriff-Coroner prior notice thereof. Any person who violates this Section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and also shall be required to pay to the Sheriff-Coroner the costs prescribed by Section 11.60.020. (Added by Ord. 09-03, 5/9/09)

Chapter 11.70 LOITERING AND DISORDERLY CONDUCT
11.70.010 Loitering and Disorderly Conduct.
        No person shall do any of the following:

        (a)    Congregate with two (2) or more other persons on any public street or in any public place, or in any place open to the patronage of the public, when the purpose of so congregating is to interfere with the lawful discharge or pursuit of any lawful business or occupation by any other person, or to maliciously interfere with any occupant, licensee, guest or invitee lawfully on such place;

        (b)    Become part of or remain in a group of three (3) or more persons in any public place or any place open to the patronage of the public, when any member of such group is engaged in the commission of a felony or a misdemeanor; and after disobedience to a request to disperse has been made to such persons by a peace officer or by the owner or person in charge of such premises;

        (c)    Incite or encourage by words or conduct disobedience to any lawful order or request of any law enforcement officer pursuant to and in the performance of his or her duties;

        (d)    Park contrary to and in violation of posted instructions any automobile or other vehicle, whether attended or not, upon any private parking lot intended for the employees, customers, clients or patrons of any professional, business, commercial or industrial establishments when such parking lot is posted at the entrance thereof in a conspicuous manner conveying the information to the public that such parking lot is reserved for such employees, customers, clients and patrons of such professional, business, commercial or industrial establishment;

        (e)    Sit, lie, recline, kneel or otherwise unreasonably restrict or obstruct the free use of any public sidewalk, walkway, passageway, or any public place, or for any number of persons to congregate in such a manner as to willfully and unnecessarily obstruct or interfere with the free movement and passage of persons or vehicles in any public street or any other public place within the City;

        (f)    Park, leave or cause the parking or leaving of any bicycle, vehicle or other like object or thing on any public sidewalk, walkway or public place so as to obstruct or interfere with the reasonable movement of any person. (Added by Ord. 18-05, 9/4/18)

Chapter 11.80 GAMBLING
11.80.010 Gambling.
        It is unlawful for any person to participate in any type of gambling in any private parking lot or any public place, including, but not limited to, parks, beaches, public sidewalk, public street, alley, private parking lot, walkway or passageway. (Added by Ord. 18-05, 9/4/18)

Chapter 11.90 AGGRESSIVE AND OTHER PROHIBITED SOLICITATION
11.90.010 Definitions.
        For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this Section. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words used in the singular form include the plural form, and words used in the plural form include the singular form. The word “shall” is always mandatory and not merely directory.

        (a)    “Automated teller machine” (ATM) means any electronic information processing device which accepts or dispenses cash in connection with a credit, deposit or convenience account.

        (b)    “Automated teller machine facility” means the area comprised of one (1) or more automated teller machines, and any adjacent space which is made available to banking customers after regular banking hours.

        (c)    “Bank” means any member of the Federal Reserve System, and any bank, banking association, trust company, savings bank, credit union or other banking institution organized or operated under the laws of the United States, and any bank the deposits of which are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or Administrator of the National Credit Union Administration.

        (d)    “Check cashing business” means any person duly licensed as a check seller, bill payer, or prorater pursuant to Division 3 of the California Financial Code, commencing with Section 12000.

        (e)    “Credit union” means any Federal credit union and any State-chartered credit union the accounts of which are insured by the Administrator of the National Credit Union Administration.

        (f)    “Public place” means a place where a governmental entity has title, or is entitled to otherwise use, or to which the public or a substantial group of persons has access, including, but not limited to, any street, sidewalk, highway, parking lot, transportation facility, school, place of amusement, park, playground.

        (g)    “Public transportation vehicle” means any vehicle, including a trailer bus, designed, used or maintained for carrying ten (10) or more persons, including the driver; or a passenger vehicle designed for carrying fewer than ten (10) persons, including the driver, and used to carry passengers for hire, including common carrier vehicles engaged in the transportation of passengers, or a vehicle for hire which is engaged at the time in transporting passenger(s) for a fare.

        (h)    “Savings and loan association” means any Federal savings and loan association and any “insured institution” as defined in Section 401 of the National Housing Act, as amended, and any Federal credit union as defined in Section 2 of the Federal Credit Union Act.

        (i)     “Solicit” means using the spoken, written, or printed word, bodily gestures, signs, or other means with the purpose of obtaining an immediate donation of money or other thing of value, or soliciting the sale of goods or services. (Added by Ord. 18-05, 9/4/18)

 

11.90.020 Prohibited Solicitation.
        (a)    Aggressive Solicitation. No person shall solicit in an aggressive manner in any public place. A person solicits in an aggressive manner by engaging in any of the following before, during, or after solicitation:

        (1)    Approaching, speaking to, or following a person, if that conduct is intended or is likely to cause a reasonable person to:

        (A)   Fear bodily harm to oneself or to another person, damage to or loss of property, or

        (B)   Otherwise be intimidated into giving money or other thing of value;

        (2)    Intentionally touching or causing physical contact with another person or an occupied vehicle without that person’s consent in the course of soliciting; or

        (3)    Intentionally blocking or interfering with the safe or free passage of a pedestrian, bicycle or vehicle by any means, including unreasonably causing a pedestrian or vehicle operator to take evasive action to avoid physical contact;

        (4)    Using violent or threatening gestures toward a person solicited either before, during, or after soliciting;

        (5)    Persisting in closely following or approaching a person, after the person has been solicited and informed the solicitor by words or conduct that such person does not want to be solicited; or

        (6)    Using profane, offensive or abusive language which is inherently likely to provoke an immediate violent reaction, either before, during, or after soliciting. (Added by Ord. 18-05, 9/4/18)

 

11.90.030 Public Transportation Vehicles.
        No person shall solicit in any public transportation vehicle. (Added by Ord. 18-05, 9/4/18)

 

11.90.040 Banks and ATMs.
        No person shall solicit within twenty (20) feet of any entrance or exit of any bank, savings and loan association, credit union, or check cashing business during its business hours or within twenty (20) feet of any automated teller machine during the time it is available for customers’ use. Provided, however, that when an automated teller machine is located within an automated teller machine facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the automated teller machine facility. Provided further that no person shall solicit within an automated teller machine facility without permission. (Added by Ord. 18-05, 9/4/18)

 

11.90.050 Restaurants.
        Any person who solicits in any outdoor or indoor dining area of a restaurant or other establishment serving food for immediate consumption is guilty of a violation of this Section if:

        (a)    He or she remains there after being asked to leave by the owner, manager or supervisor of the restaurant or other food establishment; the agent of the owner, manager or supervisor of the restaurant; a member of a security force employed by the restaurant; or by a peace officer, as defined in Chapter 4.5 of Title 3 of the California Penal Code (commencing with Penal Code Section 830), acting at the request of any of the persons specified in this Subsection; or

        (b)    Within the immediately preceding thirty (30) days, he or she engaged in soliciting at that location and had been asked to leave by a person specified in Subsection (a) of this Section.

        (c)    Subsection (b) of this Section is not violated if a person who has been requested to leave enters the property within the designated period and solicits with the express authorization of a person specified in Subsection (a) of this Section.

        Nothing in this Section shall be construed to prohibit the lawful vending of goods and services within such areas described herein, or soliciting within the restricted area after obtaining the permission of the owner or tenant. (Added by Ord. 18-05, 9/4/18)

Chapter 11.95 PROHIBITING REMOVAL OR POSSESSION OF SHOPPING CARTS
11.95.010 Prohibiting Removal or Possession of Shopping Carts.
        Any person in possession of a shopping cart outside the premises of a business establishment without the express prior written approval of its owner, unless the person is in the process of immediately returning the shopping cart to the owner, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Written permission to remove a shopping cart shall be valid for a period not to exceed seventy-two (72) consecutive hours. (Added by Ord. 18-05, 9/4/18)

Title 12 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Note
Chapter 12.04 SIZE, WEIGHT AND LOAD
Chapter 12.06 SIGNS ON PARKED VEHICLES
Chapter 12.08 PARKING RESTRICTIONS FOR CITY STREETS
Chapter 12.10 MOBILE SOURCE AIR POLLUTION REDUCTION PROGRAM
Chapter 12.12 TAXI ADMINISTRATION PROGRAM
Chapter 12.14 PREFERENTIAL PARKING PROGRAM
Chapter 12.16 SPEED LIMITS
Chapter 12.18 PARKING RESTRICTIONS ON DEL REY
Chapter 12.20 PARKING BENEFIT DISTRICT

Note
*       Sections from the Codified Ordinances of the County of Orange have been adopted by reference. For information on these sections, contact the Office of the City Clerk.

Chapter 12.04 SIZE, WEIGHT AND LOAD
12.04.100 Findings.
        The City Council hereby finds that vehicles exceeding a gross weight of 10,000 pounds cause undue damage to public streets within the City, adversely impacting the public safety, and, therefore, restrictions upon such vehicles are necessary for the public health, safety, and general welfare. (Ord. 90-03, 2/22/90)

 

12.04.110 Prohibitions.
        Vehicles exceeding a maximum gross weight of 10,000 pounds are prohibited on all City streets except as otherwise provided in this Chapter. (Ord. 90-03, 2/22/90)

 

12.04.115 Exemptions.
        The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to:

        (a)    The following unrestricted streets:

        (1)    Pacific Coast Highway, from the northern to the southern City boundary;

        (2)    Del Prado, from its northern end to its southern end;

        (3)    Street of the Golden Lantern, from Del Prado to the northern City boundary;

        (4)    Crown Valley Parkway, from Pacific Coast Highway to the eastern City boundary;

        (5)    Del Obispo, from Pacific Coast Highway to the northern City boundary; and

        (6)    Pacific Coast Highway from San Juan Creek to the southern City limits at Camino Capistrano. (Amended by Ord. 91-14, 08/27/91)

        (b)    Commercial vehicles coming from an unrestricted street having ingress and egress by direct route to and from a restricted street when necessary for the purpose of making pickups or deliveries of goods, wares, or merchandise from or to any building or structure located on the restricted street or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling, or construction of any building or structure upon the restricted street for which a building permit has been obtained.

        (c)    Passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission.

        (d)    Any vehicle owned by a public utility or a licensed contractor while necessarily in use in the construction, installation, maintenance, or repair of any public utility.

        (e)    Any vehicle owned and operated by a public agency.

(Added by Ord. 90-03, 2/22/90)

 

12.04.120 Permit to Use Restricted Street.
        Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 12.04.110, non-exempt vehicles exceeding a maximum gross weight of 10,000 pounds may be operated upon restricted streets upon obtaining a permit pursuant to this Chapter. (Ord. 90-03, 2/22/90)

 

12.04.125 Application for Permit.
        Any person desiring to operate a non-exempt vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight of 10,000 pounds along or upon any restricted street shall file an application for a permit to do so with the City Engineer on a form provided by the City Engineer for that purpose. (Ord. 90-03, 2/22/90)

 

12.04.130 Application Fees.
        At the time of filing an application for a permit pursuant to this Chapter, the applicant shall pay to the City, at the office of the City Treasurer, a filing fee as set by Resolution of the City Council.

        All or any portion of the use fee paid pursuant to this Chapter shall be returned to the applicant if, prior to the commencement of any use allowed by a use permit, the permittee notifies the City Engineer in writing of his or her intention not to engage in the permitted use and demands the return of such use fee. In such event, the City Engineer shall cause the use fee to be returned to the permittee and the permit shall thereupon become null and void. (Ord. 90-03, 2/22/90)

 

12.04.135 Issuance of Permit — Terms and Conditions.
        The City Engineer shall issue permits upon payment of the application and use fees required by Section 12.04.130. The City Engineer may impose such conditions as he or she deems necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Dana Point, including, but not limited to, the routes which may be used and the times of day when said routes may be used. (Ord. 90-03, 2/22/90)

 

12.04.140 Surety Bond.
        The City Engineer may, if he or she deems it necessary to protect the interests of the City and its citizens, require, in addition to the use fee set forth in Section 12.04.130, a cash bond, or, in lieu thereof, a corporate surety bond, as a condition of the issuance of any permit. The amount of said bond shall be fixed by the City Engineer. The bond shall inure to the benefit of the City and guarantee that the applicant will faithfully perform all of the conditions and requirements specified in the permit. (Ord. 90-03, 2/22/90)

 

12.04.145 Display of Permit.
        A copy of every permit issued pursuant to this Chapter shall be carried in the vehicle to which it refers and shall be open to inspection by any peace officer or governmental employee charged with the care or protection of City streets. (Ord. 90-03, 2/22/90)

 

12.04.155 Suspension and Revocation of Permit.
        (a)    The City Council may revoke any permit issued under the provisions of this Chapter when:

        (1)    The City Council is satisfied that the conduct of the permittee’s use of restricted streets does or will endanger, threaten, or jeopardize the public health, safety, peace, or welfare;

        (2)    The granting of such permit was based upon false or misleading statements or representations made by or on behalf of the applicant;

        (3)    The permittee or the permittee’s employees have violated or permitted any violation of any law of the state, any provision of this Code, or any condition of the permit in connection with the permittee’s use of restricted streets.

        (b)    For any of the reasons specified in Subsection (a) above, the City Traffic Engineer or City Engineer may, by written order, temporarily suspend any permit issued under this Chapter by mailing a copy of the written order to the permittee at the address shown on the application for such permit or by personally serving a copy on the permittee. The permittee may request that the permit be reinstated by submitting a letter in writing for review by the Director of Public Works (“Director”). The Director shall review the request within five (5) working days of receipt of said request. The Director’s determination to reinstate or permanently revoke a suspended permit will be final.

        (c)    Upon suspension or revocation of any permit issued pursuant to this Chapter, any use fee paid pursuant to Section 12.04.130 shall be reimbursed as provided in Section 12.04.130; except that should said suspension or revocation be made pursuant to Subsection (a)(2) or (a)(3) above, no reimbursement shall be available. (Ord. 90-03, 2/22/90: Ord. 07-02, 2/20/07)

 

12.04.180 Regulations for Moving Buildings or Structures.
        (a)    Manpower Minimum. It shall be unlawful to move any building or structure twenty (20) feet or more in width over, upon, along, or across any highway, street, alley, or way unless the contractor so moving the same shall have not less than five (5) persons engaged in said moving operation, comprised as follows:

        (1)    A foreman;

        (2)    A truck driver;

        (3)    A person on the building to handle wire clearances;

        (4)    Two (2) flagmen, one to be at least three hundred (300) feet ahead of the building or structure, the other flagman to follow said building or structure at a distance sufficient to give adequate warning to approaching traffic. Said flagmen shall carry all signals required by law.

        (b)    Relocation Permit Required. No building or structure shall be moved upon any public street without first obtaining a permit to do so from the City Traffic Engineer. No such permit shall be issued unless a relocation permit, issued pursuant to Division 1 of Title 7 of the Codified Ordinances of the County of Orange as the same were incorporated by reference into the Dana Point Municipal Code by Ordinance No. 90-07, has been obtained for the relocation of said building or structure. (Ord. 90-03, 2/22/90)

 

 

12.04.200 Decisions and Right of Appeal.
        (a)    Appeals of the imposition of conditions or terms by the City Engineer may be submitted in writing to the City Engineer. A notice of appeal shall be filed within ten (10) days after the applicant is notified of the City Engineer’s decision to impose conditions or terms.

        (b)    At the time set for hearing of the appeal of a City Engineer’s condition or term, the Director of Public Works (“Director”) may summon witnesses and hear evidence relating to the application. At the conclusion thereof, the Director may grant or deny the application, or make such modifications with reference thereto as may be deemed appropriate. The findings and order of the Director shall be final and conclusive.

        (c)    Decisions of the Traffic Improvement Subcommittee may be appealed. Appeals of the Traffic Improvement Subcommittee shall be filed with the City Clerk. Appeals must be filed no later than fifteen (15) calendar days after the rendering of the decision being appealed. Appeals filed to the City Clerk shall be in writing, must specifically cite the basis of the appeal, including how the person is negatively impacted by the Subcommittee’s determination and must be accompanied by any fee the Council so chooses to impose by resolution. A decision rendered by the Traffic Improvement Subcommittee appealed to the City Council shall not become final until upheld by the City Council. (Added by Ord. 07-02, 2/20/07; amended by Ord. 09-01, 2/9/09)

Chapter 12.06 SIGNS ON PARKED VEHICLES
12.06.010 Exhibiting of Signs on Parked Vehicles.
        No person shall maintain any sign or advertisement upon or in a vehicle, including, but not limited to, a car, truck, trailer, boat, motorcycle, camper, or motorhome, advertising such vehicle for sale, rent, or lease, while such vehicle is parked upon any public or private property within the City of Dana Point, except:

        (a)    When such vehicle is parked on or immediately in front of the property to which it is registered; or

        (b)    When such vehicle is parked or stored upon the property of a business licensed to sell, rent, or lease vehicles. (Ord. 89-22, 9/12/89)

Chapter 12.08 PARKING RESTRICTIONS FOR CITY STREETS
12.08.010 Applicability of Regulations.
        (a)    The provisions of this Chapter prohibiting the stopping, standing, or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times herein specified, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or to comply with the directions of a police officer or official traffic-control device.

 

        (b)    The provisions of this Chapter imposing a time limit on standing or parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions of the State Vehicle Code or the Ordinances of this City prohibiting or limiting the standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times.

 

12.08.012 Stopping or Standing in Parkways Prohibited.
        No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle within any parkway. For purposes of this Title, the term “parkway” shall mean that portion of a street other than a roadway or a sidewalk.

 

12.08.014 City Engineer to Place and Maintain No Stopping and No Parking Zones.
        The City Engineer or his/her designated Traffic Engineer shall place and maintain or cause to be placed and maintained, by appropriate signs or by paint upon the curb surface, all no stopping zones, no parking areas, and restricted parking areas, as defined and described in this Chapter.

        When such signs or curb markings are in place no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand, or park any vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking or sign except as permitted by such marking or sign, or as otherwise permitted by this Chapter.

 

12.08.016 No Parking Areas.
        No operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand, park, or leave standing such vehicle in any of the following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or to comply with the direction of a police officer or other authorized officer, traffic sign, or signal:

        (a)    Within any divisional island unless authorized and clearly designated by appropriate signs or markings. For purposes of this Title, the term “divisional island” shall mean a raised or painted island located in the roadway and separating opposing or conflicting streams of traffic;

        (b)    On either side of any street between the projected property lines of any public walk, public steps, street, or thoroughfare terminating at such street;

        (c)    In any area where the City Engineer or his/her designated Traffic Engineer determines that the parking or stopping of a vehicle would constitute a traffic hazard or would endanger life or property, when such area is designated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface;

        (d)    In any area established by Resolution of the Traffic Improvement Subcommittee or City Council as a no parking area, when such area is designated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surfaces;

        (e)    Upon, along, or across any railway track in such a manner as to hinder, delay, or obstruct the movement of any train traveling upon such track;

        (f)    Within fifty (50) feet of a railroad crossing;

        (g)    In any designated bicycle lane provided signs and markings designating such bicycle lane are posted. A “bicycle lane” shall mean a marked lane within the roadway designated by appropriate signs and markings for the one-way use of bicycles. A “bicycle lane” shall also mean a physically separated area designated for bicycle use commonly called a bicycle path or trail and may include a bicycle route as defined in Section 2371 of the California Streets and Highways Code;

        (h)    In any area where the parking or stopping of any vehicle would constitute a traffic hazard or would endanger life or property;

        (i)     On any street or highway where the use of such street or highway or a portion thereof is necessary for any of the following:

 

        (1)    Street cleaning on the day and between the hours established for such cleaning by Resolution of the Traffic Improvement Subcommittee or City Council,

        (2)    Street construction,

        (3)    Street repair,

        (4)    The installation of underground utilities,

        (5)    Any other lawful and authorized use or purpose other than the normal flow of traffic, or

        (6)    Movement of equipment, articles, or structures of unusual size, and the parking of such vehicle would prohibit or interfere with such use or movement.

        Signs giving notice of no parking shall be erected or placed at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the effective time of such no parking restrictions;

        (j)     At any place within twenty (20) feet of a point on the curb immediately opposite the end of a safety zone as defined in Section 540 of the California Vehicle Code, when such place is designated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface;

        (k)    At any place within twenty (20) feet of any marked crosswalk or at any intersection when such place is designated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface except that a bus may stop at a designated bus stop;

        (l)     Within twenty (20) feet of the approach to any traffic signal, boulevard stop sign, or official electric flashing device, when such place is designated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface;

        (m)   On any street or highway where use of such street or highway or portion thereof is necessary for cleaning and in connection therewith, parking shall be specifically prohibited at such times and places as may be specified from time to time by Resolution of the Traffic Improvement Subcommittee or City Council as being necessary for street cleaning purposes, when appropriate signs giving notice of such prohibition have been erected;

        (n)    On any unimproved vacant parcel of private property in the City, except when such vehicle is stopped or parked on such property in connection with construction, maintenance or repair activities occurring on such property. (Amended by Ord. 93-04, 2/9/93; Ord. 07-02, 2/20/07; Ord. 09-01, 2/9/09)

 

12.08.017 Bus Zones.
        The City Engineer or his/her designated Traffic Engineer shall authorize bus loading zones for the loading or unloading of buses or common carriers of passengers and shall determine the location thereof, subject to the limitations and directions as set forth below:

        (a)    The word “bus” as used in this Section shall mean any motor vehicle, other than a motor truck or truck tractor, designed for carrying more than ten (10) persons including the driver and used or maintained for the transportation of passengers.

        (b)    No bus zone shall exceed one hundred (100) feet in length, except that when satisfactory evidence has been presented to the City Engineer showing the necessity thereof. The City Engineer may extend bus zones not to exceed a total length of one hundred thirty (130) feet.

        (c)    Bus zones shall be designated by signs and/or red-colored curbs with white or silver letters applied, indicating “No Standing—Bus Loading Zone” on the top of curbs in such zones.

        (d)    No bus shall stand in any bus zone longer than necessary to load or unload passengers, except that at the terminus of any route a bus may stop and wait without loading or unloading passengers for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) minutes.

        (e)    No person shall stop, stand, or park any vehicle, except a bus in a bus zone.

 

12.08.018 Loading Zones.
        The City Engineer or his or her designated Traffic Engineer may authorize the designation of loading zones in the City. Such loading zones shall be marked in yellow or white on the curb adjacent to the space to be reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers, freight, materials, or mail. It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to park, stop, or stand the same in any loading zone for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers, freight, materials, or mail. It shall be unlawful for any vehicle loading or unloading passengers to park, stop, or stand in any loading zone for more than five (5) minutes. It shall further be unlawful for any vehicle loading or unloading freight or materials to park, stop, or stand in any loading zone for more than twenty (20) minutes. It shall further be unlawful for any vehicle loading or unloading mail to park, stop, or stand in any loading zone for more than three (3) minutes.

        Loading zones for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or freight shall be designated by yellow curb; loading zones for the purpose of loading or unloading mail shall be designated by white curb. (Amended by Ord. 92-08, 8/25/92)

 

12.08.019 Taxi Zones.
        The City Engineer shall authorize the designation of taxicab loading zones subsequent to the issuance of a permit for said zone by the Director of Traffic Improvement Subcommittee. It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave parked any vehicle other than a taxicab in any taxicab loading zone. (Amended by Ord. 07-02, 2/20/07; Ord. 09-01, 2/9/09)

 

12.08.020 Storage of Vehicles on Streets Prohibited.
        It is the intent of this Section to prohibit the storage of vehicles upon any public street or upon publicly owned, maintained, or operated property. No person who owns or has possession, custody, or control of any vehicle, shall park such vehicle upon any public street or upon publicly owned, maintained, or operated property for a period of seventy-two (72) or more consecutive hours. For purposes of this Section, the vehicle shall be considered to have remained parked unless, during any seventy-two (72) hour period, said vehicle has been moved at least one-tenth of one mile from the position it previously occupied, or the odometer on said vehicle exhibits a change of at least one-tenth of one mile. (Amended by Ord. 05-05, 9/14/05)

 

12.08.021 Parking of Vehicles Over Six Feet High Prohibited Near Intersections.
        No person who owns or has possession, custody, or control of any vehicle which is six (6) feet or more in height (including any load thereon) shall park or leave standing any such vehicle on a street or highway within one hundred (100) feet of any intersection, at any location at which such prohibition is indicated by appropriate signs giving notice thereof. Vehicles found in violation of this Section may be cited or towed in accordance with the provisions of Sections 12.08.098 or 12.08.100(d), respectively.

 

12.08.022 Repair, Dismantling, Greasing, Etc., Prohibited Upon Streets.
        No person shall construct or cause to be constructed, repair or cause to be repaired, grease or cause to be greased, dismantle or cause to be dismantled, any vehicle or any part thereof upon any public street in the City. Temporary emergency repairs may be made upon a public street.

 

12.08.024 Washing or Polishing for Hire Prohibited on Streets.
        No person shall wash or cause to be washed, polish or cause to be polished any vehicle or any part thereof upon any public street in the City, when a charge is made for such service.

 

12.08.026 Parking Adjacent to Schools.
        The City Engineer, or his or her designated Traffic Engineer, shall erect signs indicating no parking during all or certain hours of the day upon that side of any street adjacent to any school property when such parking would, in the City Engineer’s opinion, interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic or create a hazardous situation.

 

12.08.028 Parking on Narrow Streets Prohibited.
        The City Engineer, or designee, may place signs or markings indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed twenty (20) feet, or upon one side of a street, as indicated by such signs or markings when the width of the roadway does not exceed thirty (30) feet based upon a review of traffic and safety conditions. The City Engineer is not obligated to place no parking signs and markings, as indicated in this Section, but can do so upon review if needed. (Amended by Ord. 05-05, 9/14/05)

 

12.08.029 Parking in Alleys.
        Unless specifically authorized by signs indicating the same, it is unlawful for the operator of a vehicle to park or stop said vehicle for a period of time longer than is necessary for the loading or unloading of passengers or materials; providing, that the loading or unloading of passengers shall not consume more than five (5) minutes, nor the loading or unloading of materials more than twenty (20) minutes in any alley.

 

12.08.030 Temporary Signs Prohibiting Parking May be Authorized by City Engineer or Chief of Police Services, During Exigencies.
        Whenever the City Engineer or the Chief of Police Services shall determine that traffic congestion is likely to result from unanticipated public or private assemblages, gathering, or functions, or for other reasons, the City Engineer or Chief of Police Services shall have the power and authority to order temporary signs to be erected or posted indicating that the operation, parking, or standing of vehicles is prohibited on such streets and alleys as the City Engineer or Chief of Police Services shall direct during the time such temporary signs are in place. The City Engineer or Chief of Police Services shall cause such signs to be removed promptly at the end of said unanticipated event.

 

12.08.031 Parking Variances.
        Temporary variances to parking restrictions under Chapter 12.08 may be granted by the City Engineer with the concurrence of the Chief of Police Services and the Fire Chief or the designees thereof. Parking variances shall not be granted for periods in excess of sixty (60) days. A variance may be renewed upon application to City and approval of the same as set forth above.

 

12.08.032 Commercial Vehicles to Carry Warning Devices and Display Devices When Vehicles Disabled.
        Every motor truck having an unladen weight of four thousand (4,000) pounds or more, and every truck tractor irrespective of weight when operated upon any street or highway during darkness shall be equipped with and carry at least two (2) flares or two (2) red lanterns or two (2) warning lights or reflectors, which reflectors shall be of a type approved by the California Highway Patrol. When any above-mentioned vehicle or any trailer or semitrailer is disabled upon any street or highway within the City and upon which street or highway there is insufficient street lighting to reveal a vehicle at a distance of two hundred (200) feet during darkness, a warning signal of the character indicated above shall be immediately placed at a distance of approximately one hundred (100) feet in advance of, and one hundred (100) feet to the rear of, such disabled vehicle by the driver thereof. The continuous flashing of at least four (4) approved Class A-Type I turn signal lamps, at least two (2) toward the front and at least two (2) toward the rear of the vehicle, shall be considered to meet the requirements of this Section until the devices mentioned above can be placed in the required locations. The warning signals herein mentioned shall be displayed continuously during darkness while such vehicle remains disabled upon such street or highway.

 

12.08.034 Thirty-Minute Parking.
        When authorized signs or green curb markings have been determined by the City Engineer or his/her designated Traffic Engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand, or park such vehicle between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day except Sundays and City holidays for a period of time longer than thirty (30) minutes.

 

12.08.038 One-Hour Parking.
        When authorized signs or green curb markings have been determined by the City Engineer or his/her designated Traffic Engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand, or park such vehicle between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day except Sundays and City holidays for a period of time longer than one (1) hour.

 

12.08.040 Two-Hour Parking.
        When authorized signs or green curb markings have been determined by the City Engineer or his/her designated Traffic Engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand, or park such vehicle between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day except Sundays and City holidays for a period of time longer than two (2) hours.

 

12.08.041 Handicap Parking.
        The City Engineer or his/her designated Traffic Engineer shall designate parking spaces as handicap parking on public streets, highways, or public parking lots for the exclusive use of vehicles which display a distinguishing license plate or a placard issued pursuant to California Vehicle Code Section 22511.5 or 22511.9. The parking space shall be designated by blue paint on the curb or edge of the paved portion of the street adjacent to the space. In addition to the blue paint, the space shall also be designated by appropriate signs.

 

12.08.042 Parallel Parking on One-Way Streets.
        (a)    Subject to other and more restrictive limitations, a vehicle may be stopped or parked only within eighteen (18) inches of the right-hand curb facing in the direction of traffic movement upon any one-way street unless signs are in place prohibiting such stopping or standing.

        (b)    In the event a highway includes two (2) or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one-way roadway unless signs are in place permitting such standing or parking.

        (c)    The City Engineer or his/her designated Traffic Engineer is authorized to determine when standing or parking shall be prohibited upon the left-hand side of any one-way street or when standing or parking may be permitted upon the left-hand side of any one-way roadway of a highway having two (2) or more separate roadways and shall erect signs giving notice thereof.

        (d)    The requirement of parallel parking imposed by this Section shall not apply in the event any commercial vehicle is actually engaged in the process of loading or unloading freight or goods if such vehicle as parked allows for the passage of at least one lane of traffic to pass thereby.

 

12.08.044 Diagonal Parking Prohibited.
        No person shall stand, stop, or park any vehicle on any street in a position other than parallel to the curb except where designated.

 

12.08.046 Vehicles to Be Parked Within Designated Parking Space Markings.
        The City Engineer is authorized to install and maintain parking space markings to indicate parking spaces adjacent to curbings where authorized parking is permitted.

        When such parking space markings are placed on the highway, subject to other and more restrictive limitations, no vehicle shall be stopped, left standing, or parked other then within a single space unless the size or shape of such vehicle makes compliance impossible.

 

12.08.048 No Stopping Zones.
        The City Engineer shall designate established no stopping zones by placing and maintaining appropriate signs indicating that stopping of vehicles is prohibited and indicating the hours and days when stopping is prohibited.

 

 

12.08.050 Commercial, Wide Vehicle and Trailer Parking Restricted.
        (a)    Definitions. The following definitions shall govern this Section 12.08.050:

        (1)    “Bus” shall have the meaning set forth in California Vehicle Code Section 233.

        (2)    “Camp trailer” shall have the meaning set forth in California Vehicle Code Section 242.

        (3)    “Camper” shall have the meaning set forth in California Vehicle Code Section 243.

        (4)    “Commercial vehicle” means any vehicle meeting the definition of “commercial vehicle” in Section 260 of the California Vehicle Code, as that definition may be amended from time to time; provided, however, that for the purposes of this Chapter no “pick-up truck,” as that term is defined in California Vehicle Code Section 471, shall be considered a commercial vehicle unless: (1) goods, wares, or property of a commercial nature loaded thereon extend about the manufacturer’s box; or (2) the standard bed of the vehicle has been replaced with a utility or stake bed over eighty (80) inches in width; or (3) the vehicle has been modified to include a rack extending over the length of the vehicle’s bed which currently has goods or wares of a commercial nature stored thereon.

        (5)    “Trailers” shall mean and include all trailers that are capable of human habitation, including, but not limited to, camper trailers, campers, house cars, and trailer coaches.

        (6)    “House car” shall have the meaning set forth in California Vehicle Code Section 362.

        (7)    “Recreational vehicle (RV)” shall have the meaning set forth in California Health and Safety Code Section 18010.

        (8)    “Trailer” shall have the meaning set forth in California Vehicle Code Section 630.

        (9)    “Trailer bus” shall have the meaning set forth in California Vehicle Code Section 636.

        (10)  “Trailer coach” shall have the meaning set forth in California Vehicle Code Section 635.

        (11)  “Wide vehicle” shall mean and refer to any vehicle that has a width that is in excess of eighty (80) inches (excluding side view mirrors).

        (b)    Wide Vehicles. The following regulations shall apply to all wide vehicles:

        (1)    Between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., no person shall park any wide vehicle, other than to make deliveries or repairs of an emergency nature on either the wide vehicle itself or to the adjacent properties, on any of the following described street locations:

        (A)   Any public street or cul-de-sac, which has a curb width of forty-four (44) feet or less.

        (B)   Any street on which a traffic lane line has been painted where the distance between the painted lane line or centerline and the nearest part of the wide vehicle is eleven (11) feet or less.

        (c)    Commercial Vehicles. The following regulations shall apply to all commercial vehicles:

        (1)    No person shall park or leave stopped or standing any commercial vehicle between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on any City street, designated publicly used parking lots or alley except for the purpose of actively loading, unloading, or servicing the property immediately adjacent to the commercial vehicle.

        (2)    No person shall park a commercial vehicle on a City street, designated publicly used parking lot or alley for over two (2) hours between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. This Subsection shall not preclude a resident from parking one (1) commercial vehicle used for business and parked immediately adjacent to the property to which the commercial vehicle is registered, provided the size of the commercial vehicle does not violate Section 6.14.002(N), regulating oversize vehicles.

        (3)    Subsections (1) and (2) of this section shall not apply to any of the following:

        (A)   Any commercial vehicle then currently involved in the construction, reconstruction, maintenance, or repair of any street, designated publicly used parking lot or alley upon which the commercial vehicle is parked or any development occurring directly in front of that property;

        (B)   Any commercial vehicle employed by any governmental entity or public utility which is used for urgent response purposes including, but not limited to, ambulances and utility repair vehicles; or

        (C)   Any commercial vehicle parked on an arterial street directly adjacent to the commercial/retail-zoned business property to which the commercial vehicle is registered.

        (d)    RVs, Buses, and Trailers. The following regulations shall apply to RVs, buses, and trailers. It is the intent of this Subsection that RVs, buses, vehicles, and trailers shall not be parked on City streets, or designated publicly used parking lot except as provided herein.

        (1)    No trailer shall be left unattached to any vehicle on any City street, designated publicly used parking lot or alley for any period of time exceeding two (2) hours.

        (2)    No person shall park, stop, or leave standing any RV, bus, or trailer, regardless of width, on any street, designated publicly used parking lot or alley in the City except:

        (A)   For the purpose of loading, unloading, or visiting, the residential (non-commercial) property immediately adjacent to the RV, bus, or trailer, for a period not to exceed twenty-four (24) hours; or

        (B)   If the RV, bus, or trailer is parked immediately adjacent to the property to which it is registered and is used for daily business activities for a period not to exceed seventy-two (72) hours, if a City issued permit is obtained; or

        (C)   If the RV, bus, or trailer is parked immediately adjacent to the property which its occupants are visiting, for a period not to exceed seventy-two (72) hours, if a City issued permit is obtained.

        (e)    Parking Permits. The following regulations shall apply to all City issued parking permits:

        (1)    Where a City parking permit is required above, a maximum of six (6), seventy-two (72) hour parking permit extensions may be issued per residential address per calendar year. Longer running permits may be issued for designated publicly used parking lots at the request of the parking lot owner or manager.

        (2)    A parking permit/extension shall be issued free of charge and may be obtained from the City of Dana Point.

        (3)    The following information must be provided by the property owner: the date and time the on-street parking permit is needed; the name and address of the user and property owner requesting the parking extension; the make, model and license plate number; and the location where the vehicle will be parked.

        (4)    If the parking extension has been obtained, the vehicle may be parked on a City street at the location, and during the period of time, authorized by the parking extension.

        (5)    At the expiration of the initial twenty-four (24) hour or seventy-two (72) hour period, or at the end of any authorized parking permit extension, the vehicle shall be moved from any and all City streets or designated publicly used parking lots for the ensuing seventy-two (72) hour period.

        (6)    No two (2) consecutive parking extensions shall be granted within a six (6) day period. City parking permits shall not be issued for unattached boat or supply trailers. (Amended by Ord. 97-10, 9/9/97; Ord. 11-01, 1/24/11; Ord. 15-01, 4/7/15)

12.08.060 Private Off-Street Parking Facilities.
        (a)    The Council hereby finds and determines that there are certain private roads and parking areas within the City which are open to the public and frequently and regularly used to serve commercial establishments and that the public health, safety, and welfare require such private roads and parking areas to be subject to reasonable public regulation and control.

        (b)    Pursuant to Sections 21107.6 and 21107.8 of the California Vehicle Code, the off-street private parking areas and privately-owned streets identified in Exhibit A, attached to Ordinance 15-01, adopted April 7, 2015, a copy of which is on file in the office of the City Clerk, are hereby found to be open to the public and are hereby declared to be subject to traffic regulation by the County Sheriff, or such other law enforcement agency as may be designated by the Council.

        (c)    The parking restrictions set forth in Section 12.08.050 of this Code shall apply to each of the off-street parking facilities identified in Exhibit A so long as the owner or operator of the off-street parking facility has posted a sign in compliance with Vehicle Code Section 21107.8(b). (Added by Ord. 15-01, 4/7/15)

 

12.08.098 Vehicle Citations—Authorized.
        Any officer, agent or employee of the City designated by the City Manager to have the authority and responsibility to enforce provisions of this Code, including any regularly employed or salaried peace officer of the City or police agency providing police services to the City, shall have the authority to issue citations for any violation of this Chapter. Any vehicle that has been parked or left standing upon a private street for any violation which would be subject to citation on a public street provided appropriate signs are erected at the entrance to the private street and the provisions of this Chapter or the California Vehicle Code have been designated to be enforced upon such private street. (Added by Ord. 19-04, 10/15/19)

 

12.08.100 Vehicle Removal From Streets—When Authorized.
        Any regularly employed or salaried officer of the police agency providing police services to the City may remove or cause to be removed:

        (a)    Any vehicle that has been parked or left standing upon a public street or highway for seventy-two (72) or more consecutive hours; or any unattached trailer that has been parked or left standing upon a public street or highway for two (2) or more consecutive hours.

        (b)    Any vehicle that has been parked or left standing upon a private street for any violation which would incur towing on a public street provided appropriate signs are erected at the entrance to the private street and the provisions of this Chapter or the California Vehicle Code have been designated to be enforced upon such private street in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 8.26 of this Code and the California Vehicle Code.

        (c)    Any vehicle which is parked or left standing upon a public street or highway between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. when such parking or standing is prohibited by Ordinance or Resolution of the City and signs are posted giving notice of such removal.

        (d)    Any vehicle which is parked or left standing upon a public street or highway where the use of such street or highway or portion thereof is necessary for any of the following, provided that signs giving notice that such vehicle may be removed are erected or placed at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to removal:

        (1)    Street cleaning on the day and between the hours established for such cleaning by Resolution of the City Council;

        (2)    Street construction;

        (3)    Street repair;

        (4)    The installation of underground utilities;

        (5)    Any other lawful and authorized use or purpose other than the normal flow of traffic; or

        (6)    Movement of equipment, articles, or structures of unusual size, and the parking of such vehicle would prohibit or interfere with such use or movement.

        (e)    Any vehicle which is parked or left standing on any public highway or street in violation of Section 12.08.016(d) of this Chapter, provided that a Resolution of the Traffic Improvement Commission or City Council establishes such area or zone is a tow away zone, and that vehicles parked in such area or zone shall be removed, and provided further that signs are first posted in such area or zone giving notice of such removal as follows: “No Parking—Tow Away Zone.”

        (f)    Any vehicle which is parked or left standing on any unimproved vacant parcel of private property in violation of Section 12.08.016(n) of this Chapter, provided that signs are first posted on such property giving notice of such removal as follows: “No Parking—Violators Will Be Towed (DPMC Section 12.08.100(f)).” (Added by Ord. 91-04, 2/26/91; amended by Ord. 92-08, 8/25/92; Ord. 93-04, 2/9/93; Ord. 97-10, 9/9/97; Ord. 07-02, 2/20/07)

 

12.08.200 Decisions and Right of Appeal.
        (a)    Appeals of the imposition of conditions or terms by the City Engineer may be submitted in writing to the City Engineer. A notice of appeal shall be filed within ten (10) days after the applicant is notified of the City Engineer’s decision to impose conditions or terms.

        (b)    At the time set for hearing of the appeal of a City Engineer’s condition or term, the Director of Public Works (“Director”) may summon witnesses and hear evidence relating to the application. At the conclusion thereof, the Director may grant or deny the application, or make such modifications with reference thereto as may be deemed appropriate. The findings and order of the Director shall be final and conclusive.

        (c)    Decisions of the Traffic Improvement Subcommittee may be appealed. Appeals of the Traffic Improvement Subcommittee shall be filed with the City Clerk. Appeals must be filed no later than fifteen (15) calendar days after the rendering of the decision being appealed. Appeals filed to the City Clerk shall be in writing, must specifically cite the basis of the appeal, including how the person is negatively impacted by the Subcommittee’s determination and must be accompanied by any fee the Council so chooses to impose by resolution. A decision rendered by the Traffic Improvement Subcommittee appealed to the City Council shall not become final until upheld by the City Council. (Added by Ord. 07-02, 2/20/07; amended by Ord. 09-01, 2/9/09)

 

12.08.300 Parking Meter/Pay Station/Mobile Device Payment Zones.
        In accordance with CVC Section #22508, the City Council may establish pay parking zone areas by Ordinance within the City of Dana Point. If within the Coastal Zone, a Coastal Development Permit to establish the parking fee structure is also necessary from the Planning Commission as required by the Coastal Act which is administered by the California Coastal Commission to establish the parking fee structure. (Added by Ord. 15-04, 9/15/15)

 

12.08.310 Generally.
        (a)    Parking meter/pay station/mobile device payment zones are those streets or portions of streets established by ordinance of the City Council as zones within which the parking of vehicles may be controlled, regulated, and inspected with the aid of parking meters or pay stations and mobile device payment systems. In accordance with CVC 22508, mobile device payment systems may augment, but not completely replace parking meters or pay stations.

        (b)    Parking meter/pay station/mobile device payment zones may be established in areas to manage the supply of parking and to make it reasonably available when and where needed.

        (c)    The City Engineer shall cause parking meter/pay station/mobile device payment signage to be installed and maintained in all parking meter/mobile device payment zones. The maximum rate shall be set by the City Council Public Hearing. In a fiscal year, the City Engineer may adjust meter rates up or down one dollar ($1.00) per hour in twenty-five-cent ($0.25) increments based on usage. Any increase over one dollar ($1.00) per hour in a fiscal year shall require City Council approval. (Added by Ord. 15-04, 9/15/15)

 

12.08.320 Parking Meter/Pay Station/Mobile Device Payment Systems.
        (a)    Time of Operation. The provisions of Sections 12.08.300 through 12.08.350 relating to the operation of parking meters shall be effective for posted hours and days as determined by the City Engineer.

        (b)    Operational Procedure to Be Followed. Immediately after occupancy of a paid parking space, the operator of a vehicle shall deposit a coin or paper currency of the United States or use a credit card or other acceptable form of payment in said parking meter and follow operational procedures in accordance with the instructions posted on the parking meter/pay station or pay by mobile device in accordance with posted directions.

        (c)    Unlawful to Park After Metered Time or Mobile Device Paid Time has Expired. No operator of any vehicle shall permit said vehicle to remain parked in any parking space during any time that the parking spot is illegally in use other than such time immediately after the original occupancy as is necessary to operate the meter, obtain a ticket, or pay by mobile device to show legal parking.

        (d)    Unlawful to Extend Time Beyond Limit. No person shall allow a vehicle to be parked for a period beyond the maximum legal parking time limit that has been established for the parking space.

        (e)    Improper Use of Meter. No person shall deposit, attempt to deposit, or cause to be deposited in any parking meter any defaced or bent coin, or any slug, device or metallic substitute for a coin of the United States, or deface, injure, tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy or attempt in any manner to impair the usefulness of any parking meter.

        (f)    Special Reservation of Parking Meter Spaces. The City Engineer is authorized to issue special permits to reserve parking meter spaces. A parking meter space may be reserved for special events or it may be reserved for activities related to construction or maintenance, thereby allowing parking of commercial vehicles for the performance of work. A daily fee will be charged to the permittee.

        (g)    Inoperable Parking Meter/Pay Station or Mobile Device Payment System. Persons shall not utilize the parking spot if the parking meter or pay station or mobile device payment system they are trying to use is inoperable, subject to limitations of CVC 22508.5.

        (h)    Permit Parking at Parking Meter/Pay Station/Mobile Device Payment Zones. The City Engineer may designate specific areas where parking permits are valid at parking meter/pay station/mobile device payment zones. These areas will be defined in the master list for each program area where this is appropriate. (Added by Ord. 15-04, 9/15/15)

 

12.08.330 Rule of Evidence.
        The parking or standing of any motor vehicle in a parking space, at which space the parking meter displays the sign or signal indicating illegal parking or the pay station ticket time has expired or the mobile payment device paid time system indicates expiration, shall constitute a prima facie presumption that the vehicle has been parked or allowed to stand in such space for a period longer than permitted by these provisions. (Added by Ord. 15-04, 9/15/15)

 

12.08.340 Use of Money Deposited for Parking.
        All moneys collected from parking meters/pay stations/mobile device payment systems, less operating expenses, in this district shall be placed in a special fund, which fund shall be devoted exclusively to purposes within the geographic boundaries of the parking district from which the revenue is collected. Such moneys shall be used for the purposes stated in the parking district establishment ordinance. (Added by Ord. 15-04, 9/15/15)

 

12.08.350 Application of Other Chapters.
        No section of this Chapter shall be construed as permitting any parking in violation of any other provision of Sections 12.08.300 through 12.08.350. (Added by Ord. 15-04, 9/15/15)

Chapter 12.10 MOBILE SOURCE AIR POLLUTION REDUCTION PROGRAM
12.10.100 Definitions.
        Unless the context shall require otherwise, the definitions set forth in this Section shall apply to the following terms as used in this Chapter:

        A.    “City” shall mean the City of Dana Point.

        B.     “Mobile source air pollution reduction programs” shall mean any program or project “implemented” by the City to reduce air pollution from motor vehicles which it determines will be consistent with the California Clear Air Act of 1988 or the plan proposed pursuant to Article 5 (commencing with Section 40460) of Chapter 5.5 of Part 3 of the California Health and Safety Code.

        C.     “Fee Administrator” shall mean the Director of Financial Management of the City or his designee.

 

12.10.110 Administration of Vehicle Registration Fee.
        (a)    Receipt of Fee. The additional vehicle registration fees disbursed by the SCAQMD and remitted to the City, pursuant to this Chapter, shall be accepted by the Fee Administrator.

        (b)    Establishment of Air Quality Improvement Trust Fund. The Fee Administrator shall establish a separate interest-bearing trust fund account in a financial institution authorized to receive deposits of City funds.

        (c)    Transfer of Funds. Upon receipt of vehicle registration fees, the Fee Administrator shall deposit such funds into the separate account established pursuant to Section 12.10.110(b). All interest earned by the Trust Fund Account shall be credited only to that account.

        (d)    Expenditure of Air Quality Trust Fund Revenues. All revenues received from the SCAQMD and deposited in the Trust Fund Account shall be exclusively expended on mobile source emission reduction programs as defined in Section 12.10.100(b). Such revenues and any interest earned on the revenues shall be expended within one (1) year of the completion of the programs.

        (e)    Audits. The City consents to an audit of all programs and projects funded by vehicle registration fee revenues received from the SCAQMD pursuant to Section 44243 of the Health and Safety Code. The audit shall be conducted by an independent auditor selected by the SCAQMD as provided in Sections 44244 and 44244(a) of the Health and Safety Code. (Chapter 12.10 amended by Ord. No. 91-12, 7/9/91)

Chapter 12.12 TAXI ADMINISTRATION PROGRAM
12.12.010 Definitions.
        For the purpose of this Chapter, the words and phrases herein defined shall be construed in accordance with the following definitions.

        (a)    “City” means the City of Dana Point.

        (b)    “City authorization” means City authorization to operate a taxicab business in the City.

        (c)    “Driver” means a person who drives or controls the movements of a taxicab.

        (d)    “Driver’s permit” means a valid permit issued by OCTAP authorizing a person to drive or control the movements of a taxicab.

        (e)    “OCTAP” means the Orange County Taxicab Administration Program administered by the Orange County Transportation Authority.

        (f)    “Operate a taxicab” means to drive a taxicab and either solicit or pick up passengers for hire in the City.

        (g)    “Owner” means the registered owner or lessor of a taxicab.

        (h)    “Person” includes natural person, firm, association, organization, partnership, business, trust, corporation, or public entity.

        (i)     “Taxicab” means a vehicle operated within the jurisdiction of the City, capable of carrying not more than eight (8) persons, excluding the driver, and used to carry passengers for hire. The term shall exclude a vehicle operating as a charter party carrier licensed as such by any state agency, including the Public Utilities Commission, or any other vehicle having a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued by any state agency, including the Public Utilities Commission.

        (j)     “Taxicab business permit” means a valid permit issued by OCTAP authorizing a person to operate a taxicab business.

        (k)    “Taxicab vehicle permit” means a permit issued by OCTAP authorizing a particular vehicle to be operated as a taxicab. (Added by Ord. 98-07, 11/24/98)

 

12.12.020 City Authorization Required.
        (a)    A person shall only operate a taxicab if the owner of that taxicab is authorized by the City to operate a taxicab business in the City.

        (b)    An owner shall only allow a taxicab owned by the owner to be operated if the owner is authorized by the City to operate a taxicab business in the City.

        (c)    The procedures for City authorization to operate a taxicab business in the City shall be established by separate resolution or ordinance of the City Council. (Added by Ord. 98-07, 11/24/98)

 

12.12.030 Driver’s Permit Required.
        A person shall only operate a taxicab if that person is in possession of a driver’s permit and if City authorization has been obtained. An owner shall only allow a driver to operate a taxicab owned by the owner if that driver possesses a driver’s permit and if City authorization has been obtained. (Added by Ord. 98-07, 11/24/98)

 

12.12.040 Taxicab Vehicle Permit Required.
        A person shall only operate a taxicab if that vehicle displays a taxicab vehicle permit and if City authorization has been obtained. An owner shall only allow a taxicab owned by the owner to be operated in the City if that vehicle displays a taxicab vehicle permit and if City authorization has been obtained. (Added by Ord. 98-07, 11/24/98)

 

12.12.050 Taxicab Business Permit Required.
        A person or company shall only operate a taxicab business in the City if that person possesses a taxicab business permit and if City authorization has been obtained. (Added by Ord. 98-07, 11/24/98)

 

12.12.060 Application for Permits.
        Application for a driver’s permit, taxicab vehicle permit or taxicab business permit shall be made to OCTAP, upon a form provided by OCTAP and shall be accompanied by an application fee sufficient to cover the administrative costs of processing said application as established by OCTAP and adopted by separate resolution of the City Council. (Added by Ord. 98-07, 11/24/98)

 

12.12.070 Testing for Controlled Substances and Alcohol.
        A driver shall test negative for controlled substances and alcohol as required by applicable state statutes. (Added by Ord. 98-07, 11/24/98)

 

12.12.080 Insurance Required.
        A driver operating a taxicab in the City shall carry with him/her at all times proof of insurance covering that vehicle, with such policy limits and coverage as established by OCTAP and adopted by separate resolution of the City Council. Said proof of insurance must clearly identify the vehicle covered. (Added by Ord. 98-07, 11/24/98)

 

12.12.090 Nontransferability.
        No permit issued under this Chapter shall be assigned to, or used by, any person or vehicle other than the person or vehicle named in such permit. (Added by Ord. 98-07, 11/24/98)

 

12.12.100 Equipment.
        A taxicab operated under the authority of this Chapter shall be equipped according to the standards established by OCTAP and adopted by separate resolution of the City Council. (Added by Ord. 98-07, 11/24/98)

 

12.12.110 Mechanical Condition.
        A taxicab operated under the authority of this Chapter shall be maintained according to the standards established by OCTAP and adopted by separate resolution of the City Council. (Added by Ord. 98-07, 11/24/98)

 

12.12.120 Operational Requirements.
        (a)    A driver shall only carry a passenger to his/her destination by the most direct and accessible route.

        (b)    A taxicab shall have all permits issued by OCTAP conspicuously displayed according to the standards established by OCTAP and adopted by separate resolution of the City Council.

        (c)    A taxicab shall have the following information continuously posted in a prominent location in the taxicab passenger’s compartment according to the standards established by OCTAP and adopted by separate resolution of the City Council:

        (1)    A schedule of rates and charges for the hire of said taxicab;

        (2)    The driver’s name and address;

        (3)    The owner’s name, address and telephone number;

        (4)    The taxicab identification number;

        (5)    The driver’s permit issued pursuant to this Chapter;

        (6)    The taxicab vehicle permit issued pursuant to this Chapter; and

        (7)    Any other information required by the City.

        (d)    A driver shall give a receipt for the amount charged upon the request of the person paying the fare.

        (e)    A taxicab shall only be operated if the passenger compartment is kept in a clean and sanitary condition.

        (f)    A driver shall not leave his taxicab to solicit passengers.

        (g)    The name or trade name of the owner and the number by which the taxicab is designated shall be printed, stamped or stenciled conspicuously on the outside of each taxicab according to the standards established by OCTAP and adopted by separate resolution of the City Council. (Added by Ord. 98-07, 11/24/98)

 

12.12.130 Rates and Charges.
        No driver shall charge rates and charges other than those established by OCTAP and adopted by separate resolution of the City Council. (Added by Ord. 98-07, 11/24/98)

 

12.12.140 Separate from Business Licensing.
        The requirements of this Chapter are separate and independent from the business licensing and any other provisions under the City Code. (Added by Ord. 98-07, 11/24/98)

 

12.12.150 Penalty.
        (a)    It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor, subject to punishment in accordance with Section 1.01.200 et seq. of this Code, for any person to violate any provision of this Chapter.

        (b)    The City Attorney, at the request of the City Council, may institute an action in any court of competent jurisdiction to restrain, enjoin or abate the condition(s) found to be in violation of the provisions of this Chapter, as provided by law. (Added by Ord. 98-07, 11/24/98)

Chapter 12.14 PREFERENTIAL PARKING PROGRAM
12.14.002 Definitions.
        For purposes of this Chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this Chapter are defined as follows:

        (a)    “Department” means the City’s Department of Public Works.

        (b)    “Director” means the City’s Director of Public Works and Engineering or his or her designee.

        (c)    “City Engineer” means the City’s City Engineer in the Public Works Department.

        (d)    “District” means a preferential parking district.

        (e)    “Dwelling unit” means a self-contained group of interconnected rooms designed or intended as separate living quarters, with sleeping and sanitary facilities and one cooking facility, provided within a permanent structure or portion thereof. Examples of a dwelling unit include a house, apartment, condominium or mobile home, but do not include a hotel, motel or timeshare. If any dwelling unit or units has been modified to add one or more dwelling units to a structure without obtaining proper permits from the City or County of Orange, then such added dwelling unit(s) shall not be considered a dwelling unit for purposes of this Chapter.

        (f)    “Guest” means any person visiting a resident located in a preferential parking district for any traditional guest purpose. The term “guest” also includes those persons providing professional services to a dwelling unit or building located within a district.

        (g)    “Parking restriction” means the limited amount of time and/or time of day vehicles may park on the street in a preferential parking district.

        (h)    “Permit,” for the purposes of this Chapter, means a valid preferential parking authorization for a resident or a guest issued in accordance with Section 12.14.008.

        (i)     “Preferential parking” means the exemption of vehicles displaying a valid permit from certain daytime and nighttime parking restrictions.

        (j)     “Preferential Parking District” means a street or group of streets designated by City Council resolution which establishes specified parking restrictions exempting those vehicles displaying a valid permit pursuant to this Chapter.

        (k)    “Resident” means a homeowner, tenant or other person who lives in a dwelling unit. (Added by Ord. 99-12, 10/26/99; amended by Ord. 07-02, 2/20/07; Ord. 08-05, 5/20/08)

 

12.14.004 Initiation of a Preferential Parking District.
        The process for a preferential parking district may be initiated at the direction of the City Council or Traffic Improvement Subcommittee. Notwithstanding the right of the City Council or Traffic Improvement Subcommittee to initiate a preferential parking district, no resolution establishing such district shall take any force or effect until signs or markings giving adequate notice thereof have been placed in and about the district. (Added by Ord. 99-12, 10/26/99; amended by Ord. 08-05, 5/20/08; Ord. 09-01, 2/9/09)

 

12.15.005 Intent of Preferential Parking District Surrounding Dana Hills High School.
        The intent of the preferential parking district (district) is to protect residents and their guests from the adverse impacts of non-resident parking on public streets in preferential parking districts. The permits issued to residents living in district boundaries are for their sole use, including guests who are visiting their dwelling units. Permits shall not be distributed to non-residents or guests not actually entering the district to visit a resident in the district. Persons who attend or visit Dana Hills High School, unless they are actual district residents parking next to their homes, are not entitled to park in the district, even if a guest pass or resident pass is provided by a district homeowner or resident. It is also the intent of this district that residents and guests park reasonably close to the residence for which the pass is issued, defined as within five hundred (500) feet of the residence. (Added by Ord. 08-05, 5/20/28)

 

12.14.006 Designation of Preferential Parking District.
        Once the process for the formation of a preferential parking district has been initiated, the following shall take place prior to the establishment of a district:

        (a)    The Director shall prepare a study on the need for preferential parking in the proposed district. The study may include a survey of resident opinions and observations regarding the need for preferential parking. The study shall include:

        (1)    An evaluation of the appropriate district boundaries;

        (2)    An evaluation of the current on-street parking uses within the proposed district;

        (3)    An assessment of the parking restrictions required to address the needs of the proposed district;

        (4)    An assessment of the potential impacts of the district upon parking uses and parking availability within and without the proposed district boundaries;

        (5)    An evaluation of the proximity of the proposed district to the Dana Hills High School campus and the negative parking impacts attributable to student parking for all preferential parking districts around Dana Hills High School.

        (b)    The Director shall present the study and recommendations to the Traffic Improvement Subcommittee or City Council for consideration at a noticed public hearing.

        (c)    The Director, in making a recommendation to the Traffic Improvement Subcommittee or City Council to establish a district, must consider whether:

        (1)    The proposed preferential parking program will help address the parking needs of the proposed district; and

        (2)    The proposed preferential parking program will not result in significant adverse impacts to adjacent, non-district neighborhoods and no unreasonable displacement of non-resident vehicles into surrounding residential areas; and

        (3)    There are no other practical or feasible alternatives for adequately addressing the district’s shortage of reasonably available and convenient residential parking spaces.

        (d)    The Traffic Improvement Subcommittee or City Council shall consider the recommendation of the Director in making its determination regarding the formation of a district. If the Traffic Improvement Subcommittee or City Council determines that the criteria set forth in subsection (c) have been met in accordance with the rules and procedures required by this Chapter, the Traffic Improvement Subcommittee or City Council may establish a preferential parking district by a resolution designating the appropriate boundaries, parking restrictions and number of parking permits and guest permits which will be issued per dwelling unit in the district. Motor vehicles displaying a valid parking permit may be parked exempt from the parking restrictions established pursuant to this Chapter in the district for which the permit is issued. An approved preferred parking district shall not have any force or effect until after signs or markings giving adequate notice thereof have been placed in and about the district. (Added by Ord. 99-12, 10/26/99; amended by Ord. 07-02, 2/20/07; Ord. 08-05, 5/20/08; Ord. 09-01, 2/9/09)

 

12.14.008 Issuance of Permits.
        (a)    Any resident wishing to obtain a parking permit(s) for a district must complete an application as directed by the Department and submit the application along with the appropriate fees, if any, imposed pursuant to Section 12.14.020.

        (b)    A resident applicant for a preferred parking district permit(s) must prove to the satisfaction of the Director that he or she resides in a particular dwelling unit within that district. An applicant must also prove that the motor vehicle(s) for which the permit is issued is currently registered in the State of California.

        (c)    Each permit shall be designed to state or reflect the particular district, the license number of the vehicle for which the permit is issued and the date on which the permit shall expire.

        (d)    Replacement permits may be obtained after proof to the satisfaction of the Director that the original permit was lost, damaged, or stolen, and the appropriate fees, if any, have been paid.

        (e)    Permits shall only be used by residents and guests of the dwelling unit, and shall only entitle the user to park within five hundred (500) feet of the dwelling unit to which the pass is issued. If the vehicle with a permit is parked beyond that distance, the vehicle shall be subject to citation by law enforcement. (Added by Ord. 99-12, 10/26/99; amended by Ord. 08-05, 5/20/08)

 

12.14.010 Guest Permits.
        Residents shall request the issuance of a guest parking permit(s) for preferential parking for their guests. The administration of guest permits with respect to the number of permits, conditions for issuance of permits and expiration period for such permits may be established by resolution of the Traffic Improvement Subcommittee or City Council at the time that the district is approved by the Traffic Improvement Subcommittee or City Council. (Added by Ord. 99-12, 10/26/99; amended by Ord. 07-02, 2/20/07; Ord. 08-05, 5/20/08; Ord. 09-01, 2/9/09)

 

 

12.14.012 Grounds for Refusal or Revocation.
        Any of the following are grounds for refusal to issue or to revoke a permit:

        (a)    The applicant or permit holder cannot provide required evidence that the dwelling unit within the district is the residence of the applicant or permit holder;

        (b)    Failure of the applicant to provide complete and correct information on the application as required by the Department;

        (c)    Assignment, transfer, or use of the permit after issuance for any consideration, monetary or otherwise;

        (d)    The copying, production, or creation of a facsimile or counterfeit permit, or the use or display of a facsimile or counterfeit permit. (Added by Ord. 99-12, 10/26/99)

 

12.14.014 Permit Revocation Procedure.
        The City Engineer is authorized to suspend and revoke a permit under this part. If the City Engineer determines that there are adequate grounds to revoke a permit, he or she may give a permit holder a notice of revocation which states: (a) the grounds for the revocation; (b) that the permit has been suspended; and (c) the procedure for review and appeal of that notice of revocation. Such notice may be delivered by leaving a copy on the windshield of the permitted vehicle or by delivering notice to the dwelling unit associated with the permit holder.

        A permit is automatically suspended as soon as a notice of revocation is delivered to the permit holder. The suspension shall become a permanent revocation if either: (i) no timely appeal is filed, or (ii) the City Engineer does not rescind the notice of revocation. During any period of suspension, a permit shall not be valid nor shall it exempt a vehicle from compliance with this part.

        An applicant or permit holder may appeal a decision to deny or revoke a permit to the Director. Any such appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed with the Director within fourteen (14) calendar days after delivery of a notice of denial or revocation. If such an appeal is filed, the applicant or permit holder shall be given an opportunity for a review and meeting concerning the Director’s decision. The Director is authorized to affirm, reverse or modify any such decision. Notice of the determination on reconsideration shall be in writing. Any applicant or permit holder may appeal the determination of the City Manager directly to the City Council in accordance with Section 2.04.100 et seq., of this Code. (Added by Ord. 99-12, 10/26/99; amended by Ord. 07-02, 2/20/07; and Ord. 08-05, 5/20/08)

 

12.14.016 Display of Permit.
        The permit issued under this Chapter shall be visibly displayed on the inside left rear window of the vehicle for which the permit is issued. Guest permits shall be visibly displayed on the left front side of the vehicle’s dashboard or the rear view mirror. (Added by Ord. 99-12, 10/26/99)

 

12.14.018 Term of Preferential Parking Permits.
        Preferential parking permits shall be valid for a period of up to five (5) years from the date of issuance or until such time as the applicant ceases to reside in the district, whichever occurs first. (Added by Ord. 99-12, 10/26/99)

 

12.14.020 Permit Fee.
        Applications for issuance of initial permits, renewal permits, transfer permits in the case of a holder of a permit moves to another district, or a replacement permit in the case of a lost or mutilated permit, shall be accompanied by such fee, if any, as may be established from time to time by resolution of the Traffic Improvement Subcommittee or City Council. (Added by Ord. 99-12, 10/26/99; amended by Ord. 07-02, 2/20/07; Ord. 09-01, 2/9/09)

 

12.14.022 Posting of Permit Parking Area.
        Upon the designation of a preferential parking district, but prior to such district taking legal force and effect, the Department shall cause appropriate signs to be erected in the district, indicating prominently any parking limitations, period of the day for its application and the fact that motor vehicles with valid permits shall be exempt from the requirements. (Added by Ord. 99-12, 10/26/99; amended by Ord. 08-05, 5/20/08)

 

12.14.024 Special Function Permits.
        Residents within a preferential parking district or an organization may apply for a one-day special function parking permit (for parties and similar events) in person at the Department. Said application must be filed a minimum of five (5) business days prior to the special function. The City Engineer or his designee is authorized to process the application and issue any reasonable number of temporary special function parking permits. (Added by Ord. 99-12, 10/26/99; amended by Ord. 07-02, 2/20/07)

 

12.14.026 Permit Parking Exemption.
        (a)    The following vehicles are exempt from the parking restrictions established pursuant to this Chapter:

        (1)    A motor vehicle identified as owned by or operated under contract to a utility when used in the construction, operation, removal or repair of utility property or facilities or engaged in authorized work in the designated preferential parking district;

        (2)    A motor vehicle when identified as owned by or under contract to a governmental agency, when used in the course of official governmental business;

        (3)    A vehicle which displays either a distinguishing license plate or placard issued pursuant to Vehicle Code Sections 5007, 22511.5, 22511.55 or 22511.59 relating to disabled or handicapped persons;

        (4)    Authorized emergency vehicles pursuant to California Vehicle Code Section 21055;

        (5)    Any commercial vehicle making pickups or deliveries of goods, wares or merchandise from or to any building or structure in the district or for the purpose of delivery to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any building or structure for which a currently valid building permit has previously been obtained.

        (b)    A preferential parking permit does not guarantee or reserve to the holder of the permit an on-street parking space within the designated preferential parking district.

        (c)    The preferential parking district program shall be in full force and effect, including all provisions of this Chapter, on the days and times set forth in the approval of the specific district. For the Dana Hills High School District, this will be regular school days during the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. (excluding summer school). This section takes precedence over any other regulations related to the enforcement period established by approvals previous to the date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Added by Ord. 99-12, 10/26/99; amended by Ord. 08-05, 5/20/08)

 

12.14.028 Penalty Provisions.
        (a)    Unless otherwise exempted from the provisions of this Chapter, no person shall stop, stand, park, or leave standing a motor vehicle in violation of any parking restriction established pursuant to this Chapter.

        (b)    No person shall falsely represent himself or herself as eligible for a parking permit or furnish false information in an application for a parking permit to the department.

        (c)    No permit issued pursuant to this Chapter shall thereafter be transferred or used for any consideration, monetary or otherwise.

        (d)    No person shall copy, produce or create a facsimile or counterfeit parking permit; nor shall any person use or display a facsimile or counterfeit preferential parking permit.

        (e)    The permit(s) of any person who, after a hearing, has been found by the Director or City Engineer to have violated any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be revoked by the Director or City Engineer and no new permit shall be issued to that person or any person residing within that dwelling unit for a period of one year. Such person upon written notification of such revocation shall surrender the permit(s) to the Department within fourteen (14) days. Use of a revoked parking permit is prohibited.

        (f)    Any regularly employed or salaried peace officer or non-sworn community service officer of the City or police agency providing police services to the City shall have the authority to issue citations for any violation of this Chapter.

        (g)    Any violation of this Section is illegal and may be punished as a misdemeanor.

(Added by Ord. 99-12, 10/26/99; amended by Ord. 07-02, 2/20/07)

 

12.14.030 State Vehicle Code Provisions.
        The provisions of this Chapter are expressly enacted under the Constitution of the State, Article XI, Section 11 together with provisions of the Vehicle Code of the State, as amended. The provisions set forth in the Vehicle Code shall govern whenever this Chapter fails to set forth any specific provision, or is in conflict thereof. (Added by Ord. 08-05, 5/20/08)

 

12.14.200 Decisions and Right of Appeal.
        (a)    Appeals of the imposition of conditions or terms by the City Engineer may be submitted in writing to the City Engineer. A notice of appeal shall be filed within ten (10) days after the applicant is notified of the City Engineer’s decision to impose conditions or terms.

        (b)    At the time set for hearing of the appeal of a City Engineer’s condition or term, the Director of Public Works (“Director”) may summon witnesses and hear evidence relating to the application. At the conclusion thereof, the Director may grant or deny the application, or make such modifications with reference thereto as may be deemed appropriate. The findings and order of the Director shall be final and conclusive.

        (c)    Decisions of the Traffic Improvement Subcommittee with regard to the initial establishment of the district may be appealed. Appeals of the Traffic Improvement Subcommittee shall be filed with the City Clerk. Appeals must be filed no later than fifteen (15) calendar days after the rendering of the decision being appealed. Appeals filed to the City Clerk shall be in writing, must specifically cite the basis of the appeal, including how the person is negatively impacted by the Subcommittee’s determination and must be accompanied by any fee the Council so chooses to impose by resolution. A decision rendered by the Traffic Improvement Subcommittee appealed to the City Council shall not become final until upheld by the City Council. (Added by Ord. 07-02, 2/20/07; amended by Ord. 08-05, 5/20/08; Ord. 09-01, 2/9/09)

Chapter 12.16 SPEED LIMITS
12.16.010 Speed Limits.
        The City Council establishes the following speed limits on the following streets within the City of Dana Point:

        (a)    Twenty-Five (25) Miles Per Hour.

        (1)    Acapulco Drive between Caracas Street and Street of the Golden Lantern.

        (2)    Camino Capistrano between Via Sacramento and Calle Loma.

        (3)    Camino Capistrano between Calle Loma and Camino De Estrella.

        (4)    Camino Capistrano between Camino De Estrella and Camino Mira Costa.

        (5)    La Cresta Drive between Selva Road and easterly cul-de-sac.

        (6)    La Cresta Drive between westerly cul-de-sac and Street of the Golden Lantern.

        (7)    La Cresta Drive between Street of the Golden Lantern and Calle La Primavera.

        (8)    Ritz Carlton Drive from PCH (West) to PCH/Niguel Road.

        (b)    Thirty (30) Miles Per Hour.

        (1)    Camino Capistrano between Via Canon and Via Sacramento.

        (2)    Camino Capistrano between Camino Mira Costa and Del Gado Road.

        (3)    Dana Point Harbor Drive between Pacific Coast Highway and Street of the Golden Lantern.

        (4)    Selva Road between southerly City limit and Pacific Coast Highway.

        (c)    Thirty-Five (35) Miles Per Hour.

        (1)    Camino Capistrano between Doheny Park Road and Via Canon.

        (2)    Camino De Estrella between Camino Capistrano and easterly City limit.

        (3)    Crown Valley Parkway between Pacific Coast Highway and Sea Island Drive.

        (4)    Doheny Park Road between northerly City limit and Coast Highway.

        (5)    Street of the Golden Lantern between Del Prado Avenue and Dana Point Harbor Drive.

        (6)    Street of the Golden Lantern between La Cresta Drive and Del Prado Avenue.

        (7)    Pacific Coast Highway between Street of the Blue Lantern and Street of the Amber Lantern.

        (8)    Pacific Coast Highway between Street of the Amber Lantern and Street of the Golden Lantern.

        (9)    Pacific Coast Highway between Street of the Golden Lantern and Street of the Copper Lantern.

        (10)  Pacific Coast Highway between Street of the Copper Lantern and Doheny Park Road.

        (11)  Selva Road between Pacific Coast Highway and Chula Vista Avenue.

        (12)  Selva Road between Chula Vista Avenue and Street of the Golden Lantern.

        (13)  Selva Road between Street of the Golden Lantern and Stonehill Drive.

        (d)    Forty (40) Miles Per Hour.

        (1)    Del Obispo Street between Pacific Coast Highway and Stonehill Drive.

        (2)    Del Obispo Street between Stonehill Drive and Blue Fin Drive.

        (3)    Street of the Golden Lantern between Camino Del Avion and Josiah Drive.

        (4)    Street of the Golden Lantern between Josiah Drive and Acapulco Drive.

        (5)    Street of the Golden Lantern between Acapulco Drive and La Cresta Drive.

        (6)    Niguel Road between Pacific Coast Highway and Stonehill Drive.

        (7)    Stonehill Drive between Niguel Road and Street of the Golden Lantern.

        (8)    Stonehill Drive between Street of the Golden Lantern and Del Obispo Street.

        (9)    Stonehill Drive between Del Obispo Street and easterly City limit.

        (e)    Forty-Five (45) Miles Per Hour.

        (1)    Coast Highway between Doheny Park Road and Palisades Drive.

        (2)    Coast Highway between Palisades Drive and Camino Capistrano.

        (3)    Crown Valley Parkway between Sea Island Drive and Camino Del Avion.

        (f)    Fifty (50) Miles Per Hour.

        (1)    Niguel Road between Stonehill and Ritz Pointe Drive.

        (2)    Niguel Road between Ritz Pointe Drive and Camino Del Avion.

        (3)    Pacific Coast Highway between northerly City limit and Crown Valley.

        (4)    Pacific Coast Highway between Crown Valley Parkway and Niguel Road.

        (5)    Pacific Coast Highway between Niguel Road and Street of the Blue Lantern. (Added by Ord. 02-04, 3/12/02; amended by Ord. 03-01, 1/9/03; Ord. 03-08, 4/23/03; Ord. 05-02, 4/27/05; Ord. 11-05, 9/12/11; Ord. 15-02, 4/7/15)

Chapter 12.18 PARKING RESTRICTIONS ON DEL REY
12.18.010 Parking Restrictions on Del Rey—Prohibited.
        (a)    No person who owns or has possession, custody or control of any vehicle, shall park such vehicle within the designated “No Parking—Fire Lane” area on Del Rey at any time (see Exhibit “A”).

        (b)    Any regularly employed or salaried peace officer of the City or police agency providing police services to the City shall have the authority to: 1) issue citations for any violation of this Chapter; and 2) remove or caused to be removed the offending vehicle. (Added by Ord. 06-16, 12/13/06)

 

 

Exhibit “A”

 



 

Exhibit “A”—Areas of “No Parking” along Del Rey

Chapter 12.20 PARKING BENEFIT DISTRICT
12.20.010 Establishment of District and of District Boundaries.
        A Parking Benefit District (District) is hereby established. The boundaries of the District shall be the area bounded by an east-west line along the alley between Del Prado and Santa Clara Avenue to the north and the southern bluff, including Santa Clara Avenue, El Camino Capistrano and portions of Ruby Lantern, Amber Lantern, Violet Lantern and Old Golden Lantern. (Added by Ord. 15-05, 9/15/15)

 

12.20.020 Purpose.
        The Parking Benefit District (District) is established to manage public parking supply and demand within the District boundaries as well as improve transportation and parking related facilities and programs. Parking rates shall be established separately by ordinance at a public hearing. (Added by Ord. 15-05, 9/15/15)

 

12.20.030 Use of Revenue.
        All revenues, less expenses, collected from parking meters/pay stations/mobile device payment systems, leases, and permits, in the Parking Benefit District shall be placed in a special fund, which fund shall be used exclusively for activities benefiting the District. The specific authorized use of revenues shall be as follows:

        (a)    For purchasing, leasing, installing, repairing, maintaining, operating, removing, regulating and policing of parking meters/pay stations/mobile device payment systems in the District and for the payment of any and all expenses relating thereto.

        (b)    For purchasing, leasing, acquiring, improving, operating and maintaining on- or off-street parking facilities.

        (c)    For installation and maintenance of alternative mode programs, landscaping, medians or bulb-outs, pedestrian linkages, sidewalk cleaning, street furniture, way finding systems, and traffic-control devices and signals.

        (d)    For the painting and marking of streets and curbs required for the direction of traffic and parking of motor vehicles.

        (e)    For proper security within the District.

        (f)    For the proper regulation, control, enforcement and inspection of parking and traffic upon public streets and off-street parking facilities.

        (g)    To be pledged as security for the payment of principal of and interest on financing mechanisms used by the City to meet any of the purposes authorized by this Section.

        (h)    For transportation and parking planning, marketing and education programs related to the Parking Benefit District.

        (i)     For construction and maintenance of public restrooms that enhance parking facilities.

 

        (j)     Revenues from residential parking permits may, in addition to the foregoing, be used for sidewalk, landscaping, medians or bulb-outs, and other transportation, pedestrian, bicycle or beautification enhancements on streets within the District. (Added by Ord. 15-05, 9/15/15)

 

12.20.040 Process of Formation.
        The process for formation of a Parking Benefit District shall follow the procedures outlined for preferential parking districts in Municipal Code Section 12.14.006. (Added by Ord. 15-05, 9/15/15)

Title 13 PARKS AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES
Note
Chapter 13.04 PARKS AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES REGULATIONS

Note
*       Sections from the Codified Ordinances of the County of Orange have been adopted by reference. For information on these sections, contact the Office of the City Clerk.

Chapter 13.04 PARKS AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES REGULATIONS
13.04.010 Scope.
        The provisions of this Chapter 13.04, unless otherwise expressly provided, shall apply in all parks, beaches, and recreational areas maintained by the City. (Ord. 94-12, 8/23/94)

 

13.04.020 Definitions.
The following words shall have the meaning indicated when used in these regulations:

        (a)    “Alcoholic beverage” means alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer and every liquid or solid containing one-half of one (0.5) percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed or combined with other substances.

        (b)    “Amplified sound” means music, sound wave, vibration, or speech projected or transmitted by electronic equipment, including amplifiers.

 

        (c)    “Natural open-space” consists of Hilltop Park, Harbor Point Park and the South Strand Open Space as defined in the conservation easement approved by the City on November 30, 2005 and other conservation areas as may be designated by the City Council, including the Center for Natural Lands Management (CNLM) Dana Point Preserve.

        (d)    “Park” means any community park, neighborhood park, trail, natural open-space, conservation or recreational area owned or maintained by the City. (Ord. 94-12, 8/23/94; amended by Ord. 09-05, 5/11/09; Ord. 10-03, 3/22/10; Ord. 10-04, 3/22/10; Ord. 18-02, 1/16/18)

 

13.04.030 Hours of Use.
        It is unlawful for any person to enter, loiter or remain in any City park or building at any time other than the established hours of operation, which (except as noted below) shall be between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. for any park, and 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. for any City building, except as follows:

        (a)    City employee or agents and peace officers when engaged in official business;

        (b)    Persons with permits issued by the City Council or the City Manager or designee;

        (c)    Persons and/or spectators participating in City-sponsored or City-approved programs which take place outside generally established hours of operation;

        (d)    Shipwreck Park will be closed at sunset throughout the year;

        (e)    Hilltop Park and Harbor Point Park will be open at 7:00 a.m. and closed at sunset throughout the year;

        (f)    The Nature Interpretive Center is considered part of Harbor Point Park; therefore all Municipal Code provisions for the Harbor Point Park also apply to the Nature Interpretive Center which will be Tuesday through Sunday (closed on Monday) from 10:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.;

        (g)    The South Strand Switchback Trail and Strand Revetment Trail will be open at all times throughout the year. Signage advising the public of these hours of closure applicable to South Strand Switchback Trail, as well as the alternative access ways to the beach, shall be posted at or near the access points to said trails at all times;

        (h)    Strand Vista Park, the Mid-Strand Beach Access and the Central Strand Beach Access will be open from 5:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. Signage advising the public of the these hours of operation, as well as the alternative accessways to the beach, shall be posted at or near the Strand Vista Park and said trails at all times;

        (i)     Strand Funicular Beach access will be open daily from sunrise to sunset from Memorial Day through Labor Day, and from sunrise to sunset on weekends and holidays the rest of the year;

        (j)     The parking lot adjacent to the Center for Natural Lands Management nature preserve and the Nature Interpretive Center parking will be open at 7:00 a.m. and closed at sunset throughout the year.  (Ord. 94-12, 8/23/94; amended by Ord. 06-07, 9/13/06; Ord. 09-05, 5/11/09; Ord. 10-03, 3/22/10; Ord. 16-04, 5/17/16)

 

13.04.040 Care of City Property.
        It is unlawful for any person to make, deface, disfigure, injure, destroy, tamper with, displace or remove any playground equipment, building, tables, benches, barbecues, railings, fencing, paving, irrigation materials or other public and park utilities, or parts or appurtenances thereof, signs, notices, place cards whether temporary or permanent, monuments, stakes, posts or other boundary markers, or other structures or equipment, facilities or park property or appurtenances whatsoever in a park. (Ord. 94-12, 8/23/94)

 

13.04.050 Care of Natural Resources.
        (a)    It is unlawful for any person to damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree, plant, algae, wood, turf in a park, or pick the flowers, seeds or fruit of any tree or plant in a park without written authorization from the City Manager or designee.

        (b)    It is unlawful to take, possess or disturb specimens of live or dead organisms from any Natural Open-Space or the Marine Protected Areas set aside for conservation within city limits other than those deemed permissible by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife or the California Department of Fish and Game with appropriate permits or licenses or written authorization from the City Manager or designee.

        (c)    No person shall willfully injure, destroy or alter the Natural Open-Space of the Headlands and the Marine Protected Areas within City limits.

        (d)    It is unlawful for any person to disturb, take or injure geological or cultural resources within the Dana Point Headlands open space recreational parks and natural open-space.

        (e)    Radio or remotely controlled aircraft of any type or size are prohibited, beneath four hundred (400) feet, at the Natural Open Spaces, unless specifically authorized for emergency use by the City or the City Manager. (Ord. 94-12, 8/23/94; amended by Ord. 09-05, 5/11/09; Ord. 14-04, 7/1/14)

13.04.055 Trespassing in Natural Open-Space Areas.
        (a)    It is unlawful for any person to leave the designated trail and trespass on protected habitat without consent from the Natural Resources Protection Officer or written authorization from the City Manager or designee in the Hilltop Park, Harbor Point Park and South Strand Switchback Trail’s Natural Open-Space.

        (b)    It is unlawful for any person to leave the designated trail and trespass on protected habitat without consent from the CNLM Preserve Manager in the Center for Natural Lands Management Dana Point Preserve. (Added by Ord. 09-05, 5/11/09; amended by Ord. 10-03, 3/22/10)

 

13.04.060 Climbing Trees or Other Objects.
        It is unlawful for any person to climb any tree, or walk, stand or sit upon monuments, signs, buildings, or roofs, railings, fences and gates, backstops, tables in a park or upon any park property not designated or customarily used for such purposes. (Ord. 94-12, 8/23/94)

 

13.04.065 Throwing Items in Headland Recreational and Conservation Parks.
        It is unlawful for any person to throw any item (e.g., rocks, bottles, other refuse, trash or litter) in the Hilltop Park, Harbor Point Park, South Strand Switchback Trail, Strand Beach Park including the revetment trail, Mid/Central Strand Access Trails, the Funicular Beach Access and the Center for Natural Lands Management Dana Point Preserve. (Added by Ord. 09-05, 5/11/09; amended by Ord. 10-03, 3/22/10)

 

13.04.070 Possession of Firearms and Weapons.
        It is unlawful for any person, other than peace officers in the discharge of their duties, to use, carry or possess firearms, air rifles, BB guns, spring guns, bow and arrows, slingshots or any other potentially dangerous form of weapon, unless permitted by a City Council resolution. (Ord. 94-12, 8/23/94)

 

13.04.080 Abandoned Animals or Pets.
        It is unlawful for any person to leave or deposit dogs, cats, or other animals or fowl, fish, whether dead or alive, within the boundaries of any park. (Ord. 94-12, 8/23/94)

 

13.04.090 Leash Requirements for Pets in Parks.
        It is unlawful for the owner or individual responsible for a dog, or other pet which may become a nuisance if unrestrained, to allow such dog or pet to be within a park unless the dog or pet is restrained on a leash. This leash requirement is not applicable to dogs in enclosed City-designated “Dog Fun Zones” as long as the owner or individual responsible for the dog is within close proximity, supervising the dog, and able to immediately releash the dog as necessary. The owner or individual responsible for the dog or pet must immediately clean up any fecal matter deposited by the dog or pet in any park. (Ord. 94-12, 8/23/94; amended by Ord. 06-07, 9/13/06)

 

13.04.095 Pets in the Headland Recreational and Conservation Parks.
        It is unlawful for dogs, with the exception of service dogs, or any other pet to be on the trails or in the park at Hilltop Park, Harbor Point Park, South Strand Switchback Trail, Strand Beach Park including the revetment trail, Mid/Central Strand Access Trails, the Funicular Beach Access and the Center for Natural Lands Management Dana Point Preserve. (Added by Ord. 09-05, 5/11/09; amended by Ord. 10-03, 3/22/10)

 

13.04.100 Refuse, Trash and Litter.
        It is unlawful for any person to dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, or refuse or other trash in a park. Any unused goods or materials, portions of which are consumed or used in a park, any container or packaging thereof, may be left at the park if it is deposited into the receptacles provided for such purposes. (Ord. 94-12, 8/23/94)

 

13.04.110 Advertising Matter.
        It is unlawful for any person to distribute, circulate, give away, throw or deposit any advertising handbills, circulars, pamphlets, papers in or on any park; or post or affix the same to any tree, fence or structure in any park without written approval of the City Manager. This section shall not be construed to prohibit the distribution of First Amendment-protected materials. (Ord. 94-12, 8/23/94)

 

13.04.120 Motor Vehicles or Other Conveyances.
        It is unlawful for any person to operate or drive an automobile, truck, trailer, motorcycle, motor scooter, motor bike, or any other type of conveyance or motor vehicle in a park unless such motor vehicles or conveyances are in a paved parking lot or street designed or designated for motor vehicle use. It shall be a violation of this Section for any person to fail to comply with all applicable provisions of the State, County and City motor vehicle regulations and traffic laws in regard to equipment, sign, speed limits and operation of vehicles in any park. (Ord. 94-12, 8/23/94)

 

13.04.130 Bicycles, Skateboards, Rollerblades and Similar Items.
        It is unlawful for any person to bicycle, skateboard, rollerblade or use a similar item of any type on tennis courts, handball courts, ball diamonds, patios, porches, play apparatus areas, and all other areas which are not designed or customarily used for such a purpose. A bicyclist shall be permitted to wheel or push a bicycle by hand over any grassy area or path reserved for pedestrian use.

        It is unlawful for any person to bicycle, skateboard, rollerblade, or use a similar item of any type on the trails or on any other area of Hilltop Park, Harbor Point Park, South Strand Switchback Trail, Strand Beach Park including the revetment trail, Mid/Central Strand Access Trails, the Funicular Beach Access and the Center for Natural Lands Management Dana Point Preserve.

        It is also unlawful for any person to skateboard or rollerblade in Sea Terrace Park. (Ord. 94-12, 8/23/94; amended by Ord. 06-07, 9/13/06; Ord. 09-05, 5/11/09; Ord. 10-03, 3/22/10)

 

13.04.160 Selling and Vending.
        It is unlawful for any person or organization to sell, vend, peddle or distribute any merchandise or property or to sell tickets for any event except in conjunction with a City sponsored or co-sponsored event, or with written permission of the City Manager. (Ord. 94-12, 8/23/94)

 

13.04.170 Alcoholic Beverages.
        It is unlawful for any person or organization to serve, or cause to be served, consume or possess alcoholic beverages of any kind whatsoever on any park grounds or in any park building unless specifically permitted by the prior written approval of the City. Permits must be obtained in accordance with City policies regulating the use of City parks and facilities. (Ord. 94-12, 8/23/94; amended by Ord. 06-07, 9/13/06)

 

13.04.190 Amplified Sound in Parks.
        (a)    Purpose. The City Council enacts this section for the sole purpose of securing and promoting the public health, comfort, safety, and welfare of its citizens. While recognizing that certain uses of sound amplifying equipment are protected by the First Amendment, the City Council feels obligated to reasonably regulate the use of sound amplifying equipment in order to protect the correlative constitutional rights of citizens of this community to privacy and freedom from the public nuisance of loud and unnecessary sound.

        (b)    Permit Required for Amplifiers. It shall be unlawful for any person to install, use and operate within a park a loudspeaker or any sound amplifying equipment for the purposes of giving instructions, directions, talks, addresses, or lectures or of transmitting music to any persons or groups of persons in any park, or in the vicinity thereof, except when installed, used or operated in compliance with one of the following provisions:

        (1)    By authorized law enforcement or park and recreational personnel; or

        (2)    Under a reservation or permit issued by the City Council, and when operated in accordance with the terms of said reservation or permit.

        (c)    Granting or Denial of Permit. In determining whether to grant or deny a permit, the City Council shall be guided by the following considerations:

        (1)    The constitutional free speech and assembly rights of all persons, including the applicant;

        (2)    The possible effects upon the peaceable passage or presence of persons in the park;

        (3)    The potential for disorder or unlawful injury to persons or property;

        (4)    The potential invasion of other persons’ rights of privacy;

        (5)    The possible unlawful breach or disturbance of the peace;

        (6)    Any actual conflict with other scheduled park uses or events.

        The City Council shall not deny a permit on the basis of any dislike for or disagreement with the content of any proposed talks, addresses, lectures, or musical presentation. The City Council may, however, deny a permit for any such events which are designed for the purpose of advocating imminent lawless conduct.

        (d)    Power Sources for Amplifiers. Amplifiers permitted in parks shall be operated only through a power source provided by the City or with a battery. (Ord. 94-12, 8/23/94)

 

13.04.200 Fireworks and Explosives.
        It is unlawful for any person in a park to bring, have in their possession, set off or otherwise cause to explode or discharge or burn any firecrackers, rockets or other fireworks or explosives of inflammable material or discharge them or throw them into any such area from land or highway adjacent to the park. (Ord. 94-12, 8/23/94)

 

13.04.210 Camping.
        It is unlawful for any person to camp or stay overnight in any City park or City property. No person shall set up tents, shacks, or any other temporary shelter for the purpose of overnight camping, except by special arrangement and written permission from the City Manager. No vehicles or structures which could be used for camping shall be parked on park or City property from 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. Any vehicle in violation of this Section may be towed at owner’s expense. (Ord. 94-12, 8/23/94)

 

13.04.215 Evictions from City Property or City Parks.
        (a)    Conditioned Use of Recreational Area. The privilege of any person to use parks, beaches and recreational areas is hereby expressly conditioned upon compliance by the person with the provisions of this Chapter as they apply to such use.

        (b)    Eviction. In addition to other penalties provided for in the codified ordinances of the City of Dana Point, an individual is subject to eviction from the park when all of the following conditions occur:

        (1)    The individual is in violation of a park rule or regulation;

        (2)    The individual has been warned in a manner that is reasonably calculated to reach that individual that eviction may result from any further violation;

        (3)    After receiving such warning, a further violation occurs;

        (4)    No lesser sanction reasonably appears to suffice; or

        (5)    Following a warning, the violation continues unabated regardless of the individual’s subsequent action.

        However, where a violation is of such magnitude or seriousness of violence, no warnings will be necessary prior to eviction.

        (c)    A group is subject to eviction from the park when any one of the following conditions occur:

        (1)    There is probable cause to believe that an unlawful assembly exists pursuant to California Penal Code Section 407;

        (2)    There is a clear and present danger of imminent violence or property damage which cannot reasonably be forestalled without evicting the entire group;

        (3)    There exists a group sponsored or organized activity which violates one (1) or more park rules and regulations and such group sponsored organized activity has not ceased as a result of one (1) or more warnings given to the permit applicant and the group as a whole;

        (4)    There are multiple individual violations of park rules and regulations which have not stopped following the eviction of one (1) or more such individual violators and violations continue after the group has had a reasonable opportunity to cure them.

        (d)    No person or group evicted from a park, beach or recreational area shall remain in or return to the facility prior to the expiration of the eviction period, a minimum of twenty-four (24) hours.

        This Chapter shall be enforced by the City Manager and such of their agents as they may designate to perform said duty as well as by peace officers having jurisdiction of any area in which a violation of any provision of this Chapter may take place. The City’s policies regarding eviction may be further amended or adopted by the City Manager within his or her sole discretion. (Added by Ord. 18-05, 9/4/18)

 

13.04.220 Weddings and Private Events.
        Weddings, events and related activities held in parks are only authorized if specifically permitted by the prior written approval of the City by its City Manager or designee. Permits must be obtained in accordance with City policies regulating the use of City parks and facilities. (Ord. 94-12, 8/23/94; amended by Ord. 06-07, 9/13/06)

 

13.04.230 “For Sale” Signs.
        It is unlawful for any person to place any private property in any park or City facility displaying a “For Sale” sign at any time without written permission from the City Manager. (Ord. 94-12, 8/23/94)

 

13.04.235 Bounce Houses.
        Bounce houses and similar items are prohibited in all City parks. (Added by Ord. 06-07, 9/13/06)

 

13.04.240 Enforcement of Regulations.
        All persons entering upon any park shall abide by the regulations of the City the laws of the State of California. The City, state and county law enforcement officers shall, in conjunction with their other duties, have the authority to expel from any park any person acting in violation of these regulations. (Ord. 94-12, 8/23/94)

Title 14 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Chapter 14.01 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS CODE
Chapter 14.10 PUBLIC FRANCHISES
Chapter 14.20 DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY TO REVIEW AND APPROVE PLANS
Chapter 14.30 LANTERN DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE

Chapter 14.01 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS CODE
Article 1. General Regulations
14.01.010 Definitions.
        For the purpose of this Chapter, the following words shall have the meaning ascribed below:

        (a)    “City” means the City of Dana Point, Orange County, California.

        (b)    “City Public Works Observer” or “Observer” means the person duly authorized by the Director to perform observations of all improvements and/or encroachments, approved by the Director, within the street right-of-way of the City of Dana Point.

        (c)    “Council” means the City Council of the City of Dana Point.

        (d)    “Curb” means the lateral boundary of the roadway whether such curb be marked by curbing construction or not so marked.

        (e)    Gender. Whenever in this Chapter the male form of a noun or pronoun is used, it shall also represent the female form. Similarly, when the female form of a noun or pronoun is used, it shall represent the male form.

        (f)    “Highway” means any public highway, public street, public way or public place, within the City which has been acquired by purchase, dedication, incorporation, or condemnation proceedings.

        (g)    “Parkway” means that area between the roadway and the property line adjacent thereto. Uses of the parkway include, but are not limited to landscaping, street trees, sidewalks, public statuary, bus benches and bus shelters, street lights, traffic signals, fire hydrants, and City authorized signage.

        (h)    “Person” includes any individual, firm, copartnership, joint adventure, association, corporation, estate, trust, the state, any county, including Orange County, any city, including the City of Dana Point, and all departments thereof, district or other political subdivision thereof, or any other group or combination acting as a unit.

        (i)     “Public agency” means and includes the United States or any department or agency thereof, the State of California, or any department or agency thereof; county, municipal corporation or public district.

        (j)     “Public utility” means any utility holding a franchise issued by the City pursuant to the provisions of the Franchise Act 1937, Public Utilities Code Section 6201 et seq. providing for the operation, transmission, and distribution of electricity, gas, oil products, or water.

        (k)    “Right-of-way” means a strip of land for which the City holds an easement or the City owns in fee on which a highway is built or is proposed to be built, or on which a public facility is built or is proposed to be built, including but not limited to parks, parkway, sidewalk, curb and gutter, structures and roadway.

        (l)     “Director” means the Director of Public Works and Engineering Services of the City of Dana Point or his/her authorized designee.

        (m)   “Roadway” means that portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel.

        (n)    “Sidewalk” means any surface provided for the exclusive use of pedestrians. (Added by Ord. 98-04, 6/23/98)

 

14.01.020 Permits Required.
        It shall be unlawful for any person to lay, construct or repair any curb, sidewalk, gutter, driveway, roadway surface, retaining wall, storm drain or culvert in, over, along, across or through any right-of-way, without first obtaining a permit therefor from the Director as herein provided. (Added by Ord. 98-04, 6/23/98)

 

14.01.025 Excavation, Fills, Obstructions Upon or Injury to Highway.
        It shall be unlawful for any person to dig up, plow up, remove or break the earth, soil, stone, pavement or other surface of, or otherwise injure any highway or make or cause to be made any excavation, or construct, place upon, maintain or leave any material or any obstruction or impediment to travel in or upon a highway, or install or maintain or cause to be installed or maintained any wall, planter, tank, pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel or any other structure or any other installation of any nature across, upon, in or under any high-

way without first obtaining a permit therefore from the Director as herein provided. (Added by Ord. 99-01, 1/12/99)

 

14.01.030 Emergency Permits.
        Nothing in this Article prohibits any person from making such excavation as may be necessary and reasonable for the preservation of life or property when such necessity arises during such hours as the City Offices are closed, if the person making such excavation obtains a permit therefor within one day after the Offices of the Director are first opened subsequent to the making of such excavation. (Added by Ord. 98-04, 6/23/98)

 

14.01.040 No Permit Issuance Fee.
        No permit issuance fee shall be required of any public agency entitled to exemption therefrom pursuant to Section 6103 of the Government Code of the State of California. (Added by Ord. 98-04, 6/23/98)

 

14.01.050 Holding City Harmless.
        On each application the applicant shall agree to indemnify, protect, defend and hold harmless the City and each of its officers, agents, employees and contract employees against all liabilities, claims, demands, judgments or causes of action, including related expenses, attorney’s fees and costs for any accident of loss or damage to persons or property which may in any manner or form arise in consequence of the issuance of this permit or any work performed in consequence thereof granted pursuant to the application.

        If the applicant is a contractor licensed by the State of California, the contractor shall maintain in full force and effect during the term of the permit and agrees to endorse general and umbrella liability coverage required herein to include the City as additional insured under the insurance coverage required here using standard ISO endorsement number CG 20 10 attached to an ISO-CGL policy with an edition date of 1991 or earlier and which does not limit the scope of coverage for the additional insured to vicarious liability or to the additional insured’s supervision of a given project and which allows coverage to apply to the additional insured to the full extent provided by the policy. In no event will the contractor use an additional insured endorsement with an edition date of 1993 or later. The contractor also agrees to require all contractors, subcontractors and anyone else involved in any way with the project contemplated by this agreement to do likewise.

        If the applicant is a contractor licensed by the State of California, the contractor shall maintain in full force and effect during the term of the permit and agrees to endorse general and umbrella liability coverage required herein to include the City as additional insured under the insurance coverage required here using standard ISO endorsement number CG 20 10 attached to an ISO-CGL policy with an edition date of 1991 or earlier and which does not limit the scope of coverage for the additional insured to vicarious liability or to the additional insured’s supervision of a given project and which allows coverage to apply to the additional insured to the full extent provided by the policy. In no event will the contractor use an additional insured endorsement with an edition date of 1993 or later. The contractor also agrees to require all contractors, subcontractors and anyone else involved in any way with the project contemplated by this agreement to do likewise.

 

 

 

The liability insurance coverage values shall be:

 

Insurance Coverage Requirement

Limit Requirements

 

 

Comprehensive General Liability

$1,000,000.00

Workers Compensation and Employer’s Liability

1,000,000.00

Comprehensive Automobile Liability

1,000,000.00

 

        A combined single limit policy with aggregate limits in the amount of two million dollars ($2,000,000) will be considered equivalent to the required minimum limits.

 

        If the applicant is the owner of property that is the subject of the proposed work, the owner shall agree to endorse general and umbrella liability coverage required herein to include the City as additional insured under the owners homeowners insurance coverage. The liability insurance coverage value shall be:

 

Comprehensive Personal Liability:

$500,000.00

(Added by Ord. 98-04, 6/23/98)

 

14.01.060 Application.
        An applicant for a permit shall complete a City provided permit application form and shall state the following:

        (a)    The location, nature, and extent of the work to be performed;

        (b)    The material to be used;

        (c)    The name and address of the applicant;

        (d)    The time during which it is estimated that the work will exist;

        (e)    That the applicant agrees that if any work placed under authority for which the permit is issued which shall at any time in the future interfere with the use, repair, improvement, widening or change of grade of the highway, the applicant or his successors or assigns, within ten (10) days after the receipt of a written notice from the Director to do so, will at his own expense either remove such work, or, subject to the approval of the Director, relocate the work to a site which may be designated by the Director; and

        (f)    Such other information, including plans and specifications as the Director may require. (Added by Ord. 98-04, 6/23/98)

 

14.01.070 Director May Require Application Changes.
        The Director may require such changes in the application respecting the location, dimension, methods or manner of construction, installation or repair as may reasonably be necessary for the protection of the highway, the prevention of undue interference with traffic or to assure the health, safety and welfare of persons using the highway and persons using or occupying nearby properties. (Added by Ord. 98-04, 6/23/98)

 

14.01.080 Proof of Right to Use Highway.
        If the applicant is other than the owner of the underlying fee, each such applicant for a permit shall submit to the Director satisfactory proof of the applicant’s right to use the highway for the purposes set forth in the application. (Added by Ord. 98-04, 6/23/98)

 

14.01.090 Fees.
        An applicant for a permit to construct any work shall pay fees for processing, engineering, and observation as established by Resolution of the City Council. (Added by Ord. 98-04, 6/23/98)

 

14.01.100 Public Agencies and Public Utilities May Post Deposit for Permit Fees.
        The United States, this State, Orange County, any municipal corporation, school district, water district, sewer district, other public agency, or public utility may file a deposit of a minimum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) in lieu of paying a permit fee at the time of permit issuance. The amount of permit fee will be deducted from the amount of deposit on file. Whenever the deposit amount drops below two hundred dollars ($200.00) the public agency shall post additional funds such that the initial deposit of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) is maintained. (Added by Ord. 98-04, 6/23/98)

 

14.01.110 Refunds.
        (a)    Permit Effective. The engineering and observation costs provided for in Section 14.01.090 shall be presumed to be the actual cost. A refund thereof shall not be made to any applicant unless:

        (1)    The observation and/or engineering fee was erroneously collected, in which case the entire amount may be returned; or

        (2)    Unless the proposed work is not constructed or installed, in which event the applicant may apply for a refund of eighty-five percent (85%) of the observation fee collected.

        The balance shall be kept by the City for processing the refund application or for any observation which may be made to ensure that no work has begun. Nothing in this Section shall be construed as authorizing the repayment of any issuance or engineering fee collected.

        (b)    An applicant who is entitled to a refund as identified above shall file a request in writing along with the original fee receipts and applications issued by the City. The Director shall process the refund through the normal process for issuance of checks by the City. Only the original payee is entitled to a return of fees. (Added by Ord. 98-04, 6/23/98)

 

14.01.120 Plans May Be Required.
        If in the opinion of the Director, the work proposed to be done requires the making of plans or the setting of survey stakes, or both, the Director may require the application to be accompanied by the necessary plans, which plans shall be prepared, signed and sealed by a registered civil engineer or traffic engineer licensed in the State of California. (Added by Ord. 98-04, 6/23/98; amended by Ord. 03-13, 8/27/03)

 

14.01.130 Issuance of Permits.
        If the applicant complies with the provisions of this Chapter, with any conditions which the Director determines are needed to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public, and all applicable provisions of all other ordinances and statutes, the Director shall issue to the applicant a written permit to perform the work set forth in the application.

        The applicant, or his or her representative, shall keep a copy of the permit at the site of the work and it shall be shown on demand, to any authorized representative of the City or any law enforcement officer. Any permit issued by the Director shall authorize work to be performed only as to such portion of the highway over which the City has jurisdiction. The permit once issued shall be nontransferable. The Director may, at any time until completion of the work authorized by the permit, prescribe additional conditions as he or she may deem reasonably necessary for the protection of the highway or for the prevention of undue interference with traffic or to assure the health, safety and welfare of persons using the highway and persons using or occupying nearby property. (Added by Ord. 98-04, 6/23/98)

 

14.01.140 Permitted Work Hours.
        (a)    Local, Residential, or Collector Streets with a Traffic Volume of Less than Five Thousand (5,000) Vehicles per Day. Work shall not begin before 7:00 a.m. or continue after 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, excluding City designated holidays.

        (b)    Local, Residential, or Collector Streets with a Traffic Volume Greater than Five Thousand (5,000) Vehicles per Day. Work shall not begin before 8:30 a.m. or continue after 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, excluding City designated holidays.

        (c)    Arterial Streets. Work shall not begin before 8:30 a.m. or continue after 3:30 p.m., Monday through Friday, excluding City designated holidays. (Added by Ord. 98-04, 6/23/98; amended by Ord. 06-03, 6/14/06; Ord. 18-06, 9/4/18)

 

14.01.150 Sandbags Required on Worksite.
        If permittee is working in or adjacent to a catch basin, open drainage channel, or other similar drainage facility, sandbags shall be available on-site to protect the drainage facility from construction debris and to maintain the drainage system through the construction zone. Permittee shall also adhere to the requirements of Chapter 15.10 of the Dana Point Municipal Code (DPMC). (Added by Ord. 98-04, 6/23/98)

 

14.01.160 One Hundred Eighty Days to Commence Work.
        Every permittee shall commence the proposed work within one hundred eighty (180) days after the issuance of the permit and thereafter prosecute the work to completion in a diligent and workmanlike manner. The Director may approve, at the permittee’s request, an extension of one hundred eighty (180) days or less to commence the proposed work if needed by the permittee. (Added by Ord. 98-04, 6/23/98; amended by Ord. 18-06, 9/4/18)

 

14.01.170 Permit Cancellation.
        The Director may cancel the permit if the work authorized therein is not commenced within one hundred eighty (180) days of the issuance of the permit and is not thereafter, in the opinion of the Director, diligently prosecuted to completion. A permit once canceled may be renewed with the payment of a fee equal to twenty-five percent (25%) of the observation fee originally collected if:

        (a)    No refund has been granted per Section 14.01.110; and

        (b)    One hundred eighty (180) days has not elapsed since the original permit was canceled. (Added by Ord. 98-04, 6/23/98; amended by Ord. 18-06, 9/4/18)

 

14.01.180 Relocation of Plants and Structures.
        If so required by the Director the permittee shall make proper arrangements for, and bear the cost of, relocating any structure, public utility, tree or shrub, where such relocation is made necessary by the proposed work for which a permit is issued. (Added by Ord. 98-04, 6/23/98)

 

14.01.190 Lines, Grades, Types of Material Specified.
        Before a permittee performs any work covered by this Chapter, he or she shall determine the elevations and alignments for proposed or existing facilities. Where the work proposed to be done consists of or includes the laying or constructing of a culvert in or upon a highway, the Director may require in any permit issued therefor the size, the type of material and the grade of the culvert. (Added by Ord. 98-04, 6/23/98)

 

14.01.200 City Standards for Work.
        The permittee shall perform all work in accordance with the plans, if plans are made, and specifications referred to in the permit, and to the satisfaction of and under the supervision of the Director. In addition, all work to be performed in, upon, or across highways shall be in accordance with and conform to City standards established by Section 14.01.500 of this Code.

        The Director may waive observation if he or she believes such observation is not necessary for the best interests of the City. (Added by Ord. 98-04, 6/23/98)

 

14.01.210 Notice Prior to Commencement of Work.
        Not less than forty-eight (48) hours prior to the commencement of any work covered by this Chapter, the permittee shall notify the Director of the intent to commence work and arrange for review of the work by the observer therefor. In such notification he or she shall specify the day and hour when, and the location at which, the work will be commenced. Before permittee proceeds with any excavation, permittee shall obtain a Digalert Identification Number from Underground Service Alert. The identification number shall be communicated to the observer when a request for observation is made. (Added by Ord. 98-04, 6/23/98)

 

14.01.220 Safety and Warning Devices Required.
        A permittee shall place and maintain adequate warning signs, lights, and devices throughout the length of the work and at each end of the project until the work is completed to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works or City Engineer, conforming to the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways, Latest Edition, including all applicable State of California Supplements, and one of the latest versions of the following publications:

        (a)    Work Area Protection and Traffic Control Manual, Latest Edition; or

        (b)    Work Area Traffic Control Handbook (WATCH), Latest Edition; or

        (c)    Manual of Traffic Controls for Construction and Maintenance Work Zones, Latest Edition, issued by the State of California, Department of Transportation; or

        (d)    Manual on Uniform of Traffic Control Devices, Latest Edition, issued by the U.S. Department of Transportation and Federal Highway Administration.

        The permittee shall take such other precautions as may be necessary for the protection of the traveling public. The Director of Public Works or City Engineer may, as a condition of the issuance of a permit, specify such additional signs or warning devices or measures to be used by the permittee, but the failure of the Director of Public Works or City Engineer to so specify the signs, devices, or measures shall not relieve the permittee of his or her obligation hereunder. All proposed traffic control devices used for construction activities in any public right-of-way shall be approved by the Director of Public Works or City Engineer prior to implementation. At the discretion of the Director of Public Works or City Engineer, a permittee may be required to generate traffic control plans signed by a licensed traffic or civil engineer prior to work being allowed. (Added by Ord. 98-04, 6/23/98; amended by Ord. 03-13, 8/27/03; Ord. 06-14, 12/13/06)

 

14.01.230 Notice Upon Completion of Work.
        Whenever any permittee has completed any work for which a permit has been granted, he or she shall so notify the Director. The notice shall include the permit number, date work commenced, date work was completed and the deviations from the approved plans or City standards which were necessitated during construction. The notice shall provide a telephone number where the applicant can be reached by the observer to arrange for a walk through and an acceptance of the work as complete. (Added by Ord. 98-04, 6/23/98)

 

14.01.240 Certificate of Acceptance.
        If the Director, by survey or by observation, or both, ascertains that the work has been completed according to the requirements of the permit issued thereto, and of all of the provisions of this Chapter, he or she shall sign, if requested so to do by the permittee, a copy of the permit signifying that the work is accepted as complete. (Added by Ord. 98-04, 6/23/98)

 

14.01.250 Removal of Material and Debris and Recycling.
        A permittee shall immediately remove all material and debris which is created by, or is incidental to the project for which a permit is issued by the Director. The material and debris shall be disposed of in accordance with State and County laws regulating the disposal of noncontaminated and contaminated wastes, and in accordance with Chapter 15.10. Recycling of certain materials including asphalt concrete, Portland cement concrete, aggregate base, cement block, sand base material and green waste is required. The above listed materials shall be disposed of at a recycling center accepting these materials. Records of disposal shall be furnished to the observer before a Certificate of Acceptance is issued. All costs associated with recycling of materials shall be the sole responsibility of the permittee. (Added by Ord. 98-04, 6/23/98)

 

14.01.260 Violation.
        Every person who performs any work covered by this Chapter in any amount greater than, or in any way different from, or contrary to the terms of any permit issued therefor is guilty of a misdemeanor when convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction. (Added by Ord. 98-04, 6/23/98)

 

Article 2. Highway Obstruction
14.01.270 Soil or Debris Obstruction.
        (a)    Unlawful to Create Hazard on Highway. It is unlawful for any person to place, track or otherwise deposit soil or debris of any sort in any manner on the paved or traveled surface of any roadway or sidewalk, which creates a threat to the health, safety and welfare to pedestrians or to traffic or to the general public thereon.

        (b)    Removal of Soil or Debris. It shall be the responsibility of a person who deposits soil or debris on a roadway or sidewalk to remove such material. The Director has the right to remove the soil or debris, and thereupon submit a statement of the cost of such removal to such person, his or her employer, employee or agent, and said person, employer, employee or agent shall pay such cost to the City.

        (c)    Action to Recover Cost. The City may bring action against said person, his or her employer, employee or agent, to recover the cost of such removal by the Director and for costs of suit.

        (d)    Injunction. The City may bring an action to enjoin any continued such placing, tracking, or otherwise depositing by such a person, his or her employer, employee or agent, and for cost of suit. (Added by Ord. 98-04, 6/23/98)

 

14.01.280 Oil Petroleum and Other Hazardous Materials.
        It is unlawful for any person to place, put, turn or deposit into or upon any public highway, street, or alley within the City of Dana Point, Orange County, California, any oil or liquid of petroleum content, or other hazardous materials as provided in Chapter 15.10 or to permit any such oil, liquid of petroleum content or other hazardous materials to escape from any property, owned or controlled by such person, so as to flow into or upon any such public highway, street or alley. (Added by Ord. 98-04, 6/23/98)

 

Article 3. Advertising on Parked Vehicles
14.01.300 Advertising on Vehicles Parked on City and State Highways—Purpose.
        The purpose of this Article is regulation of the use of vehicles parked on City and State highways for the primary purpose of advertising to promote traffic safety, to maximize the availability of City and State highways for parking in the business areas for use by the shopping public and to promote the aesthetic appearance of City and State highways and adjacent properties. (Added by Ord. 98-04, 6/23/98)

 

14.01.310 Definitions.
        As used in this Article:

        (a)    Unless the context otherwise requires, all terms shall have the meaning set forth in the California Vehicle Code.

        (b)    “Advertising signs” shall include, but not be limited to, any kind of display, printing, writing or banner for the primary purpose of advertising the sale, purchase, or promotion of a product, business or service. (Added by Ord. 98-04, 6/23/98)

 

14.01.320 Violation.
        No person shall park any vehicle on a City or State highway with any advertising sign painted on, affixed to or resting on the vehicle. (Added by Ord. 98-04, 6/23/98)

 

14.01.330 Exceptions.
        (a)    Vehicles displaying signs, decals, or other inscriptions mandated or expressly authorized by statute or other City ordinance, but only to the extent such signs, decals or other inscriptions are expressly authorized or mandated.

        (b)    Signs permanently affixed to commercial vehicles while engaged in the ordinary business for which they are registered or maintained, provided, however that a commercial vehicle parked on a City or state highway in the same space for more than four (4) hours shall be presumed not engaged in its ordinary business.

        (c)    Taxi cabs while engaged in the ordinary course of business.

        (d)    Vehicles owned by public agencies.

        (e)    Vehicles operated by entities subject to the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission. (Added by Ord. 98-04, 6/23/98)

 

14.01.340 Penalties.
        (a)    Any person violating this Article shall be guilty of an infraction when convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction.

        (b)    Any person violating this Article more than one time in a twelve (12) month period shall be guilty of a misdemeanor when convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction for the second and subsequent violations. (Added by Ord. 98-04, 6/23/98)

 

Article 4. Use of Public Right-of-Way for Business Purposes
14.01.350 Use of Public Right-of-Way for Permanent Commercial Outdoor Dining or for Temporary Special Events.
        The purpose of the following standards for permanent commercial outdoor dining or temporary special events is to establish operational standards for the use of public right-of-way which protects the health, safety and welfare of the public. For the purpose of these standards, commercial outdoor dining shall be permitted within the adjoining public right-of-way only after the Council has approved a permit to encroach. For the purpose of these standards temporary special events shall include parades, sidewalk sales, street fairs and any other activity open to the public and may be permitted within the public right-of-way with the approval of a special event permit by the Director of Community Development of the City of Dana Point or at his discretion with the approval of the City of Dana Point Planning Commission. (Added by Ord. 98-04, 6/23/98)

 

14.01.360 Standards for Permanent Commercial Outdoor Dining.
        (a)    No encroachment permit shall be issued by the Director for permanent commercial outdoor dining in the public right-of-way unless the Council has approved a permit to encroach.

        (b)    An applicant requesting permanent commercial outdoor dining shall first apply for the appropriate permits from the Community Development Department. The Director of Community Development may require the following: detailed plans and specifications for each proposed use, showing the layout of the dining facilities. Plans for the proposed use area shall be prepared by a Registered Civil Engineer or a Licensed Architect authorized by state law to provide such services.

        (c)    A nonrefundable annual fee shall be established by resolution of the City Council for the use of public right-of-way for outdoor dining. The permit fee shall be paid with the application to the Community Development Department for the initial approval or any applicant requested amendment of the encroachment permit. The fee for the use of public right-of-way shall be paid annually to provide for the cost of inspecting and administration of the permit.

        (d)    The encroachment permit for outdoor dining, once approved by the City Council, shall remain in affect until the applicant has stopped use of the right-of-way for sixty (60) days or until the City Council or owner request consideration of an amendment to the conditions of the permit. The permit shall be renewed annually, on the anniversary date of the encroachment permit. City shall give thirty (30) day notice of expiration of the permit. Failure of the City to give notice will not remove permittee’s obligation to renew the permit. Failure to renew the permit shall cause the encroachment permit to become null and void.

        (e)    Whenever a business, for which a permit has been issued, is sold or title transferred, a new encroachment permit shall be obtained by the new owner. No portion of a fee paid by the previous owner is refundable or transferable. The new owner shall pay fees as set forth herein.

        (f)    The permit requirements set forth in this Article are in addition to, and not in lieu of any requirements of this Code, including but not limited to franchise agreements and licenses. Applicants for permit under this Article shall comply with any and all requirements of this Code in addition to the requirements set forth herein this Article. (Added by Ord. 98-04, 6/23/98)

 

14.01.370 Standards for Special Event Activity.
        (a)    No encroachment permit shall be issued by the Director for a special event in the public right-of-way unless the Director of Community Development or the Dana Point Planning Commission has approved a permit for said activity.

        (b)    An applicant requesting a special event permit shall first apply for the appropriate permit from the Community Development Department. The Director of Community Development may require but is not limited to the following:

        (1)    Completion of a special activity permit application;

        (2)    Payment of an application fee and refundable deposit;

        (3)    A detailed plan for the proposed activity;

        (4)    Proof of liability insurance listing the City of Dana Point as an additional insured for a minimum of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00);

        (5)    A letter of authorization from the property owner(s) if different than the applicant. (Added by Ord. 98-04, 6/23/98)

 

Article 5. Bus Passenger Shelters and Benches
14.01.380 Permit Required.
        No person shall erect, place, construct or maintain a bus shelter or a bus passenger bench on any highway unless a fully executed franchise agreement has been approved by the City Council and an encroachment permit has been obtained from the Director under such terms and restrictions as are herein set forth. (Added by Ord. 98-04, 6/23/98)

 

14.01.390 Definitions.
        As used in this Article:

        (a)    “Bus shelter” or “shelter” means a covered waiting area located on a highway, with or without a bench, that provides protection from sun, wind, and rain for passersby or persons awaiting transportation.

        (b)    “Bus bench” or “bench” means a seat located on a highway for the comfort and convenience and accommodation of passersby or persons awaiting transportation.

        (c)    “Encroachment permit” means the prescribed written approval by the Director for placement of shelters and benches on a highway.

        (d)    “Master encroachment permit” means a permit approved by the City Council for setting forth all requirements and conditions for placement of shelters and/or benches on a highway for an applicant who desires to place multiple shelters and benches throughout the City.

        (e)    “Permit rider” means the form used to identify each shelter or bench location subject to conditions of a master encroachment permit. (Added by Ord. 98-04, 6/23/98)

 

14.01.400 Encroachment Permit Application.
        (a)    No encroachment permit shall be issued except upon written application filed with and upon a form prescribed by the Director showing the proposed location of each shelter and bench and such other provisions, conditions and information as the Director may require.

        (b)    Detailed plans and specifications for each shelter type and each bench type meeting the approval of the Director shall be supplied by the applicant. Shelter plans and structures shall be prepared by a Registered Engineer or Licensed Architect authorized by State Law to design such structures.

        (c)    A master encroachment permit must be obtained by the owner or authorized agent of the shelters or benches prior to applications for a permit rider for each proposed shelter and bench placed on a highway. A nonrefundable annual fee shall be established by resolution of the City Council. The master encroachment permit fee shall be paid with the application for the initial approval or any applicant-requested amendment of the master encroachment permit and the permit rider fee for bus benches shall be paid annually to provide for the cost of inspecting and administration of the master permit.

        (d)    The master encroachment permit for shelters and benches shall, once approved by the City Council, remain in affect until the owner removes all shelters and benches from the highway or until the City Council or owner request consideration of an amendment to the conditions of the master permit. The permit rider shall be renewed annually, on the anniversary date of the master encroachment permit. Failure to renew the permit rider shall cause the master encroachment permit to become null and void. Permits shall not be issued for shelters and benches with advertising signage.

        (e)    Whenever a shelter or a bench, for which a master encroachment permit and permit rider have been issued is sold or title transferred, a new master encroachment permit and permit rider shall be obtained by the new owner. No portion of a fee paid by the previous owner is refundable or transferable. The new owner shall pay fees as set forth herein.

        (f)    The permit requirements set forth in this Article are in addition to, and not in lieu of any requirements of this Code, including but not limited to franchise agreements and licenses. Applicants for a permit under this Article shall comply with any and all requirements of this Code in addition to the requirements set forth herein this Article. (Added by Ord. 98-04, 6/23/98)

 

14.01.410 Permit; Denial, Cancellation, or Revocation.
        (a)    The Director shall deny any application for a shelter and/or bench permit if he finds that the location of the proposed shelter and/or bench would tend to obstruct passage along the highway or to create a traffic hazard, impair sight distance or would otherwise be detrimental to the public safety, welfare or convenience.

        (b)    The Director or City Council may revoke the master encroachment permit or permit rider or deny renewal of the permit rider for reasons in the best interest of the City, for violation of any of the provisions of this Article, for any fraud, or misrepresentation in the application, or for any reason which would have been grounds for denial of the application.

        (c)    The application shall be canceled and denied if the applicant fails to deposit the permit fee and accept the permit conditions within ten (10) days after notice of approval of the application by the City Council.

        (d)    The permit rider shall automatically become null and void if the permittee fails to install the permitted shelters and benches within sixty (60) days from the issuance of the permit. Each shelter shall provide adequate self-contained illumination, as determined by the Director, within sixty (60) days of the installation or such permit shall be void. In such case the permit fee is not refundable. Each shelter shall have a trash container. The permittee shall be responsible for removal of trash from the trash container.

        (e)    The master encroachment permit and permit rider shall automatically become null and void upon failure of the applicant to maintain surety and current certificate for insurance with the City. (Added by Ord. 98-04, 6/23/98)

 

14.01.420 Location, Type, Number, and Priorities for Placement of Shelters and Benches.
        (a)    Shelter and/or benches shall be located only at approved public transportation stops, including school bus stops, unless specifically authorized by the City Council. The combination of shelters/benches at any location shall not exceed two unless approved by the City Council based on volume of bus boardings at a specific location as documented by the General Manager of the Orange County Transportation Authority.

        (b)    Shelters and/or benches shall be installed in accordance with design criteria established by the City Council and only at locations where curb separates the roadway from the parkway. Shelters and/or benches shall be set back from the face of curb a distance not less than thirty-two (32) inches and such that an unobstructed path of travel of four (4) feet will be provided. Where shelters are provided a wheelchair space thirty-two by forty-eight (32x48) inches shall be provided.

        (c)    Shelter and/or bench permits shall be issued on a first come, first serve basis and shall be non-exclusive for all locations.

        (d)    Where placement of both shelter and a bench at a location cannot be accommodated because of limited space or any other reasons, the shelter shall take precedent over a bench unless determined otherwise by the Director. (Added by Ord. 98-04, 6/23/98)

 

14.01.430 Observation and Maintenance.
        It shall be the duty of each permittee to maintain each shelter and bench in a safe and presentable condition at all times. A program of regular maintenance shall be submitted and approved by the Director as a component of each master encroachment permit to ensure that shelters and benches are structurally sound, in a good state of repair, that the structure and immediate environs are free from the accumulation of litter and debris, and that the shelters and benches are being operated in accordance with the master encroachment permit and permit rider. Damaged or unsafe and unsightly shelters or benches, if not repaired or maintained in a reasonable condition shall be removed by the Director or his designee at permittee’s expense. (Added by Ord. 98-04, 6/23/98)

 

14.01.440 Removal and Impounding of Shelter and Benches.
        Upon the expiration or revocation of any master encroachment permit or permit rider, the permittee shall forthwith remove such shelter or bench from the highway. The Director may give the permittee ten (10) days notice to remove the shelter and/or bench and upon his failure to do so may remove and store the shelter or bench pending the recovery thereof by the permittee, or its sale, destruction, or other disposition, as hereinafter provided. The Director shall store the shelter or bench for at least thirty (30) days after its removal during which time the permittee may recover the shelter or bench by paying the City for the cost of such removal and storage. Said costs shall not exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00) a month per shelter and one hundred dollars ($100.00) a month per bench for removal and storage. At the expiration of said thirty (30) day period, the Director may salvage such structure for public use on public property, or he may have it destroyed. All of the foregoing shall be at the sole risk of the permittee and shall be in addition to any other remedy which the City may have by law. (Added by Ord. 98-04, 6/23/98)

 

14.01.450 Surety and Liability Insurance.
        (a)    No permit shall be issued pursuant to this Article unless the applicant shall post and maintain with the City surety and a policy of public liability insurance approved by the City Attorney and continued as hereinafter provided.

        (b)    The liability policy shall be conditioned that the permittee will indemnify and save the City of Dana Point, its officers, employees and contract employees, from any and all loss, cost, damages, expenses or liability which may result from or arise out of the granting of the permit, or the installation or maintenance of the shelter and/or bench for which the permit is issued, and that the permittee will pay any and all loss or damage that may be sustained by any person as a result of, or which may be caused by or arise out of such installation or maintenance. The policy of insurance shall be maintained in its original form by the permittee at his expense, at all times during the period for which the permit is in effect. In the event two (2) or more permits are issued to one permittee, one such policy of insurance may be furnished to cover two (2) or more shelters and/or benches and each shall be of such type that its coverage shall be automatically restored from and alter the time of the reporting of any accident from which liability may thereafter accrue.

        (c)    Such policy shall provide a minimum of thirty (30) days’ written advanced notice of cancellation to the Director with no attached disclaimer.

        (d)    The limit of liability upon a policy of insurance, posted pursuant to the requirements of the section, shall in no case be less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00), combined single limit for bodily injury to or death of one person or more and property damage.

        (e)    Surety.

        (1)    Shelters. The applicant shall provide the City with a cash deposit, surety, bond or letter of credit based on the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per shelter. Should the shelter not be removed within a time specified, or if immediate removal for public safety is required by the City, the surety shall reimburse the City for any costs expended to remove, relocate, adjust or salvage said shelter.

        (2)    Benches. The applicant shall provide the City with a cash deposit, surety bond, or a letter of credit based on the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per bench. Should the bench not be removed within a time specified, or if immediate removal for public safety is required by the City, the surety shall reimburse the City for any costs expended to remove, relocate, adjust, or salvage said bench. (Added by Ord. 98-04, 6/23/98)

 

14.01.460 Interference with Shelters and Benches.
        (a)    It shall be unlawful for any person, with the exception of an authorized City official, or the permittee or his agent, to tamper with or move any shelter or bench lawfully placed upon a highway pursuant to the provisions of this Article.

        (b)    It shall be unlawful for any person to injure, deface, or commit acts of vandalism upon any shelter or bench lawfully placed upon a highway pursuant to the provisions of this Article. (Added by Ord. 98-04, 6/23/98)

 

14.01.470 Enforcement.
        The Director shall enforce the provisions of this Article. (Added by Ord. 98-04, 6/23/98)

 

14.01.480 Appeal.
        Any determination made by the Director may be appealed to the City Council by the filing of a written request with the City Manager and the payment of the fee established by City Council resolution for filing appeals. The determination of the City Council shall be final for all such appeals. (Added by Ord. 98-04, 6/23/98)

 

Article 6. Street Name Changes
14.01.490 Naming or Change of Name; Procedure.
        Whenever the City Council finds that a name should be adopted or that the existing name of any street should be changed, the Council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed name for, or the change of name of, such street. In addition to any other noticing requirements under this Code, notice of such hearing shall be given by posting notice in at least three (3) public places along the street or streets proposed to be affected, such posting to be completed at least ten (10) days before the date set for the hearing. At the time set for the hearing or at any time to which the hearing may be continued the Council shall hear and consider proposals to adopt a name for, or change the name of, the street mentioned in the notice and objections to such proposal. At or after the conclusion of the hearing the City Council may adopt, by resolution, a name for, or change the name of, such street. Thereafter, such street shall be known by the name so designated. Upon adoption of such resolution, the City Clerk shall promptly forward a copy of the resolution providing for such new name or change of name to the Orange County Board of Supervisors. The Director shall notify all public utilities, the Post Office, all emergency services, the County Tax Collector and any other interested person or special district of such name change prior to the change becoming effective by the placement of the new street name signs. (Added by Ord. 98-04, 6/23/98)

 

Article 7. City Streets: Standard Plans and Specifications
14.01.500 Adoption of Plans and Specifications.
        The hereinafter listed documents, except such portions that are hereafter deleted, modified or amended by the City of Dana Point, are hereby adopted as the standard plans and specifications for the construction, improvement and repair of highways, bridges, flood control and recreation facilities:

        (a)    “Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction,” latest edition, unless otherwise specified by the City Engineer or Director of Public Works, except Section 307, as published by Building News, Incorporated;

        (b)    The following portions of “Standard Specifications, Department of Transportation, State of California,” dated May, 2006, or latest edition: Signals, Lighting and Electrical Systems, Section 86, Pavement Markings, Section 85, Bridges, Sections 19, 49 through 52, 55, 57, 58, 67, 75, 83, 89, 90 and 95;

        (c)    The portion of the “Standard Plans, Department of Transportation, State of California,” dated May, 2006, or latest edition, covering signs, signals and lighting and that portion covering bridges;

        (d)    “County of Orange Standard Plans,” County of Orange Public Works Department, dated April, 2013, or latest edition, covering street, storm drain, signage and other improvements. (Added by Ord. 98-04, 6/23/98; amended by Ord. 03-13, 8/27/03; Ord. 06-14, 12/13/06; Ord. 18-06, 9/4/18)

 

14.01.510 Public Works Plans and Regulations.
        Standard plans for the construction, improvement, and maintenance of highways, bridges, flood control, landscaping, grading, small drainage structures, irrigation and recreational facilities and for the protection, supervision, management, control or use of such facilities, may from time to time, be submitted by the Director and shall, upon approval and adoption by Resolution of the City Council, be enforced by him or her, and complied with and adhered to, except as provided by Section 14.01.520, by developers, builders, contractors, subcontractors, agents and all others engaged in such construction, improvement or maintenance. Copies of said standard plans shall be available for review at the office of the Director. (Added by Ord. 98-04, 6/23/98)

 

14.01.520 Modifications and Deviation from Plans.
        In any case where strict adherence to the Standard Plans and Specifications enumerated in Sections 14.01.500 and 14.01.510 would be impractical or unreasonable, the Director or designee may grant such modification or deviation therefrom as will, in accordance with good engineering practice and the public health and safety, conform to a plan that will, under the circumstances in such case, be practical and reasonable. (Added by Ord. 98-04, 6/23/98)

 

14.01.530 Construction of Decorative Pavement Within Public Right-of-Way.
        (a)    The Director may issue encroachment permits for the replacement or installation of decorative pavements within public right-of-way. The applicant shall include as information to support a request for decorative pavements the following information:

        (1)    A colored rendering of the proposed installation in plan and perspective views accurately reflecting the proposed colors and patterns desired;

        (2)    Full construction details showing how the proposed decorative paving will be constructed and, if the surface will be uneven, details of the contour of the finished surface of the decorative pavement; and

        (3)    A financial analysis of the life cycle maintenance costs of the proposed decorative pavement.

        (b)    The Director may require the applicant to enter into a maintenance agreement with the City. Said agreement shall be recorded as a covenant against the property and shall apply to all successors in interest to the property. The agreement shall include provisions for the indemnification of the City, as established in Section 14.01.050 of this Chapter and for removal of the decorative pavement and the restoration of the street surface to match the surrounding surface before the agreement can be terminated by either party. If an agreement is not determined to be needed, the Director shall still require the applicant to produce indemnification pursuant to Section 14.01.050 of the Dana Point Municipal Code. (Added by Ord. 98-04, 6/23/98; amended by Ord. 05-03, 6/22/05)

 

14.01.540 Specifications for Resurfacing.
        (a)    Resurfacing After Refilling and Compaction. After completion of refilling and compaction of the backfill material in the excavation, as specified in Section 14.01.590 of this Chapter and the removal of the obstruction, the permittee shall promptly replace, with temporary or permanent patching material, or repair any portion of the highway surface removed or damaged by the excavation, obstruction, and construction operations, as specified elsewhere herein, to the satisfaction of the Director.

        (b)    Permanent Paving. Where the pavement surface has been removed, the permittee shall replace it with a minimum section of ten (10) inches of asphalt concrete (AC) over compacted subgrade. The ten (10) inch section includes a base section and an overlay section as described in Subsection (b)(1) or (2), or as otherwise approved by the Director. The material utilized for permanent paving shall be one of the following depending on the AC pavement that exists in the area of work, subject to the discretion of the Director and/or City Engineer, and shall be per the following:

        (1)    Conventional Asphalt Concrete Pavement. The AC pavement base course shall be constructed using asphalt concrete pavement Type III-B3-PG 70-10 or equivalent designation. Upon completion of the AC pavement base course, a minimum two (2) inch AC pavement overlay course shall be constructed using asphalt concrete pavement Type III-C3-PG 70-10 or equivalent designation. All asphalt concrete pavement shall be placed according to applicable sections of the Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction, edition per Section 14.01.500.

        (2)    Asphalt Rubberized Hot Mix (ARHM). The AC pavement base course shall be constructed using asphalt concrete pavement Type III-B3-PG 70-10 or equivalent designation. Upon completion of the AC pavement base course, a minimum two (2) inch AC pavement overlay course shall be constructed using rubberized asphalt concrete pavement Type ARHM-GG-C with PG64-16 asphalt rubber binder or equivalent designation. All asphalt concrete pavement shall be placed according to applicable sections of the Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction, edition per Section 14.01.500.

        The limits of asphalt repairs shall be the following:

        (A)   Case A, Perpendicular Street Cut in Parking Lane (Nontravel Lane). If the street cut is perpendicular to the street and is not in a travel lane, the repair shall be one (1) foot wider each side than the street cut subject to the approval of the City Engineer. The AC pavement overlay portion of the repair shall be extended to the curb or gutter edge. Also, if asphalt in the adjacent area of the repair shows stress or fails due to applicant’s work, the applicant shall repair those areas in conjunction with the work. If the distance between perpendicular trenches is less than ten (10) feet from the inside edge of the trenches, the overlay portion of the repair shall be extended to encompass the area between trenches.

        (B)   Case B, Parallel Street Cut in Parking Lane (Nontravel Lane). If the street cut is parallel to the street and is not in a travel lane, the repair shall be one (1) foot wider each side than the street cut subject to the approval of the City Engineer. The AC pavement overlay portion of the repair shall be extended one (1) foot from the street side of the repair to the curb or gutter edge. Also, if asphalt in the adjacent area of the repair shows stress or fails due to applicant’s work, the applicant shall repair those areas in conjunction with the work.

        (C)   Case C, Perpendicular Street Cut in Travel Lane. If the street cut is perpendicular to the street and is in a travel lane, the repair shall be one (1) foot wider each side than the street cut subject to the approval of the City Engineer. The AC pavement overlay portion of the repair shall be extended to the edge of the travel lane on both sides subject to the approval of the City Engineer. If the edge of the street cut or travel lane is within five (5) feet of the curb or gutter, then the AC pavement overlay portion of the repair shall be extended to the gutter or curb edge. Also, if asphalt in the adjacent area of the repair shows stress or fails due to applicant’s work, the applicant shall repair those areas in conjunction with the work. If the distance between perpendicular trenches is less than ten (10) feet from the inside edge of the trenches, the overlay portion of the repair shall be extended to encompass the area between trenches.

        (D)   Case D, Parallel Street Cut in Travel Lane. If the street cut is parallel to the street and is in a travel lane, the repair shall be one (1) foot wider each side than the street cut subject to the approval of the City Engineer. The AC pavement overlay portion of the repair shall be extended to the edge of the travel lane on both sides subject to the approval of the City Engineer. If the edge of the travel lane or street cut is within five (5) feet of the curb or gutter edge, then the AC pavement overlay portion of the repair shall be extended to the gutter or curb edge. Also, if asphalt in the adjacent area of the repair shows stress or fails due to applicant’s work, the applicant shall repair those areas in conjunction with the work.

        If street cuts occur in concrete sidewalks, cross gutters, or other concrete facilities, all repairs shall be per the Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction and be to the nearest joint in all directions.

        If street cuts occur in private streets, the applicant shall also secure approval from the homeowners’ association or other applicable party prior to commencement of the work to allow pavement requirements to be incorporated.

        The City Engineer may require an applicant to utilize tunneling techniques to install below grade infrastructure in cases where adverse impacts to the public are determined to be significant. Adverse impacts can be impacts to the integrity of the street, significant anticipated traffic congestion, impacts to other utilities, or impacts to existing improvements.

        (c)    Moratorium on Newly Paved Streets. The City does not allow street cuts on streets that have been newly paved or resurfaced for a period of five (5) years unless an emergency to public health and safety exists. If a street with a moratorium is cut for any reason, the required asphalt repairs will be per the City Engineer. In most cases, the street will need to be entirely resurfaced with a minimum two (2) inch overlay from curb to curb in the area of work. In streets where a moratorium exists, the City Engineer may allow tunneling as an alternative to street cuts as long as there is enough space outside the paved surface to accommodate the tunneling operation. Tunneling will not be allowed in a street where a moratorium exists if the asphalt concrete pavement surface will be impacted. All damage caused during the work shall be repaired in kind within five (5) working days from the completion of the work.

        (d)    The Director shall schedule utility coordination meetings on a semiannual basis with all utility companies serving Dana Point to coordinate capital improvement projects. (Added by Ord. 98-04, 6/23/98; amended by Ord. 05-06, 10/12/05; Ord. 18-06, 9/4/18)

 

14.01.550 Cost of Resurfacing.
        If, after the refilling of an excavation the permittee fails or refuses to resurface or repair that portion of the surface of the highway damaged by him or her, the Director shall do so and the permittee shall be charged with the cost thereof computed by the Director. (Added by Ord. 98-04, 6/23/98)

 

14.01.560 Cost of Further Repairs.
        If at any time subsequent to the repair of the surface of a highway damaged or destroyed by an excavation or obstruction in such highway, it becomes again necessary to repair such surface due to settlement or any other cause directly attributable to such excavation or obstruction, the permittee shall repair the roadway surface so damaged. If the permittee does not repair the damage within three (3) working days, the City shall repair the damage and the permittee shall pay to the City the cost of such additional repairs made by the Director. (Added by Ord. 98-04, 6/23/98)

 

14.01.570 Traffic to be Kept Open.
        (a)    Trenching for installation across any intersecting highway open to traffic shall be progressive. Not more than one-half of the width of the roadway shall be disturbed at one time and the remaining width shall be kept open to traffic by bridging or backfilling.

        (b)    More than one-half of the width of the roadway may be disturbed at one time only upon the prior authorization of the Director. (Added by Ord. 98-04, 6/23/98)

 

14.01.580 Location of Pipes and Conduits.
        The shallowest portion of any pipeline or other facility shall be installed not less than thirty (30) inches below the roadway surface unless otherwise authorized by the Director. The Director may establish zones within the right-of-way reserved for various utilities. The zones are intended to establish a consistent predictable zone in which the sewers, water lines, gas lines, electrical lines, telephone and cable lines will be run. If the Director establishes such zones, notice shall be distributed to all interested parties and any comments received shall be considered. If established, the Director reserves the right to allow variances from the designated zone where practical difficulty necessitates a different alignment. Director shall consider the regulations of the Public Utilities Commission in determining the depth of any pipeline or other facility. (Added by Ord. 98-04, 6/23/98)

 

14.01.590 Work Regulations.
        (a)    General Compaction Requirements. All backfill replaced in excavations within the road right-of-way shall be compacted until the relative density within three (3) feet of the roadway surface is not less than ninety percent (90%) and below three (3) feet is not less than the adjacent undisturbed soil as determined by the Relative Compaction Test specified in Section 6, of the State Standard Specifications.

        (b)    Compaction of Clayey Soils. Clayey materials shall be defined as a soil containing more than thirty percent (30%) of material which will pass a No. 200 mesh screen. Clayey material replaced as backfill shall not be pounded or jetted but shall be compacted, as specified under general compaction requirements by any other suitable method providing the material is first conditioned by wetting or drying to within two percent (2%) of optimum moisture content.

        In lieu of backfilling with clayey material, the permittee, at his option, may elect to furnish sandy or granular material, less than thirty percent (30%) of which will pass a No. 200 mesh screen in which case compaction may be obtained, as specified under general compaction requirements.

        (c)    Special Requirements for Tunneling Concrete or Lateral Excavations of Arterial Streets. When the work covered by a valid permit involves excavations under existing concrete structures, such as, but not limited to, cross gutters or curb and gutter, the permittee shall backfill such cavities with a one sack sand-cement slurry. Native material shall not be used due to the inability to achieve compaction. When the work covered by a valid permit involves an excavation perpendicular to the direction of vehicular travel on an arterial street, the trench shall be backfilled with a one sack sand-cement slurry. Native material shall not be used due to the obstruction which would be caused by equipment during the compaction of said perpendicular trench.

        (d)    Finishing and Cleanup. After the work has been completed, all debris and excess material from excavation and backfill operations shall be removed from the right-of-way and the roadway left in a neat and orderly condition. Cleanup methods shall be selected which will not cause the discharge of construction debris to the City storm drainage system.

        All roadside drainage ditches shall be restored to the original grades and the inlet and outlet ends along with the conduit between all culverts shall be left free and clear. If the surface of the drainage ditch is earth with grass bank protection, the contractor shall take such steps, including, but not limited to, reseeding, jute mesh, or fiberglass mesh to prevent, to the maximum extent practicable, bank erosion.

        All approaches to private driveways, and intersecting highways and streets shall be kept to traffic at all times except as authorized by the Director.

        Excess and nonsurfacing materials which adhere to roadway surfacing as a result of construction operations shall be removed by approved methods to the satisfaction of the Director.

        (e)    Type 5 Cement Required. Type 5 cement shall be used in all concrete used for private or public construction within public right-of-way. The Director may consider the use of other types of cement when the applicant submits a complete analysis of the soils at the proposed construction site which establish that the sulfur levels at that site do not warrant the use of sulfur resistive cement. (Added by Ord. 98-04, 6/23/98)

 

14.01.600 Repair and Reconstruction—Responsibility of the Abutting Property Owner.
        (a)    The City Council may, by resolution, require the owners of lots or portions of lots fronting on any portion of a public street or place when that street or place is improved or if and when the area between the property line of the adjacent property and the street line is maintained as a park or parking strip, to maintain any sidewalk in such condition that the sidewalk will not endanger persons or property and maintain it in a condition which will not interfere with the public convenience in the use of those works or areas, save and except as to those conditions created or maintained in, upon, along, or in connection with such sidewalk by any person other than the owner, under and by virtue of any permit or right granted to him or her by law or by the City authorities in charge thereof, and such person shall be under a like duty in relation thereto.

        (b)    When any portion of the sidewalk is out of repair or pending reconstruction and in condition to endanger person or property or in condition to interfere with the public convenience in the use of such sidewalk, the City Council, by resolution, may empower the Director to notify the owner or person in possession of the property fronting on that portion of such sidewalk so out of repair, to repair the sidewalk.

        (c)    Notice to repair may be given by delivering a written notice personally to the owner or to the person in possession of the property facing upon the sidewalk so out of repair, or by mailing a postal card, postage prepaid, to the person in possession of such property, or to the owner thereof at his or her last known address as the same appears on the last equalized assessment rolls of the City or to the name and address of the last person owning such property as shown in the records of the office of the clerk.

        (d)    The postal card shall contain a notice to repair the sidewalk so out of repair, and the Director shall, immediately upon the mailing of the notice, cause a copy thereof printed on a card of not less than eight (8) inches by ten (10) inches in size, to be posted in a conspicuous place on the property. In lieu of posting a copy of the mailed notice on the property as provided in this Section, the Director may, not less than seven (7) days nor more than ten (10) days after the mailing of the first postal card notice, mail an additional postal card, postage prepaid, marked “Second Notice,” to the person to whom the first postal card notice was addressed. The second notice shall otherwise contain the material required by this Section, but shall not extend the time for commencing repairs specified in this Section.

        (e)    The notice shall particularly specify what work is required to be done, and how it is to be done, and what materials shall be used in the repair and shall further specify that if the repair is not commenced within two (2) weeks after notice is given and diligently and without interruption prosecuted to completion, the Director shall make such repair, and report the cost of the same to the City Council. The City Council may assess the cost against the parcel of property fronting the sidewalk as outlined in subsection (f).

        (f)    If the repair is not commenced and prosecuted to completion with due diligence, as required by the notice, the Director shall forthwith repair the sidewalk and the cost thereof may be assessed by the City Council against the parcel of property fronting upon the sidewalk upon which such repair was made, and such cost so assessed, if not paid within five (5) days after its confirmation by the City Council, shall constitute a special assessment against that parcel of property, and shall be a lien on the property for the amount thereof, which lien shall continue until the assessment and all interest thereon is paid, or until it is discharged, all pursuant to Chapter 22 of the Improvement Act of 1911, being Division 7 of the Streets and Highways Code, commencing with Section 5600. (Added by Ord. 98-04, 6/23/98)

 

14.01.610 Landscape Maintenance Within the Parkway Area.
        (a)    Grass and Shrubs. City parkways that are in the public right-of-way have been planted with grass for overall neighborhood aesthetic appearance and for functional walkability between street parked vehicles and sidewalks. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of, or other person in charge of or in control of, the property abutting the parkway to maintain, by watering, fertilizing and mowing, grass growing within the parkway strip. Existing parkway grass may be replaced by the resident with drought tolerant grasses. All parkway landscape replacement must be irrigated by hand or with a subsurface irrigation system for grass or drip/microsystem for plants in accordance with State law. For new installations, complete hardscape and rock/large gravel parkways are not allowed. A mixture of a predominantly drought tolerant plant area with intermittent connected walkways, for access or artificial turf may be allowed with an encroachment permit from the Public Works Department. If an alternative plant and hardscape walkway landscape has been approved by the City, plants shall be maintained and trimmed to a height not exceeding thirty-six (36) inches, within the parkway strip.

        (b)    Trees. Trees growing within the parkway shall be preserved for the aesthetic enhancement provided to all members of the public. Any person desiring to trim, prune, or remove a parkway tree shall first file an application with the Director so to do. The application shall state the name and address of the applicant, the location and type of tree to be trimmed, prune or removed, and shall give reasons why the requested action is needed. The Director may, after reviewing the application and the supporting data grant approval, if he or she finds that the proposed work will not be detrimental to the health and vigor of the tree, or that the proposed removal of deadwood will eliminate a hazard to the public at large and avoid damage to the tree if winds were to remove the deadwood, if the tree is dying or if the tree is within the vicinity of a public utility facility and will become a hazard to the public at large and the adjoining property owners if not removed. Director shall consider the regulations of the Public Utility Commission in granting approval of the application.

        Nothing in this Section shall preclude City personnel, the adjoining property owner, or a public utility from removing broken branches or downed trees caused by high winds or other natural forces without obtaining a permit.

        (c)    Violations. Any person found trimming, pruning, or removing a tree without receiving a permit from the Director, is guilty of a misdemeanor when convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction. (Added by Ord. 98-04, 6/23/98; amended by Ord. 15-03, 6/16/15)

 

14.01.620 Travel Over Newly Made Pavement and Markings Prohibited.
        (a)    Highway Construction. Whenever any highway, within the City of Dana Point, shall be hereafter in course of construction or improvement, with cement, asphalt, or any other substance that is soft when first applied, it shall be unlawful for any person to step, walk, ride, or drive upon that portion of any such highway which is being at the time so improved, until after the same shall become set or hard.

        (b)    Pavement and Markings. No person shall ride or drive any animal or vehicle over or across any newly made pavement, or any pavement under construction, or any freshly painted markings upon any highway when a barrier or sign is in place warning persons not to drive over or across such pavement or markings, or when a sign is in place stating that the street is closed. (Added by Ord. 98-04, 6/23/98)

 

14.01.630 Closing Highway.
        (a)    Necessity Determined by the Director. Whenever it shall be deemed necessary by the Director to close any highway within the City for the protection of the public, for the protection of such highway from damage during storms or during construction, improvement or maintenance operations thereon, the Director may close or restrict the use of the whole or any part of such highway deemed necessary to be excluded from public travel. The Director shall at the next meeting of the City Council present the facts which led to his determination for City Council concurrence. If the City Council does not agree, the highway, if closure has been accomplished, shall be reopened as soon thereafter as is reasonable. If the highway has not yet been closed, the Director shall order the construction to be modified to eliminate the need to close the highway.

        (b)    Warning Signs, Lights and Devices Required for Closed Highway During Construction. While such highway or portion thereof is so closed, or while such highway or portion thereof is in process of construction or repair or maintenance, the Director shall erect, or cause to be erected, suitable barricades or obstructions thereon, may post or cause to be posted, conspicuous notices to the effect that such highway, or portion thereof, is closed or directing the traffic, and may place, or cause to be placed, warning lights or devices on such highway or portion thereof. All warning signs, lights and devices shall conform to the State of California, Department of Transportation sign chart and the WATCH manual.

        (c)    Violation; Damage to Barrier, Notices, Warning Signs. When such highway or portion thereof is closed to the public or is in process of construction, repair or maintenance, as provided herein, any person who willfully breaks down, removes, injures or destroys any such barrier or obstruction, or tears down, removes, or destroys any such notice, or extinguishes, removes, injures or destroys any such warning lights or devices so erected, posted, or placed by the Director, his employees or contractor, or willfully enters upon or drives any vehicle on or over said highway, or portion thereof, when in the process of construction, repair, or maintenance, without first obtaining a permit to do so from the Director, or authorized contractor, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor when convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction. (Added by Ord. 98-04, 6/23/98)

 

14.01.640 Abandonment of Driveways—Removal of Driveway Approach.
        When an existing driveway is abandoned for any reason by the adjoining property owner, or his tenant, the property owner shall cause the driveway approach to be removed and the sidewalk, curb, and gutter to be restored in accordance with City specifications, plans and grades, and if there is a parkway area, the property owner shall fill said area with earth fill and plant the area in a manner compatible with the adjacent parkway area, all the foregoing to be done at the expense of the property owner.

        The improvement, modification, or alteration of adjoining real property in such a manner as to cause an existing driveway to no longer serve any useful function in terms of ingress and egress for vehicular traffic to and from the subject real property it formerly served and the maintenance of said condition thereafter for a period of six (6) months shall constitute an abandonment of said driveway for the purpose of this Section. (Added by Ord. 98-04, 6/23/98)

 

Article 8. Pay Phones
14.01.700 Definitions.
        “Pay phone” means any telephone available for a fee directly to the public, and includes the booth or other structure protecting the telephone equipment.

        “Permittee” means each person issued an encroachment permit under the provisions of this Article.

        “Sidewalk” means that part of a public right-of-way that is designated and ordinarily used for pedestrian travel.

        “Telephone corporation” means a corporation that has obtained and maintains all required authorizations to provide telecommunications service from the California Public Utilities Commission and the Federal Communications Commission. (Added by Ord. 02-08, 6/11/02)

 

14.01.710 Encroachment Permit Required.
        No person shall erect, install, place or maintain any pay phone which in whole or in part rests upon, in or over any public right-of-way without first obtaining an encroachment permit from the Director pursuant to this Article. (Added by Ord. 02-08, 6/11/02)

 

14.01.720 Encroachment Permit Application Process.
        (a)    Application Form. No encroachment permit shall be issued except upon written application filed with and upon a form prescribed by the Director, which form shall include, but not be limited to, the following information:

        (1)    The name, address and telephone number of the applicant, and reasonable proof that the applicant is a telephone corporation.

        (2)    The location of each pay phone to be installed or maintained on any public right-of-way in the City by the applicant.

        (3)    The time during which it is estimated that the installation work will exist and the extent of the work to be performed.

 

 

 

 

        (4)    A complete description of the pay phone(s) to be installed, including manufacturer name, model, dimensions, and any unusual, distinctive or unique attributes.

        (5)    Photographs, depiction, rendering or drawing of the actual or similar pay phone to be installed is encouraged but not required.

        (6)    The agreement of the applicant that if the pay phone installed under the authority for which the permit is issued shall at any time in the future interfere with the use, repair, improvement, widening or change of grade of the public right-of-way, the applicant or the applicant’s successors or assigns, within ten (10) days after the receipt of a written notice from the Director to do so, will at the applicant’s expense either remove such pay phone, or, subject to the approval of the Director, relocate the pay phone to a site which may be designated by the Director.

        (7)    A written statement, approved as to form by the City Attorney, agreeing to indemnify and hold harmless the City, its officers, employees and agents from any claim, damage, demand or liability including expenses and costs for bodily or personal injury, and for property damage sustained by any person as a result of or related to the installation, location, use or maintenance of any pay phone located on a public right-of-way.

        (8)    Such other information, including plans and specifications as the Director may require.

        (9)    Payment of the encroachment permit application fee established for this Chapter by City Council Resolution.

        (b)    Determination of Completeness. The Director shall determine whether the application contains all the information and items required by the provisions of this Article. If it is determined that the application is not complete, the applicant shall be notified in writing within ten (10) business days of the date of receipt of the application that the application is not complete and the reasons therefor, including any additional information necessary to render the application complete. The applicant shall have thirty (30) calendar days to submit additional information to render the application complete. Failure to do so within the thirty (30) day period shall render the application void. Within ten (10) business days following the receipt of an amended application or supplemental information, the Director shall again determine whether the application is complete in accordance with the procedures set forth in this Subsection. Evaluation and notification shall occur as provided above until such time as the application is found to be complete (the “Application Date”). All notices required by this Article shall be deemed given upon the date any such notice is either deposited in the United States mail or the date upon which personal service of such notice is provided.

        (c)    Determination on Application: Within ten (10) business days of the application date, the Director shall cause to be reviewed the encroachment permit application and shall determine whether the applicant complies with all requirements and standards as set forth in this Article. The Director may approve or authorize an alternative location for placement of any proposed pay phone consistent with the requirements set forth in this Article. The Director’s determination shall be guided solely by the standards and criteria set forth in this Article. An application may be granted either in whole or in part when more than one location is proposed by the applicant, and in any event, when denial is solely as to location, the applicant may amend such application without prejudice to state a different location or locations.

        (d)    Relocation of Pay Phone. In the event that a permittee desires to relocate a pay phone to another location within the City, the permittee must first apply (and pay the applicable encroachment permit application fee) and receive a new permit from the Director prior to such relocation. (Added by Ord. 02-08, 6/11/02)

 

14.01.730 Standards for Pay Phones.
        Any pay phone which rests in whole or in part upon, in or on any portion of a public right-of-way shall comply with the standards set forth in this Section.

        (a)    No advertising signs or material, other than those dealing with the name of the owner of the pay phone, shall be displayed on the outside of the pay phone.

        (b)    Each pay phone shall have affixed to it in a readily visible place so as to be seen by anyone using the pay phone a notice setting forth the name and address of the owner and the telephone number of a working telephone service to call to report a malfunction or to give the notices provided for in this Article.

        (c)    Each pay phone shall be maintained in a neat and clean condition and in good repair at all times. Specifically, but without limiting the generality of the foregoing, each pay phone shall be serviced and maintained so that:

        (1)    It is reasonably free of dirt and grease;

        (2)    It is reasonably free of chipped, faded, peeling and cracked paint in the visible painted areas thereof;

        (3)    It is reasonably free of rust and corrosion in the visible unpainted metal areas thereof;

        (4)    The clear plastic or glass parts thereof, if any, are unbroken and reasonably free of cracks, dents, blemishes, graffiti and discoloration; and

        (5)    The structural parts thereof are not broken or unduly misshapen. (Added by Ord. 02-08, 6/11/02)

 

14.01.740 Location of Pay Phones.
        Any pay phone which rests in whole or in part upon, in, or on any portion of a public right-of-way shall be located in accordance with the provisions of this Section:

        (a)    No pay phone shall be located in whole or in part in any roadway, sidewalk vault, meter cover, manhole or access cover.

        (b)    Pay phones shall be located at the rear of the sidewalk farthest from the street or roadway curb (or, if there is no curb, the edge of the roadway). Pay phones located adjacent to a building shall be located parallel to and not more than six (6) inches from the wall thereof, unless the Director determines that placement near a building is not suitable, and authorizes alternative placement. No pay phone shall be located directly in front of any display window of any building abutting a sidewalk or parkway.

        (c)    No pay phone shall be placed, installed, used or maintained:

        (1)    Within fifteen (15) feet of the curb return of any unmarked crosswalk;

        (2)    Within five (5) feet of any marked crosswalk, fire hydrant, fire call box, police call box or other emergency facility;

        (3)    Within six (6) feet of the outer end of any bus bench;

        (4)    Within three (3) feet ahead or fifteen (15) feet to the rear of any sign marking a designated bus stop;

        (5)    At any location whereby the clear space of the passageway of pedestrians is reduced to less than six (6) feet;

        (6)    Within the greater of one city block or three hundred (300) feet from any other pay phone on the same side of the street and on the public right-of-way.

        (7)    Within five (5) feet of any driveway. (Added by Ord. 02-08, 6/11/02)

 

14.01.750 Existing Pay Phones.
        Pay phones lawfully in existence by virtue of an encroachment permit issued by Caltrans prior to the effective date of the ordinance establishing this Article (July 11, 2002) shall be made to conform with Sections 14.01.730 and 14.01.740 by the first anniversary of the ordinance establishing this Article (July 11, 2003), provided, however, that Subsection (c) of Section 14.01.730 shall apply upon the effective date of this Article. In order to benefit from this Section, an owner of a pay phone must report the number and location of all lawfully existing pay phones on a public right-of-way by September 1, 2002. The Director shall cause to be compiled an inventory of such existing pay phones. (Added by Ord. 02-08, 6/11/02)

 

14.01.760 Enforcement.
        Upon a determination by the Director that a pay phone has been installed, used or maintained in violation of any of the provisions of this Article, the Director shall cause an order to be issued to the owner to correct the offending condition. Notice shall be given by telephoning the owner or permittee, as the case may be, and confirmed by mailing a copy of the order by certified mail, return receipt requested. The order shall specifically describe the offending condition and specify the actions necessary to correct it. If the owner or permittee fails to properly correct the offending condition within ten (10) days after receipt of the order, or cause to be filed an appeal as permitted under Section 14.01.770, the Director shall cause the offending pay phone to be removed and processed as unclaimed property under applicable provisions of law relating thereto. If the permittee or owner of the offending pay phone cannot be identified, the pay phone shall be removed immediately and processed as unclaimed property under applicable provisions of law. The foregoing provisions are not exclusive, and are in addition to any other penalty or remedy provided by law. (Added by Ord. 02-08, 6/11/02)

 

14.01.770 Appeal.
        Any person aggrieved by a finding, determination, notice, order or action taken under the provisions of this Article may appeal to the City Council by the timely filing of a written request with the City Manager pursuant to the City Code and the payment of the fee established for the filing of appeals. The determination of the City Council shall be final for all such appeals. (Added by Ord. 02-08, 6/11/02)

 

Article 9. Construction of Cable Communications Systems
14.01.780 Title.
        This Article is known and may be cited as the “Construction of Cable Communications Systems Article” of the City of Dana Point, California. (Added by Ord. 08-07, 6/3/08)

 

14.01.790 Definitions.
        A.    For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words, terms, phrases, and their derivations have the meanings given herein. Terms defined in the Cable Act shall have the same meanings herein unless expressly defined otherwise. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, and words in the singular number include the plural number.

        “Above ground facility” or “AGF” means all structures, poles, pedestals, cabinets, and any other facility installed above surrounding grade in the PROW (defined herein) excluding antennas.

        “1984 Cable Act” means the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984.

        “1992 Cable Act” means the Cable Television Subscriber Protection and Competition Act of 1992.

        “Cable Act” means the 1984 Cable Act, as amended by the 1992 Cable Act and by the Telecommunications Act.

        “Cable operator” means any person or group of persons (a) who provides cable service over a cable system in the City and, directly or through one or more affiliates, owns a significant interest in that cable system; or (b) who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of a cable system in the City.

        “Cable service” means (a) the one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or other programming service; and (b) subscriber interaction which is required for the selection of or use of video programming or other programming service.

        “Cable system” or “cable communications system” or “system” means a facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service, and which is provided to multiple subscribers within the City; but this term does not include: (a) a facility that serves one or more television broadcast stations; (b) a facility that serves subscribers without using any PROW; (c) a facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. Section 201 et seq.), except that the facility shall be considered a cable system (other than for purposes of Section 621(c) of the Cable Act) to the extent the facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers, unless the extent of the use is solely to provide interactive on-demand services; (d) an open video system that complies with Section 653 of the Cable Act; or (e) any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility systems.

        “California Public Utilities Commission” or “CPUC” means the California Public Utilities Commission.

        “City” means the City of Dana Point, California, acting by and through its City Council, or a representative as the governing body may designate to act on cable matters on its behalf.

        “Company” means the person granted a franchise by any governmental entity to install, operate, maintain, or reconstruct a cable system, and the lawful successors, transferees, or assignees of that person.

        “Company manager” means an employee of the company who is designated by the company in writing to the City to be the contact person for the company in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.

        “Construction plan” means a plan that describes in detail the designs, locations, and an estimated time schedule for construction of the facilities.

        “Department” means the Department of Public Works.

        “Director” means the Director of the City’s Department of Public Works or his or her designee.

        “Encroachment permit” means a permit for work on City owned property including, but not limited to, parks, rights-of-way, facilities, buildings, or other property.

        “Excess capacity” means the volume or capacity in any existing or future duct, conduit, manhole, hand hole or facility that is or will be available for use by third party facilities.

        “Facility” or “facilities” means any cable or other wire or line, pipeline, pipes, duct, conduit, converter, cabinet, pedestal, meter, tunnel, vault, equipment, drain, manhole, splice box, surface location marker, pole, structure, utility, or other appurtenance, structure, property, or tangible thing owned, leased, operated, or licensed by company to provide, in whole or in part, cable services, that are located or are proposed to be located on the PROW which constitute, in whole or in part, a cable system.

        “FCC” means the Federal Communications Commission.

        “Feasible” means capable of being accomplished in a successful manner within a reasonable period of time, taking into account appropriate environmental, physical, legal, economical and technological factors.

        “Franchise” means a written legal undertaking or action issued by any level of government, which authorizes a specific person to utilize the City’s PROW for the purpose of installing, operating, maintaining, or reconstructing a cable system to provide cable service.

        “Person” means any person, corporation, partnership, proprietorship, individual, or organization.

        “Public property” means all real property and improvements owned, operated or controlled by City, other than PROW, within the City’s jurisdiction. Public property includes, but is not limited to, City owned buildings/facilities, recreational facilities, parks, libraries, street trees, signs, medians and traffic signal facilities.

        “Public right-of-way” or “right-of-way” or “PROW” means any public street, public way, public place or rights-of-way, now laid out or dedicated, and the space on, above or below it, and all extensions thereof, and additions thereto, under the jurisdiction of City.

        “Service area” means all or a portion of the City of Dana Point, as further defined in a franchise.

        “Street” or “streets” means any street, road, highway, alley, lane, court, boulevard, or other similar PROW, including related facilities such as medians, parkways, sidewalks, traffic signals and signs.

        “Standard encroachment permit conditions,” hereafter described as SEPC, means the conditions imposed by the City pursuant to existing ordinance, local and State regulations, or City policies.

        “Telecommunications Act” means the Telecommunications Act of 1996.

        “Traffic control plan” means a plan describing the manner in which company will manage vehicle, bicycle, and pedestrian traffic along affected streets when installing or maintaining facilities.

        B.     Terms Not Defined. Words, terms, or phrases not defined herein shall first have the meaning as defined in the Cable Act, and then the special meanings or connotations used in any industry, business, trade, or profession where they commonly carry special meanings. If those special meanings are not common, they will have the standard definitions as set forth in commonly used and accepted dictionaries of the English language. (Added by Ord. 08-07, 6/3/08)

 

14.01.800 Design, Installation, and Construction of Cable System.
        (a)    Promotion of Undergrounding. It is the policy of City to promote undergrounding of facilities whenever and wherever feasible. When existing facilities are located underground along a particular PROW, new facilities must be installed, at the company’s sole expense, underground along that PROW. Further, whenever any above ground facility is located or relocated underground along a particular PROW, all companies shall concurrently relocate the company’s facilities underground on a cost-sharing basis for all companies involved in a manner consistent with applicable law. No new above ground facilities will be allowed except as provided in subsections (b) and (c).

        (b)    Exceptions to Limits on Above Ground Facilities. The limitations on above ground facilities shall not apply to (1) an insubstantial modification to an existing above ground facility which does not produce a significant impact on the PROW and/or public property and the environment surrounding it; (2) to any new above ground facility which, as determined by the Director, does not produce a significant impact upon the PROW and/or public property and the environment surrounding it; and (3) to any installation specifically authorized pursuant to a pre-existing and valid local franchise agreement to the extent said exclusion is required by applicable law.

        (c)    Limits on Above Ground Facilities. Except as provided in subsection b of this section, companies shall place all newly installed facilities underground or in flush-mounted vaults unless said underground installation is not feasible, as determined by the Director pursuant to the standards set forth herein. Companies shall coordinate with all affected property owners to locate all newly installed above ground facilities to minimize inconvenience and disruption to residents in a manner approved in writing by the Director.

        (d)    Excess Capacity. Facilities shall be installed within existing underground ducts or conduits whenever excess capacity is available on reasonable terms. (Added by Ord. 08-07, 6/3/08)

 

14.01.810 Encroachment Permit—Applicability.
        (a)    Except as provided in subsection (b), in addition to any agreement, license, permit or franchise required by this Chapter or any other chapter of this Code, and in addition to any other permit or entitlement required by local, State or Federal law, any person or company which is a cable operator shall obtain an encroachment permit prior to performing any work in the PROW relating to, in whole or in part, the construction, installation, or repair of a cable system, or a portion thereof, and shall pay all fees required by this Code.

        (b)    Notwithstanding anything stated herein, an encroachment permit shall not be required if, in the determination of the Director, the proposed project relates solely to work on the inside of the facility without alteration to the enclosure itself. In lieu of the necessity of an encroachment permit, the company shall obtain all otherwise necessary City permits including, without limitation building permits, electrical permits, and other permits which may be required by the Municipal Code and shall comply with the undergrounding requirements of Section 14.01.800. Further, the company shall be responsible to coordinate with the Director in regard to needed permits or determinations.

        (c)    Annual Encroachment Permits. The Director in his or her discretion may issue an annual encroachment permit to the company to make extensions, routine maintenance and emergency repairs. Annual encroachment permits shall be issued on a yearly basis. Except as specifically provided otherwise in this Chapter, excavations authorized by this section shall be subject to all fees and requirements of this Chapter. (Added by Ord. 08-07, 6/3/08)

 

14.01.820 Encroachment Permit Application.
        An application for an encroachment permit, along with payment of any fees or deposit required by the City, shall be filed with the Director, in the form and manner required by the Director and shall contain, at a minimum, all of the following: in accordance with the City’s encroachment permit application requirements, as determined by the Director.

        (a)    The Identity of Company. If the application is made by an authorized agent of the company, written authorization shall be provided.

        (b)    Engineering plans, specifications and a network map of the Facilities to be located within the PROW, including a map in electronic and/or other form required by the City. The plans and specifications shall show:

        (1)    The location of all existing and proposed facilities in the PROW or public property along proposed route including the type and location of existing and proposed pedestals and other above ground facilities, along with, if required by the Director, photographs or artists renderings, of all above ground visible equipment, from which their fully-dimensioned size must be apparent. The submission may be required to include a detailed description of the equipment included within the above ground installation including the electronic components, natural gas generator, electrical fans, anticipated noise levels during winter and summer months, the emergency backup operations and the proposed maintenance schedule for the facilities;

        (2)    The specific trees, structures, improvements, facilities and obstructions, if any that the company proposes to temporarily or permanently remove or relocate;

        (3)    Existing improvements and appurtenances, including but not limited to, sidewalk, asphalt pavement, trees, landscaping, traffic signs and pavement markings, traffic signals, and any other improvement that is in the vicinity of the planned work;

        (4)    Detailed information to clearly show how all existing improvements shall be protected or restored to their original condition during the planned work. In addition, dimensions showing exact locations as to where new facilities are to be constructed;

        (5)    Specifically how all City ordinances and the SEPC are planned to be addressed with any proposed project.

        (c)    Excess Capacity. If the company is proposing an underground installation within new facilities to be constructed within the PROW, it shall agree to provide, upon request, information regarding any excess capacity that will exist in such ducts or conduits after installation of the company’s facilities, to the City or a subsequent permit applicant.

        (d)    A Construction Plan. A construction plan disclosing, at a minimum, construction schedule, final completion date, and specific construction benchmark dates as to identify portions of the project.

        (e)    A Traffic Control Plan. A traffic control plan in accordance with such guidelines established by the Director.

        (f)    A Public Notification Plan. Companies may be required by the Director to provide reasonable advance notice to the public via a public notification plan of the proposed quantity, precise dimensions, design, color, type, potential noise and location of above ground facilities pursuant to guidelines promulgated by the Director. The plan is subject to the prior written approval of the Director. (Added by Ord. 08-07, 6/3/08)

 

14.01.830 Issuance of an Encroachment Permit.
        (a)    Each encroachment permit shall be subject to the criteria and provisions of this Chapter. The encroachment permit shall be issued upon review of a completed application and a determination by the Director that the company has complied with all applicable requirements of this Chapter.

        (b)    Criteria. The determination to grant or deny an encroachment permit shall be exclusively based upon the criteria set forth in this subsection. The Director shall consider the following:

        (1)    The capacity of the PROW to accommodate the company’s proposed facilities and facilities known to be needed in the future;

        (2)    The capacity of the PROW to accommodate known additional facilities if the permit is granted;

        (3)    The damage or disruption, if any, to the PROW or any public or private facilities, improvements, pedestrian or vehicle travel, landscaping, or any other existing improvement if the permit is granted;

        (4)    The availability of technically compatible existing facilities or excess capacity, or alternate routes and/or locations for the proposed facilities, which would be less disruptive or which better protects the PROW for its dedicated use;

        (5)    The adverse aesthetic or blighting effect of any above ground facilities by virtue of their design, color, dimensions, locations, new obstructions and quantity;

        (6)    Completion of any necessary environmental review under the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA);

        (7)    Agreement for compliance with all City ordinances, regulations, policies, and the SEPC related to the issuance of an encroachment permit.

        (c)    Modifications. Any approval of an encroachment permit may require modifications to the proposed activities pursuant thereto as a result of the Director’s consideration of the factors set forth above, including by limiting or changing the number, size, color and location of the above ground facilities proposed to be installed and/or requiring the installation of landscape or other camouflaging techniques, screening, relocation or requiring undergrounding to minimize adverse visual impacts and obstructions.

        (d)    Fees. As a condition of the issuance of any encroachment permit, the company shall pay and submit all applicable cost-based fees assessed by resolution of the City Council.

        (e)    Right to Inspect. Upon the provision of reasonable written notice by the Director, the company shall allow the City the right to inspect the company’s work at any reasonable time the City deems appropriate.

        (f)    Duration and Validity. Encroachment permits shall be void if the permitted work has not commenced within sixty (60) calendar days of the permit issuance date, if the permitted work is not prosecuted diligently to its conclusion, or if the permitted work, including restoration, has not been completed within the duration limits of the permit. The Director may, upon good cause, issue extensions to the time of commencement of work, the duration of the encroachment permit, or both upon request from the company. (Added by Ord. 08-07, 6/3/08)

 

14.01.840 Notification Plan.
        Companies may be required by the Director to provide reasonable advance notice to the public via a public notification plan of the proposed quantity, precise dimensions, design, color, type, potential noise and location of above ground facilities pursuant to guidelines promulgated by the Director and/or meet with the public as determined by the Director. The plan is subject to the prior written approval of the Director. (Added by Ord. 08-07, 6/3/08)

 

14.01.850 Construction Plan.
        (a)    Initial Submittal Requirements. Not less than thirty (30) days prior to proposed commencement of any work in the PROW and only after an encroachment permit is secured, the company shall submit to the Director for his or her review a construction plan containing the following information:

        (1)    Dates for Work Start and Completion. The company shall identify a start and completion date for the work and shall complete the cable system construction authorized by the encroachment permit no later than the date specified in the permit. If the company requires additional time to complete work, it shall so notify Director and Director may grant a work completion extension;

        (2)    Telephone Contact. The company shall provide the Director with a telephone contact number, answered twenty-four (24) hours a day during the construction period, to enable the Director to report any concerns regarding construction of the facilities.

        (b)    Construction Status Report. During construction, the company shall, at the request of the Director, submit to the Director regular progress reports describing in detail the status of construction in relation to the construction plan. The first report shall be submitted within seven (7) days after commencement of construction and shall be updated seven (7) days thereafter, as may be required by the encroachment permit. Work plans shall be provided in advance to the Director for review and approval.

        (c)    Notification. The company shall provide written notification to the Director of any construction and/or maintenance activities undertaken in the PROW, whether undertaken pursuant to permit or otherwise, prior to the commencement of such activities unless the activities have been previously reported to the Director, or a valid emergency due to system failure. (Added by Ord. 08-07, 6/3/08)

 

14.01.860 Conditions of Utilization of PROW.
        (a)    All facilities of the company shall be so located, constructed, installed and maintained so as not to endanger, interfere with or limit the usual and customary use and/or traffic and travel upon the PROW as well as adjacent private property pursuant to a routing plan to be approved by the Director.

        (b)    In the event the company creates a hazardous or unsafe condition or an unreasonable interference with the PROW or adjacent private property, such company shall remove or modify that part of the facility to eliminate such condition.

        (c)    The company shall not place equipment where it will interfere with existing and known future City uses of the PROW, with the rights of private property owners as determined by the Director, with gas, electric, sewer or telephone fixtures, with water hydrants and mains, with sewers, storm drains or v-ditches, or any wastewater stations, with any traffic control system, or any other City facility.

        (d)    The company, at its own expense and pursuant to a timeline approved by the Director, shall protect the PROW and support or temporarily disconnect or relocate any of the company’s facilities when necessitated by reason of:

        (1)    Traffic conditions;

        (2)    Public safety;

        (3)    Temporary or permanent street closing not for the benefit of a private party;

        (4)    Street construction or resurfacing;

        (5)    A change or establishment of street grade;

        (6)    Installation of sewers, drains, water pipes, storm drains, lift stations, force mains, street light facilities, traffic signal facilities, tracks, or any other public use of the PROW; and

        (7)    Any other City approved construction activity.

        (e)    It shall be the responsibility of the company to mark its facilities with search wire and to locate and mark or otherwise visibly indicate and alert others to the location of its underground facilities before employees, agents, of independent contractors of any entity perform work in the marked-off area. The company shall participate in and adhere to the practices of Underground Services Alert (“USA”) or its successor notification system and provide at least forty-eight (48) hours prior notice to USA prior to any excavation. (Added by Ord. 08-07, 6/3/08)

 

14.01.870 Conditions of Construction.
        (a)    Applicability. Each excavation and/or installation of above ground facilities in the PROW pursuant to this Chapter shall be performed in accordance with this Chapter, with the City’s SEPC, with the standard plans and specifications of the Department and with any Department orders or regulations, except where the Director, at his or her discretion, grants prior written approval to deviate from the standard plans and specifications, orders, or regulations.

        (b)    Notice for Emergency Excavation or Installation. For emergency excavation or installation, the company shall post and maintain notice at the site of the excavation or installation during the construction period. The notice shall include the name, telephone number, and address of the company, a description of the excavation or installation to be performed, and the duration of the excavation or installation. The notice shall be posted along any street where the excavation or installation is taking place. The Director shall be advised immediately during normal weekday working hours.

        (c)    Marking of Subsurface Facilities. If the company excavates in the PROW, it shall comply with the requirements of Government Code Section 4216 (underground service alert or its successor notification system) regarding notification of excavation or installation and marking of subsurface facilities.

        (d)    Limits on Excavation in the Public Right-of-Way.

        (1)    Scope. It is unlawful for the company to make, cause, or permit to be made, any excavation in the PROW outside the boundaries, times, and description set forth in the encroachment permit.

        (2)    Trenchless Technology. Use of trenchless equipment to excavate in the PROW is allowed with prior written approval of the Director.

        (3)    Single Excavation Maximum of One Thousand Two Hundred (1,200) Feet. No single excavation site shall be longer than one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet in length at any time except with the prior written approval of the Director.

        (4)    Moratorium on New or Newly Repaved Streets. Municipal Code Section 14.01.540 shall expressly apply.

        (5)    The company shall adhere to all requirements listed in the SEPC.

        (e)    The company assumes all responsibility for damage or injury resulting from the construction of any above ground facility. If the company fails to comply with any written Director’s demand relating thereto, the City may perform said work at the company’s expense and may withdraw its costs and expenses from the security deposit or other security provided by the company, or charge the company.

        (f)    Modification to Requirements. Upon written request, and for good cause as determined by the Director, the Director may grant written approval for modifications to the requirements of this Section.

        (g)    Incomplete Excavation—Completion by the City. In any case where an excavation is not completed or restored in the time and manner specified in the encroachment permit, this Chapter, or the orders, regulations, conditions, and standard plans and specifications of the Department, the Director shall order the company to complete the excavation as directed within twenty-four (24) hours. If the company should fail, neglect, or refuse to comply with the order, the Director may complete or cause to be completed such excavation to temporarily cover or mitigate hazards in such manner as the Director deems expedient and appropriate. The company shall compensate the City for any costs associated with the administration, construction, consultants, equipment, inspection, notification, remediation, repair, restoration, or any other actual costs incurred by the City or other agencies, boards, commissions, departments of the City that were made necessary by such excavation. The cost of such work also may be deducted from company’s security fund.

        (h)    Subject to the limitation set forth in this Chapter, completion of an excavation or restoration by the Department in accordance with this Chapter shall not relieve the owner or the company from liability for future pavement failures at the excavation site. (Added by Ord. 08-07, 6/3/08)

 

14.01.880 Post-Excavation Obligations.
        (a)    Repair and Maintenance Obligations of the Company. Each company that excavates or causes to be made an excavation in the PROW shall be responsible to maintain, repair, or reconstruct the site of the excavation so as to maintain a condition acceptable to the Director, and in compliance with the City’s SEPC, until such time as the site of the excavation is repaved or resurfaced by the Department, or pursuant to a subsequently issued PROW permit. The Director may also withhold issuance of new encroachment permits or rescind approval of previously approved encroachment permits for the company’s failure to remediate or repair excavation or to maintain the facility to the satisfaction of the Director or for lack of payment to the City for City’s repair of excavation or maintenance of the facility to the satisfaction of Director.

        (b)    Subsurface or Pavement Failures. In the event that subsurface material or pavement over or immediately adjacent to any excavation should become depressed, broken, or fail in any way at any time after the work has been completed, the Director shall exercise his or her best judgment to determine the person(s) responsible, if any, for the failure in the subsurface or surface of the PROW and shall designate such person as the responsible party. The Director shall notify such person(s) of the condition, its location, and the required remedy, and such person(s) shall repair or restore, or cause to be repaired or restored, such condition to the satisfaction of the Director within seventy-two (72) hours of the notification, unless, considering the interest of public safety, the Director extends the time for the responsible party to repair or restore the affected PROW.

        (c)    Repairs by the City. Municipal Code Sections 14.01.550 and 14.01.560 shall expressly apply.

        (d)    Emergency Remediation by City.

        (1)    If, in the judgment of the Director, the site of an excavation is considered hazardous or if it constitutes a public nuisance, public emergency, or other imminent threat to the public health, safety, or welfare that requires immediate action, the Director may order the condition remedied by a written, electronic, or facsimile communication to the person(s) responsible, if any, for remedying the condition and shall designate such person as the responsible party.

        (2)    If the responsible party is inaccessible or fails, neglects, or refuses to take immediate action to remedy the condition as specified in the communication, the Director may remedy the condition or cause the condition to be remedied in such manner as the Director deems expedient and appropriate. The person(s) identified by the Director as the responsible party shall compensate the City for any reasonable costs associated with the administration, construction, consultants, equipment, inspection, notification, remediation, repair, restoration, or any other actual costs incurred by the Department or other agencies, boards, commissions, departments of the City that were made necessary by reason of the emergency remediation undertaken by the Department. The cost of such work also may be deducted from the company’s security deposit.

        (3)    Remediation by the Department in accordance with this section shall not relieve the person(s) from liability for future pavement failures at the site of the remediation. (Added by Ord. 08-07, 6/3/08)

 

14.01.890 Duty to Remove Facilities from PROW and Public Property.
        (a)    The Director may order the company to remove its facilities from public property or PROW at its own expense whenever the company ceases and fails to complete construction of the facility outlined in the PROW permit within the term or duration of the PROW permit.

        (b)    If not removed voluntarily by the company, then the Director may notify the company that if removal of the property is not accomplished within a reasonable time specified by the Director, the Director may order the removal of the facilities at the company’s expense. The company’s security deposit shall be available to pay for such work.

        (c)    If officials or representatives of the City remove facilities, and if the company does not claim the property within thirty (30) days of its removal, then the City may take whatever steps are available under State law to declare the property surplus, and sell it, with the proceeds of such sale going to the City.

        (d)    When such company removes its facilities from the PROW, the company shall, at its own expense, and in a manner approved by the Director, replace and restore such PROW to a condition comparable to that which existed before the work causing the disturbance was done. (Added by Ord. 08-07, 6/3/08)

 

14.01.900 Maintenance of Facilities.
        (a)    Construction, installation, maintenance and repair of any facilities shall comply with the most current editions of the zoning codes, building codes, excavation codes, construction codes, plumbing codes, National Electrical Safety Code, the National Electric Code, the City-adopted Public Works Construction Standards, Specifications and Plans, the Municipal Code, as they are modified from time to time, and any applicable Federal, State or local statutes, regulations, guidelines, or requirements.

        (b)    To the extent permitted to remain above ground, the company shall place all above ground facilities in flush mounted or low profile waterproof pedestals whose design, size, location, color within manufacturer’s specifications, appearance, and placement have been previously approved by the Director in writing and shall be in conformity with all applicable City ordinances, codes, regulations, rules, and guidelines.

        (c)    Cabinet Treatment, Graffiti Mitigation and Landscaping. The exterior of above ground facilities shall resist graffiti or be painted with anti-graffiti paint and be maintained in a “like-new” condition. Applications for above ground facilities must include a graffiti mitigation plan detailing how the company will maintain the above ground facilities free from graffiti and other defacements (i.e., stickers, posters, decals, and other markings), and a landscaping plan detailing how the landscape installation will minimize visual impact, and how said landscaping will be maintained. The graffiti mitigation plan and landscaping plan shall commit to inspection at least four (4) times a year and shall include identification of the resources dedicated to mitigating graffiti. Additionally, the graffiti mitigation plan shall provide the name, mailing address, phone number, and e-mail address of a single point of contact responsible to resolve graffiti issues should they occur. The graffiti mitigation plan shall clearly state that graffiti shall be removed within forty-eight (48) hours of the time at which the company is notified of graffiti and that the above ground facility’s surfaces shall be restored to their original exterior appearance. The Director at his or her discretion may require a bond or other security to insure compliance with this section.

        (d)    Each above ground facility installed in the PROW shall be discretely, yet clearly identified with the name of the owner of the above ground facility and a toll-free telephone number for the company. The Department shall adopt orders or regulations to specify other appropriate methods for identification.

        (e)    During construction and maintenance, the company shall identify its construction sites, vehicles and equipment, by name and category with sufficient clarity so that traffic flowing in both directions can determine the nature of the project and the entity upon whose behalf the construction is being undertaken.

        (f)    The company assumes all responsibility for damage or injury resulting from the maintenance of any above ground facility. If the company fails to comply with any written Director’s demand relating thereto, the City may perform said work at the company’s expense and withdraw its costs and expenses from the security deposit or other security provided by the company, or charge the company. (Added by Ord. 08-07, 6/3/08)

 

14.01.910 City Vacation or Abandonment.
        In the event any PROW or portion thereof used by the company shall be vacated by the City for a governmental purpose, upon reasonable notice the company shall forthwith remove its facilities from the PROW unless specifically permitted to continue. As a part of the removal, the company shall restore, repair or reconstruct the area where the removal has occurred, to a condition as may be required by the Director, but not in excess of the original condition. In the event of any failure, neglect or refusal of the company, after thirty (30) days notice by the Director, to do such work, the Director may cause it to be done, and the company shall, within forty-five (45) days of billing, pay to the City the actual costs incurred. (Added by Ord. 08-07, 6/3/08)

 

14.01.920 System Location Data.
        To the extent reasonably available, the company shall provide the Director with data in a digital or other format specified by the Director which details and documents all the geographic locations of facilities located in PROW. The computer disk or other record shall be updated whenever there have been significant changes in the location of the facilities at the Director’s discretion. In addition, the company shall maintain in its local office a complete, fully-dimensioned, and up-to-date set of as-built system maps and drawings upon completion of construction. As-built drawings shall show all facilities. The scale of maps and drawings shall be sufficient to show the required details in easily readable form and size. (Added by Ord. 08-07, 6/3/08)

 

14.01.930 Appeals from Action of the Director.
        If the company is aggrieved by any decision of the Director under this Chapter, the company may appeal the decision to the City Council by filing with the City Clerk a statement addressed to the City Council setting forth the facts and circumstances regarding the Director’s decision and the basis for the appeal. The appeal shall be accompanied by a fee as established by resolution of the City Council. The City Council, not less than ten (10) business days from the date on which the appeal was filed with the City Clerk, shall hear the appeal and all relevant evidence, and shall determine the merits of the appeal. The City Clerk shall provide written notification of the time and place set for hearing the appeal. The City Council may sustain, overrule or modify the action of the Director, and decision of the City Council shall be final.

        The right to appeal to the City Council shall terminate upon the expiration of ten (10) business days following personal delivery to the company or the deposit of a letter in the United States mail advising the company of the action of the Director and of the right to appeal such action to the City Council. (Added by Ord. 08-07, 6/3/08)

 

14.01.940 Financial Security.
        The encroachment permit may require that the company provide financial security pursuant to this Section. The Director shall determine the appropriate level of financial security, which may include all of the following protections for the City against the company’s default or failure to comply with this Chapter. (Added by Ord. 08-07, 6/3/08)

 

14.01.950 Indemnity and Liability Insurance.
        (a)    To the maximum extent permitted by applicable law, the company shall at all times defend, indemnify, protect, hold harmless, and exempt the City, the City Council, its officers, agents, servants, attorneys and employees, from any and all penalties, damages or charges arising out of claims, suits, demands, causes of action, award of damages, imposition of fines and penalties, whether compensatory or punitive, or expenses arising therefrom, either at law or in equity, which arise out of, or are caused by, the construction, erection, location, performance, operation, maintenance, repair, installation, replacement, removal or restoration of facilities within the City based upon any act or omission of a company, its agents or employees, contractors, subcontractors, independent contractors, or representatives except for that which is attributable to the sole negligence or willful misconduct of the City, the City Council, its officers, agents, servants, attorneys and employees. With respect to the penalties, damages or charges referenced herein, reasonable attorneys’ fees, consultants’ fees, and expert witness fees are included as those costs which shall be recovered by the City.

        (b)    Except as provided in or as supplemented by any encroachment permit, a company shall secure and maintain, public liability, property damage insurance, and umbrella coverage in at least the following amounts:

        (1)    Public Liability. Two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) per person/per occurrence;

        (2)    Property Damage. Two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) per any one claim; or

        (3)    Umbrella Liability. Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00).

        (c)    The public and personal liability and property damage insurance policy shall specifically include the City, the City Council, its employees, and agents as additional insureds.

        (d)    The public and personal liability and property damage insurance policies shall be issued by an agent or representative of an insurance company licensed to do business in the State and which has one of the three (3) highest or best ratings from the Alfred M. Best Company.

        (e)    The public liability and property damage insurance policies shall contain an endorsement obligating the insurance company to furnish the Director with at least thirty (30) days’ written notice in advance of the cancellation of the policy.

        (f)    Renewal or replacement policies or certificates shall be delivered to the Director at least fifteen (15) days before the expiration of the insurance which such policies are to renew or be replaced.

        (g)    Before a company commences any construction, the company shall deliver the policies or certificates representing the insurance to the Director as required herein.

        (h)    The Director may adjust the coverage amounts specified in subsection (b) of this section provided that the adjustments result in the company meeting or exceeding the coverage specified in this section. (Added by Ord. 08-07, 6/3/08)

Chapter 14.10 PUBLIC FRANCHISES
14.10.010 Purpose and Intent.
        It is the purpose and intent of the City Council of the City of Dana Point by enacting this Chapter to protect the City’s interest as caretaker of the public rights-of-way and to establish nondiscriminatory procedures for the granting of franchises to use and occupy the public rights-of-way. The City has the authority to manage public property through its police power and other statutory and Constitutional powers granted to municipalities. The authority and procedures contained herein are intended to preserve the City’s responsibility to control and protect the public rights-of-way from uses that are inconsistent with the best interest of the public and to maintain its ability to demand a fair rate of compensation for such use, while establishing procedures to treat applicants fairly in the interest of due process. (Added by Ord. 98-01, 2/24/98)

 

14.10.020 Definitions.
        “Exclusive franchise” means a franchise for a term of years which grants privileges available to one and only one franchisee within the boundaries and services defined by the franchise agreement for the duration of the franchise.

        “Franchise” means and includes any authorization granted hereunder in terms of franchise, privilege, or otherwise to erect, construct, install, operate, or maintain a facility for commercial purposes by occupying the public right-of-way within a specified area in the City. Any such authorization shall not mean or include any license or permit required for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the City generally as required by other ordinances and laws of this City.

        “Franchise agreement” means an agreement entered into by the City at its option with the franchisee which sets forth the terms and conditions of the grant of franchise.

        “Franchisee” means the person, firm, or corporation granted a franchise by the City Council under this Chapter, and the lawful successor, transferee, or assignee of such person, firm, or corporation.

        “Nonexclusive franchise” means a franchise which grants privileges available to multiple simultaneous franchisees within the boundaries and services defined by the franchise.

        “Right-of-way” means any public highway, public street, public way, or public place in the City, either owned by the City or dedicated to the public for public purposes. (Added by Ord. 98-01, 2/24/98)

 

14.10.030 Authority.
        The City Council of the City of Dana Point shall have the authority at its option to grant a franchise, whether exclusive or nonexclusive, to erect, construct, install, operate, or maintain any structure or equipment for commercial purposes by occupying the public right-of-way as approved by the City Council and subject to the terms and conditions of this Chapter and any franchise agreement executed between the City and the franchisee. Further, the City of Dana Point shall have the authority to require reasonable compensation as determined by the City Council in the form of a franchise fee for the privilege granted by any franchise in accordance with this Chapter. (Added by Ord. 98-01, 2/24/98)

 

14.10.040 Franchise Required.
        (a)    Following the effective date of this Chapter, no person shall erect, install, or construct any permanent structure or equipment for commercial purposes on, above, or below the public right-of-way unless the person has first obtained a franchise for such use granted by the City Council under such terms and restrictions as are set forth herein.

        (b)    No person shall operate or maintain any permanent structure or equipment for commercial use which is erected, installed, or constructed on, above, or below the public right-of-way following the effective date of this Chapter unless the person has first obtained a franchise for such use pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter or has obtained some other specific grant of authority from the City for the use of the public right-of-way.

        (c)    Notwithstanding the above, the procedures set forth herein shall not be applied to any restaurant or commercial establishment that executes a license agreement with the City for the use of the public right-of-way immediately adjacent to and abutting the property on which the establishment is located, or any facility, or the operation and maintenance of any structure or equipment, which is now or hereafter otherwise specifically authorized to locate in the public right-of-way by federal, state, or local laws, and for which all required approvals by the City are properly obtained. (Added by Ord. 98-01, 2/24/98)

 

14.10.050 Applicable Laws.
        Franchisee shall be subject to all provisions of the franchise agreement and all applicable laws, ordinances, and regulations of the City of Dana Point, Orange County Transportation Agency (OCTA), State of California, United States of America, and any other public agency having jurisdiction over territory located within the City. The grant of a franchise shall not relieve the franchisee of any obligation under the Dana Point Municipal Code to obtain any building and construction permits, public works permits, encroachment permits, use permits, or any other specific authorization that may be required for the proposed project. Unless the franchise agreement adopted by the City Council provides otherwise, a franchise does not grant a right to construct or install physical improvements at specified locations,

which locations shall be determined and approved pursuant to applicable planning processes and permits. (Added by Ord. 98-01, 2/24/98)

 

14.10.060 Procedures for Nonexclusive Franchise.
        Negotiation and grant of a nonexclusive franchise shall comply with the following procedural requirements:

        (a)    Each applicant for a franchise shall submit the following to the City:

        (1)    A written “Request and Application for Franchise” to the City Manager or his/her designee as prescribed by the City Manager or designee; and

        (2)    A proposal identifying the requested use of the public right-of-way, proposed locations of right-of-way occupation, descriptions of proposed physical improvements if they are to be constructed above ground, method of construction, time of construction, hours of operation, resources and procedures for maintenance, and amount and method of compensation to the City, and the initial term of the proposed franchise and any renewal, if applicable; and

        (3)    All applicable fees required by ordinance of the City Council; and

        (4)    Any other information required by the City Manager.

        (b)    The City Manager or designee shall negotiate proposed terms and conditions in the interest of the City for a draft franchise agreement between the applicant and the City in consultation with the City Attorney. The applicant shall sign the draft franchise agreement indicating acceptance of the terms prior to submission to City Council for consideration.

        (c)    The City Council shall hold a public hearing to consider a Resolution accepting the franchise agreement and granting the franchise accordingly. At least ten (10) days prior to the hearing, the City shall publish notice of public hearing and intent to grant a franchise in any newspaper of general circulation in the community and post said notice in at least three (3) posting places throughout the City.

        (d)    The City Council may approve or modify and accept the franchise agreement and grant the franchise by Resolution, deny the application for franchise, or continue the decision to grant the franchise and return the franchise agreement with direction for further negotiation between City Staff and the applicant. (Added by Ord. 98-01, 2/24/98)

 

14.10.070 Procedures for Exclusive Franchise.
        Grant of an exclusive franchise shall comply with the following procedural requirements:

        (a)    Each applicant for an exclusive franchise shall submit the following to the City:

        (1)    A written “Request and Application for Exclusive Franchise” to the City Manager or his/her designee as prescribed by the City Manager or designee; and

        (2)    A proposal identifying the requested use of the public right-of-way, proposed locations of right-of-way occupation, description of proposed physical improvements if they are to be constructed on, above, or below ground, method of construction, time of construction, hours of operation, resources and procedures for maintenance, the amount and method of compensation to the City, and the initial term of the proposed exclusive franchise and any requested consideration of renewal, if applicable; and

        (3)    All applicable fees required by ordinance or resolution of the City Council; and

        (4)    Any other information required by the City Manager.

        (b)    The City Council may receive the application and consider a “Resolution of Intention to Consider an Exclusive Franchise and Call for Proposals” which recites the terms under which the City intends to grant the exclusive franchise.

        (c)    If said Resolution is adopted by the City Council, the City shall publish within ten (10) days after adoption of the Resolution a “Notice of Intention to Consider an Exclusive Franchise and Call for Proposals” in any newspaper of general circulation in the community and post said notice in at least three (3) posting places throughout the City. The notice shall invite competing proposals to be submitted to the City Manager within sixty (60) days of the date the “Resolution of Intention to Consider an Exclusive Franchise and Call for Proposals” was adopted. The City Manager or designee may also send notice to any other persons known to be interested in submitting a proposal.

        (d)    The City Manager or designee shall consider all proposals and submit one or more of the proposals to the City Council for final selection. The City Council may select one proposal and direct the City Manager or designee to negotiate a draft exclusive franchise agreement between the City and the party submitting the selected proposal. The City Manager or designee may negotiate the draft exclusive franchise agreement in accordance with the terms of the proposal, the provisions of this Chapter, and the best interests of the City. If the City Council rejects all proposals submitted by the City Manager, the process provided for in this Chapter is concluded.

        (e)    The City Council shall hold a public hearing to consider a Resolution accepting the exclusive franchise agreement and granting the exclusive franchise accordingly. At least ten (10) days prior to the hearing, the City shall publish notice of public hearing and intent to grant an exclusive franchise in any newspaper of general circulation in the community and post said notice in at least three (3) posting places throughout the City. The notice shall state the date, time, and location of the public hearing for protests and public comments to be heard.

        (f)    The City Council may approve or modify and accept the exclusive franchise agreement and grant the exclusive franchise by Resolution, deny the application for exclusive franchise, or continue the decision to grant the exclusive franchise and return the exclusive franchise agreement with direction for further negotiation of terms and conditions between City staff and the proposed franchisee, subject to acceptance by the City Council. (Added by Ord. 98-01, 2/24/98)

 

14.10.080 Franchise Conditions, Restrictions and Regulations.
        Franchisee shall be subject to all other conditions, restrictions, and specifications as outlined in the franchise agreement negotiated between the City and franchisee as adopted and approved by Resolution of the City Council. Further, the City reserves the power to adopt and enforce additional requirements and regulations as are necessary and convenient in the exercise of its jurisdiction under this Chapter and may determine any question of fact which may arise during the existence of any franchise granted hereunder. (Added by Ord. 98-01, 2/24/98)

 

 

14.10.090 Waiver of Procedures by City Council.
        The City Council may waive any procedural requirement imposed under this Chapter when the City Council determines it to be in the best interest of the City. (Added by Ord. 98-01, 2/24/98)

 

14.10.100 Transferability.
        Franchisee shall not assign or otherwise transfer a franchise granted by the City Council pursuant to this Chapter without the express prior written consent of the City Council. (Added by Ord. 98-01, 2/24/98)

 

14.10.110 Indemnification.
        Franchisee shall agree, and shall so state in the franchise agreement, to indemnify, protect, defend, and hold harmless the City, its officers, officials, employees, and agents against any and all claims, demands, losses, costs, expenses, penalties, damages, or liability of any kind or nature, including but not limited to injury, death of persons, damage to property, and any attorney fees, arising directly or indirectly out of franchisee’s exercise or enjoyment of its franchise, or any other negligent or wrongful acts or omissions by franchisee, its officers, employees, or agents, excepting only liability arising out of the sole negligence of the City. Further, franchisee shall agree, and shall so state in the franchise agreement, to indemnify, protect, defend, and hold harmless the City, its officers, officials, employees, and agents against any and all claims, demands, losses, costs, expenses, penalties, damages, or liability of any kind or nature resulting from, or arising with respect to, the award of the franchise, including but not limited to the procedure for accepting and reviewing proposals and the decision of award, negligent or otherwise, including but not limited to a claim of bad faith. (Added by Ord. 98-01, 2/24/98)

 

14.10.120 Revocation.
        The City Council reserves the right to revoke any franchise granted pursuant to this Chapter, and all rights and privileges pertaining thereto, in the event that the franchisee violates any provision of the franchise agreement, this Chapter, or any other material provision of the Dana Point Municipal Code or other law subject to enforcement by the City. Upon suspicion of such a violation, the City Manager may schedule a hearing before the City Council to consider revocation of the franchise and notify franchisee thereof by certified and regular first class mail at least thirty (30) days prior to said hearing. Franchisee may present evidence rebutting the violation or evidence showing an effort to correct the violation and mitigate its effects. Following the hearing, the City Council may revoke the franchise, continue the franchise, or continue the franchise subject to additional conditions at its discretion. The right to revoke any franchise granted pursuant to this Chapter is in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other remedies available to the City. (Added by Ord. 98-01, 2/24/98)

Chapter 14.20 DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY TO REVIEW AND APPROVE PLANS
14.20.010 Delegation of Authority to Review and Approve Plans.
        (a)    The City delegates to the Director of Public Works, City Engineer and/or City Traffic Engineer or their designees the authority to review and approve City project plans, signing and striping plans including pavement markings, traffic work order requests, traffic control plans, other improvement plans, and related or similar plans for the City.

        (b)    This section is meant to reiterate the existing law stating that the Director of Public Works, City Engineer and/or City Traffic Engineer or their designees have the authority to review and approve City project plans, signing and striping plans including pavement markings, traffic work order requests, traffic control plans, other improvement plans, and related or similar plans for the City.

        (c)    City project plans, signing and striping plans including pavement markings, traffic work order requests, traffic control plans, other improvement plans, and related or similar plans for the City previously reviewed or approved by the Director of Public Works, City Engineer and/or City Traffic Engineer or their designees were reviewed or approved pursuant to authority delegated to them for such purposes by the City. If and to the extent necessary, the delegation of authority within subsection (a) of this section shall operate retroactively to authorize the past reviews and approvals by the Director of Public Works, City Engineer and/or City Traffic Engineer or their designees of City project plans, signing and striping plans including pavement markings, traffic work order requests, traffic control plans, other improvement plans, and related or similar plans for the City. (Added by Ord. 08-03, 2/19/08)

Chapter 14.30 LANTERN DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE
14.30.010 Purpose.
        The City Council finds that the purpose of the development impact fee is to defray a portion of the cost of new public facilities related to the development project known as the Dana Point Town Center (Lantern District) as outlined in the General Plan and the Town Center Plan of the City of Dana Point. (Added by Ord. 14-03, 4/15/14)

 

14.30.020 Use.
        The fee will be used to comply with the Town Center Plan and with the General Plan as outlined in the Urban Design Element and Economic Development Sections to improve the facilities and standard of services provided in the Town Center, renamed the Lantern District, with the same boundary. The City shall establish a Lantern District development impact fee account to collect revenues and interest-earned thereon as development occurs and reimburse the General Fund annually solely for public facility and service expenditures. (Added by Ord. 14-03, 4/15/14)

 

14.30.030 Establishment.
        The Lantern District development impact fee is hereby established and imposed upon the issuance of all building permits for commercial, retail and residential development within the Town Center Plan Area, now known as the Lantern District. This fee shall be calculated to reflect the developments’ fair share cost of mitigating the increased demand such development places upon the Lantern District. The City Council shall set forth the specific amount of the Lantern District development impact fee. (Added by Ord. 14-03, 4/15/14)

 

14.30.040 Adjustment of Fee.
        The Lantern District development impact fee shall annually be adjusted and become effective each January 1st by the greater of two percent (2%) or the Cumulative Percentage Increase in the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers (“CPI-U”) for the Los Angeles-Riverside-Orange County California Standard Metropolitan Statistical Area (“Index”) published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the United States Department of Labor. The Index used each year will be as reported for the month of June preceding the particular January 1st effective date. The City Council may also adjust such fee when it finds that the cost of acquiring and/or construction of new public facilities or services within the Lantern District has increased in excess of the Consumer Price Index. (Added by Ord. 14-03, 4/15/14)

 
14.30.050 Exemptions and Appeals.
        A building permit applicant may appeal the imposition of the Lantern District development impact fee on its development by submitting a written appeal to the Director of Community Development or the Director’s designee. The Director shall review the appeal and rule thereon within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of the appeal. The applicant shall show that its development is not the type of project that will add any additional business customers, or residents/visitors at the property, or create additional use or demand upon public facilities. Substantially upgrading existing facilities to attract customers is considered an impact, subject to the fee. Any determination of the Director of the Director’s designee may be appealed to the City Council in writing within ten (10) calendar days of the Director’s decision. The City Council shall have forty-five (45) days to render a decision on an appeal. Building permit approvals shall be held in abeyance during the appeal process. (Added by Ord. 14-03, 4/15/14)

Title 15 WATER AND SEWERS
Chapter 15.10 STORM WATER/SURFACE RUNOFF WATER QUALITY

Chapter 15.10 STORM WATER/SURFACE RUNOFF WATER QUALITY
15.10.010 Title.
        This Chapter shall be entitled “Storm Water/Surface Runoff Water Quality” and shall be known by this title throughout this Code. (Added by Ord. 10-12, 11/8/10)

 

15.10.020 Purpose and Intent.
        The general purpose of this Chapter is to protect the health and safety of the waters of the State of California and the United States, for those who use the waters for recreation and food sources, and for the marine habitats and ecosystems existing in the waters by:

        (a)    Effectively prohibiting non-storm water discharges into the MS4;

        (b)    Reducing pollutant loads in surface runoff, including in storm water, to the maximum extent practicable;

        (c)    Establishing minimum requirements for surface runoff management, including source control requirements, to prevent and reduce pollution;

        (d)    Establishing requirements for development and redevelopment project site designs to reduce surface runoff pollution and erosion; and

        (e)    Establishing requirements for the management of surface runoff flows from development and redevelopment projects, both to prevent erosion and to protect and enhance existing water-dependent habitats.

        The intent of this Chapter is to enhance and protect the water quality of waters of the State and the United States in a manner that is consistent with the Clean Water Act and State law. (Added by Ord. 10-12, 11/8/10)

 

15.10.030 Definitions.
        For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section:

        “Authorized Enforcement Official” shall mean the City Manager or designee.

        “Authorized Enforcement Staff” shall mean any City employee, including Code Enforcement, Building Inspectors and Public Works staff, assigned to duties involving permits and other City approvals, inspections, and enforcement related to this Chapter.

        “Best management practices” or “BMPs” shall mean schedules of activities, pollution treatment practices or devices, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices or devices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to storm water, receiving waters, or the storm drain system. Best management practices also include but are not limited to treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. Best management practices may include any type of pollution prevention and pollution control measure that can help to achieve compliance with this Chapter.

        “Channel” shall mean a natural or improved watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or intermittently flowing water.

        “City” shall mean the City of Dana Point.

        “City Manager” shall mean the City Manager of the City or designee.

        “City Model Water Quality Management Plan” or “City Model WQMP” shall mean that model water quality management plan set forth in the City’s Local Implementation Plan (defined below).

        “Commercial discharger” shall mean a discharger who owns and/or operates a commercial business and/or site/source anywhere in the City.

        “Commercial site/source” shall mean all sites/sources engaged in business or commerce, whether for profit or not-for-profit, or publicly or privately owned, except for municipal facilities and industrial sites/sources.

        “Constructed wetland” shall mean a vegetated area that has been deliberately modified to provide or enhance habitat, to provide water quality benefits, or to moderate water flow rates or velocities, that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation.

        “Co-permittee” shall mean the County of Orange, the Orange County Flood Control District and/or any one of the eleven (11) municipalities (including the City) which is responsible for compliance with the terms of the NPDES order.

        “DAMP” shall mean the Orange County Drainage Area Management Plan, including the appendices which include the City’s adopted Local Implementation Plan, as the same may be amended from time to time.

        “Developer” shall mean any person or persons who seeks or receives any permit or approval to undertakes development activities within the City.

        “Development” shall mean, for purposes of this Chapter, any and all new development or redevelopment projects involving land disturbing activities, or structural development, including construction or installation of a building or structure, and/or the creation of impervious surface areas (also see “new development” and “redevelopment” defined below).

        “Development project guidance” shall mean DAMP Chapter 7 and the Water Quality Management Plan Requirements, as all such documents/requirements may be amended from time to time.

        “Directly adjacent” shall mean situated within two hundred (200) feet of any property or water body.

        “Director” shall mean the City Director of Public Works and Engineering Services or designee.

        “Discharge” shall mean any release, spill, leak, pump, flow, escape, leaching (including subsurface migration or deposition to groundwater), dumping or disposal of any liquid, semi-solid or solid substance.

        “Discharge exception” shall mean the group of activities not restricted or prohibited by this Chapter, including only the following discharges (the discharger shall have the burden of proving the application of any applicable discharge exception in any enforcement action brought pursuant to this Chapter):

        (1)    Discharges composed entirely of rain water runoff;

        (2)    Discharges authorized by current EPA or Regional or State Board issued NPDES permits, State General Permits, or other waivers, permits, approvals or authorizations granted by a government agency; and all other discharges otherwise authorized under federal or State law;

        (3)    Discharges from property for which best management practices set forth in the development project guidance are being implemented and followed;

        (4)    Discharges to the MS4 from:

        (A)   Diverted stream flows,

        (B)   Rising groundwaters,

        (C)   Infiltration to the MS4 of groundwater uncontaminated by sewage,

        (D)   Uncontaminated pumped groundwater,*

        (E)   Foundation drains,*

        (F)    Springs,

        (G)   Water from crawl space pumps,*

        (H)   Footing drains,*

        (I)    Air conditioning condensation,

        (J)    Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands,

        (K)   Water line flushing, except for fire suppression sprinkler system maintenance and testing discharges,**

        (L)   Discharges from potable water sources, except to the extent such discharges are subject to but not in compliance with any general permit issued by the State or Regional Board or any waste discharge requirements or other similar authorization,

        (M)  Individual residential car washing, except to the extent that pollutants are discharged to the MS4,

        (N)   Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges,

        (O)   Emergency fire fighting activities;

*      This discharge exception may require compliance with a State or Regional Board permit for groundwater extraction or similar discharges to surface waters. The City is not prohibiting the discharge except where the Authorized Enforcement Staff determines the discharge has caused or is causing or is threatening to cause, a condition of pollution, contamination or nuisance.

**    This discharge exception does not include discharges which are subject to, but not in compliance with, any State or Regional Board permit or waste discharge requirements or other similar authorization.

        (5)    Discharges authorized pursuant to a permit issued under this Chapter.

        “Discharger” shall mean any person or entity engaged in activities or operations and/or owner the business and/or site/source, which will or may result in pollutants entering storm water, the storm drain system, or receiving waters; and the owners, operators or persons in charge of the day-to-day activities of real property on which such activities, operations or facilities are located; provided however that a local government or public authority is not a discharger as to activities conducted by others in public rights-of-way.

        “Discharging directly” shall mean outflow from a storm drain system that is composed entirely of flows from the subject development site, and not commingled with flows from adjacent lands.

        “Enforcing attorney” shall mean the City Attorney or the District Attorney acting to enforce any portion of this Chapter, or the designee of either of them, who is authorized to take enforcement action as described herein.

        “Environmentally Sensitive Areas” or “ESAs” shall mean areas that include, but are not limited to, all Clean Water Act Section 303(d) Impaired Water Bodies; areas designated as Areas of Special Biological Significance by the State Board (Water Quality Control Plan for the San Diego Basin (1994) and amendments); State Water Quality Protected Areas; water bodies designated with the RARE beneficial use by the State Board (Water Quality Control Plan for the San Diego Basin (1994) and amendments); areas designated as preserves or their equivalent under the Natural Communities Conservation Program within the City and County of Orange; and any other equivalent environmentally sensitive areas which have been identified by the co-permittees.

        “EPA” or “US EPA” shall mean the United States Environmental Protection Agency.

        “Erosion” shall mean when land is diminished or worn away due to wind, water, or glacial ice. Often the eroded debris (silt or sediment) becomes a pollutant via surface runoff. Erosion occurs naturally but can be intensified by land clearing activities such as grading or other development activities.

        “Hearing Officer” shall mean Hearing Officer as defined in Chapter 1.10 of the City Municipal Code.

        “Household hazardous waste” or “HHW” shall mean a household hazardous material that no longer has a use and is discarded or intended to be discarded. The term includes but is not limited to paint and paint-related materials; yard and garden products; household cleaners; used oil, motor vehicle fluids, batteries and oil filters; and household batteries.

        “Illicit connection” shall mean any device or conveyance or drainage system, pipeline, conduit, inlet or outlet through or by which the discharge of any pollutant to the MS4 occurs or may occur, including but not limited to floor drains, pipes or any fabricated or natural conduits. The term “illicit connection” shall not include legal nonconforming connections or connections to the MS4 that are hereinafter authorized by the agency with jurisdiction over the system at the location at which the connection is made.

        “Illicit discharge” shall mean any discharge to the MS4 that is not a discharge exception or a discharge resulting from firefighting activities (40 CFR 122.26(b)(2)).

        “Impaired water body” shall mean a water body that is listed by the State Board as impaired for a particular pollutant or pollutants, pursuant to section 303(d) of the federal Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. § 1251, et seq. An impaired water body is considered one and the same as a “303(d) listed water body.”

        “Impervious cover or impervious surface” shall mean constructed or modified surfaces that cannot effectively infiltrate rainfall.

        “Impervious surface area” shall mean the ground area covered or sheltered by an impervious surface, measured in plain view (i.e., as if from directly above). For example, the impervious surface area for a pitched roof is equal to the ground area it shelters, rather than the surface area of the roof itself.

        “Industrial activity” shall mean manufacturing, processing, or raw materials storage at a commercial, industrial or municipal facility. The term includes, but is not limited to, industrial plant yards; immediate access roads and rail lines used or traveled by carriers of raw materials; manufactured products, waste material, or by-product creation or storage; material handling; refuse storage or disposal; the application or disposal of process wastewaters; storage and maintenance of material handling equipment; treatment, storage or disposal of residuals; outdoor shipping and receiving; activities in manufacturing buildings; storage of raw materials and intermediate and finished products; and areas where significant industrial activity has taken place in the past and significant materials remain and are exposed to storm water. Material handling activities include the storage, loading and unloading, transportation, or conveyance of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, by-product, or waste product.

        “Industrial discharger” shall mean a discharger who owns and/or operates an industrial business and/or site/source anywhere in the City.

        “Industrial sites/sources” shall mean those categories of industrial sites and sources as defined in 40 CFR § 122.26(b)(14), including, but not limited to, those sites and sources that are subject to a State General Permit or other individual NPDES permit, including operating and closed landfills; facilities subject to SARA Title III; and hazardous waste treatment, storage and disposal facilities.

        “Infiltration” shall mean the process of percolating surface runoff into the subsoil.

        “Infiltration BMPs” or “infiltration facility” shall mean any structural treatment BMP designed primarily to percolate surface runoff into the subsurface, such as an infiltration trench or infiltration basin. An infiltration facility may include filtering prior to or during infiltration. BMPs that infiltrate some water but which are designed primarily to retain water or to treat water, such as retention basins, constructed wetlands, or filtering swales are not infiltration facilities.

        “Invoice for costs” shall mean all City costs and expenses incurred in investigating, assessing, monitoring, testing, remedying and/or abating any violation of this Chapter, including but not limited to all administrative overhead, salaries and related expenses, as well as all outside vendor, consulting and legal fees and costs incurred in connection therewith. The term “invoice for costs” shall also include all inspection and monitoring costs and fees incurred pursuant to Section 15.10.060 of this Chapter.

        “Legal nonconforming connection” shall mean connections to the MS4 existing as of the date of the initial adoption of this Chapter that were in compliance with all federal, state and local rules, regulations, statutes and administrative requirements in effect at the time the connection was established, including but not limited to, any discharge permitted pursuant to the terms and conditions of an individual discharge permit issued pursuant to County Ordinance No. 703.

        “Local Implementation Plan” or “LIP” shall mean the City’s adopted plan for implementation of the NPDES order, as may be amended from time to time. The City’s Local Implementation Plan is an appendix to the DAMP and is considered to be a part thereof.

        “Low impact development” or “LID” shall mean a surface runoff management and land development strategy that emphasizes conservation and the use of on-site natural features integrated with engineered, and small scale hydrologic controls to more closely reflect pre-development hydrologic functions, including but not limited to: site design practices, hydrologic source controls, retention BMPs, and biotreatment BMPs.

        “Maintenance of a BMP” shall mean periodic action taken to maintain the as-designed performance of a BMP, and includes but is not limited to repairs to the BMP as necessary, and replacement of the BMP by an equally effective or more effective BMP at the end of its useful life.

        “Maximum extent practicable” or “MEP” is the accepted standard for the development of best management practices (BMPs). When BMPs are required to meet this standard, the BMPs must be the most effective set of BMPs that is still practicable. A BMP is effective if it prevents, reduces or removes the pollutants that would otherwise be present in runoff due to human activity. A BMP is practicable if it complies with other regulations as well as surface runoff regulations; is compatible with the area’s land use, character, facilities, and activities; is technically feasible (considering area soil, geography, water resources, and other resources available); is economically feasible; and provides benefits that are reasonable in relation to costs.

        “Municipal facility” shall mean a facility owned or operated by the City that is used for a governmental purpose. Facilities on municipally owned land that are leased or rented to others to generate municipal revenues are not municipal facilities.

        “Municipal separate storm sewer system” or “MS4” shall mean a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm drains) that are:

        (1)    Owned or operated by a state, city, town, borough, county, parish, district, association, or other public body (created by or pursuant to State law) having jurisdiction over the discharge of surface runoff, sewage, industrial waters or other wastes, including special districts under State law, such as a sewer district, flood control district or drainage district, or similar entity, or an Indian tribe or an authorized Indian tribal organization, or designated and approved management agency under Section 208 of the CWA that discharges to waters of the United States;

        (2)    Designated or used for collection or conveying surface runoff;

        (3)    Not a combined sewer; and

        (4)    Not part of a publically owned treatment works (POTW) as defined in 40 CFR 122.26.

        “New development” shall mean all public and private development (whether residential—single-family, multi-unit or planned unit development; industrial; commercial; retail; and/or other nonresidential construction projects) involving grading for future construction, for which either a discretionary land use approval, a grading permit, a building permit or a nonresidential plumbing permit is required.

        “Nonresidential plumbing permit” shall mean a plumbing permit authorizing the construction and/or installation of facilities for the conveyance of liquids, other than surface runoff, potable water, reclaimed water or domestic sewage.

        “NPDES” shall mean the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.

        “NPDES order” shall mean the currently applicable municipal discharge permit(s) issued by the Regional Board, which permit establishes waste discharge requirements applicable to surface runoff in the City.

        “Person” shall mean any natural person as well as any corporation, partnership, government entity or subdivision thereof, and any trust, estate, association, joint venture, business entity or other similar entity, including their agents, employees and representatives.

        “Pollutant” shall mean any agent that may cause or contribute to the degradation of water quality, such that a condition of pollution or contamination is created or aggravated, including but not limited to:

        (1)    Chips, shavings or pieces of natural or man-made materials, including but not limited to plastics, wood or metal shavings, and byproducts of manufacturing;

        (2)    Solid waste, including, but not limited to: municipal waste and residential (household) waste (such as trash, paper, plastics, lawn clippings and yard wastes, and pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers);

        (3)    Liquid waste, including, but not limited to: oil or other fluids from motor vehicles, lawn mowers and other common household equipment; coolants; and cleaning chemicals, soaps, detergents and surfactants;

        (4)    Metals and nonmetals, including, but not limited to: cadmium, lead, zinc, copper, silver, nickel, chromium, phosphorus, nitrogen and arsenic;

        (5)    Petroleum and related hydrocarbons, including, but not limited to: fuels, lubricants, waste oils, solvents, and grease;

        (6)    Eroded soils, sediment and particulate materials;

        (7)    Animal wastes;

        (8)    Substances having a pH less than 6.5 or greater than 8.5, or having unusual coloration, turbidity, or odor;

        (9)    Pathogens or excessive levels of fecal coliform, fecal streptococcus or enterococcus;

        (10)  Waste materials and waste water generated on construction sites and by construction activities, including but not limited to: paint, paint flakes, stain, sealants, glues, limes, pesticides, fertilizers, herbicides, wood preservatives, solvents, asbestos, stucco fragments, oils, lubricants, hydraulic fluid, radiator fluid, battery fluids, construction equipment wash water, concrete pouring and cleanup wash water, concrete detergents, steam cleaning and sand blasting residues, chemical degreasing or diluting agents, and super chlorinated water generated by potable water line flushing;

        (11)  Materials causing an increase in biochemical oxygen demand, chemical oxygen demand or total organic carbon;

        (12)  Materials which contain base/neutral or acid extractable organic compounds;

        (13)  Those pollutants defined in Section 1362(6) of the Clean Water Act, including solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, industrial, municipal and agricultural waste; and

        (14)  Any other constituent or material discharged that may cause or contribute to a condition of pollution or nuisance or otherwise causes or has the reasonably potential to cause a violation of the NPDES order.

        “Post-construction” shall mean long-term activities or facilities that remain after construction is completed.

        “Priority commercial sites/sources” shall mean the following commercial sites/sources (which are each considered to be priority threats to water quality):

        (1)    Automobile mechanical repair, maintenance, fueling, or cleaning;

        (2)    Airplane mechanical repair, maintenance, fueling, or cleaning;

        (3)    Boat mechanical repair, maintenance, fueling, or cleaning;

        (4)    Equipment repair, maintenance, fueling, or cleaning;

        (5)    Automobile and other vehicle body repair or painting;

        (6)    Mobile automobile or other vehicle washing;

        (7)    Automobile (or other vehicle) parking lots and storage facilities;

        (8)    Retail or wholesale fueling;

        (9)    Pest control services;

        (10)  Eating or drinking establishments;

        (11)  Mobile carpet, drape or furniture cleaning;

        (12)  Cement mixing or cutting;

        (13)  Masonry;

        (14)  Painting and coating;

        (15)  Botanical or zoological gardens and exhibits;

        (16)  Landscaping;

        (17)  Nurseries and greenhouses;

        (18)  Golf courses, parks and other recreational areas/facilities;

        (19)  Cemeteries;

        (20)  Pool and fountain cleaning;

        (21)  Marinas;

        (22)  Portable sanitary services;

        (23)  Building material retailers and storage;

        (24)  Animal facilities;

        (25)  Mobile pet services;

        (26)  Power washing services;

        (27)  Other commercial sites/sources that the Director determines has or may contribute a significant pollutant load to the MS4;

        (28)  Any commercial site/source tributary to an impaired water body, where the site or source generates pollutants for which the water body is impaired; and

        (29)  Any commercial site/source within or directly adjacent to or discharging directly to a coastal lagoon or other receiving water within an ESA.

        (30)  Other commercial sites/sources with a history of unauthorized discharges to the MS4.

        “Priority development project” or “PDP” shall mean a development project that falls within any one or more of the following categories:

        (1)    New development projects that create ten thousand (10,000) square feet or more of impervious surface (collectively over the entire project site), including commercial, industrial, residential, mixed-use, and public projects on private or public land within the City.

        (2)    Automotive repair shops that are categorized in any one of the following Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) codes: 5013, 5014, 5541, 7532-7534, and 7536-7539.

        (3)    Retail gasoline outlets (RGOs) that meet the following criteria: (a) are five thousand (5,000) square feet or more in total size; or (b) have a projected average daily traffic (ADT) of one hundred (100) or more vehicles per day.

        (4)    Restaurants. “Restaurant” shall mean a facility that sells prepared foods and drinks for consumption, including stationary lunch counters and refreshment stands selling prepared foods and drinks for immediate consumption (SIC code 5812). Restaurants where the land development is greater than five thousand (5,000) square feet shall comply with all requirements imposed on priority development projects under this Chapter. Restaurants where the land development is less than five thousand (5,000) square feet need not comply with those SSMP requirements involving structural control BMPs or any of the numeric sizing criteria requirements set forth in the NPDES order as being applicable to priority development projects.

        (5)    Parking lots of five thousand (5,000) square feet or more or with fifteen (15) parking spaces or more which are exposed to surface runoff. “Parking lot” shall mean land area or a facility for the temporary parking or storage of motor vehicles used personally, for business, or for commerce.

        (6)    Streets, roads, highways, and freeways. This category includes any paved surface that is five thousand (5,000) square feet or greater used for the transportation of automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, and other vehicles.

        (7)    Hillside development greater than five thousand (5,000) square feet. “Hillside development” shall mean any development which is located in an area with known erosive soil conditions or where the natural slope is twenty-five percent (25%) or greater.

        (8)    Impervious surface of two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet or more located within, directly adjacent to, or discharging directly to an environmentally sensitive area; or a project with an increase in impervious surface area of ten percent (10%) or more of its naturally occurring condition located within, directly adjacent to, or discharging directly to an environmentally sensitive area.

        (9)    All redevelopment projects that create, add or replace at least five thousand (5,000) or more square feet of impervious surface area on an already developed site, and the existing development or redevelopment project falls under another priority development project category. If the redevelopment results in the addition or replacement of less than fifty percent (50%) of the impervious surface area on-site and the existing development was not previously subject to SSMP requirements, the numeric sizing criteria set forth in the NPDES order only apply to the addition or replacement area. If the addition or replacement accounts for fifty percent (50%) or more of the impervious surface area, the SSMP requirements shall apply to the entire development.

        (10)  Such additional development projects as may be added from time to time to the City’s Model WQMP as priority development projects, in accordance with the NPDES order (e.g., those development projects which result in the disturbance of one (1) or more acres of land).

        Where a new development project feature, such as a parking lot, falls into a priority development project category, the entire project shall become a priority development project.

        “Priority residential areas/activities” shall mean any of the following residential areas/activities (any one of which is considered to be a priority threat to water quality):

        (1)    Automobile repair and maintenance;

        (2)    Automobile washing;

        (3)    Automobile parking;

        (4)    Home and garden care activities and product use (pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers);

        (5)    Disposal of household hazardous waste (e.g., paints, cleaning products, and other wastes generated during home improvement or maintenance activities);

        (6)    Disposal of pet waste;

        (7)    Disposal of green waste;

        (8)    Any other residential source of pollutants which the Director determines may result in the discharge of pollutants to the MS4;

        (9)    Any residence tributary to an impaired water body, where the residence generates pollutants for which the water body is impaired; and

        (10)  Any residence within or directly adjacent to or discharging directly to coastal waters or other receiving waters within an ESA.

        “Private property” shall mean any real property, irrespective of ownership, which is not open to the general public.

        “Prohibited discharge” shall mean any discharge that is not a discharge exception, and which contains any pollutant, from public or private property that is discharged to, or that has the reasonable potential to be discharged to (1) the MS4; (2) any upstream flow, which is tributary to the MS4; (3) any groundwater, river, stream, creek, lagoon, lake, reservoir, wash or dry weather arroyo, wetlands area, marsh, coastal slough; or (4) any coastal harbor, bay, lagoon, or the Pacific Ocean.

        “Project proponent” shall mean the developer who is proposing a particular development project.

        “Rainy season” shall mean from October 1st through April 30th.

        “Receiving waters” shall mean all waters that are “waters of the State” within the scope of the California Water Code, including, but not limited to, natural streams, creeks, rivers, reservoirs, lakes, ponds, water in vernal pools, lagoons, estuaries, bays, the Pacific Ocean, and groundwater.

        “Redevelopment” shall mean the proposed creation, addition, and/or replacement of impervious surface area on an already developed site. Examples include the expansion of a building footprint, road widening, the addition to or replacement of a structure, and creation or addition of impervious surface areas. Replacement of impervious surface areas includes any activity that is not part of a routine maintenance activity where impervious material(s) are removed, exposing underlying soil during construction. Redevelopment does not include trenching and resurfacing associated with utility work; resurfacing existing roadways; new sidewalk construction, pedestrian ramps, or bike lane on existing roads; and routine replacement of damaged pavement, such as pothole repair.

        “Regional Board” or “SDRWQCB” shall mean the California Regional Water Quality Control Board, San Diego Region.

        “Regional Water Quality Control Board” or “RWQCB” shall mean any one (1) of nine (9) regional water quality control boards in the State of California which administer water quality requirements and issue NPDES orders, permits, and related surface runoff requirements.

        “Responsible party” shall mean “responsible party” as defined in Chapter 1.10 of the City Municipal Code.

        “Standard Storm Water Mitigation Plan,” “SSMPs,” “Standard Urban Storm Water Mitigation Plan,” “SUSMP,” “Water Quality Management Plan” or “WQMP” shall all mean that development document required under the NPDES Order for Priority Development Projects, and shall include those plans meeting the requirements of the City Model Water Quality Management Plan.

        “State Board” or “SWRCB” shall mean the California State Water Resources Control Board.

        “State General Permit” shall mean the waste discharge requirements for discharges of storm water associated with industrial activities excluding construction activities permit (State Industrial General Permit) and/or the NPDES General Permit for storm water discharges associated with construction and land disturbance activities (State Construction General Permit) and the terms and requirements of either or both. In the event the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) revokes the in-lieu permitting authority of the State Water Board, then the term State General Permit shall also refer to any EPA administered runoff control program for industrial and construction activities.

        “Storm drain system” shall mean private and public streets, gutters, channels, storm drains, constructed drains, lined diversion structures, wash areas, inlets, outlets or other facilities, other than sanitary sewers, which are a part of or tributary to the City and County-wide surface runoff system used for the purpose of collecting, storing, transporting or disposing of surface runoff.

        “Storm water” shall mean storm water runoff, snow melt runoff, and surface runoff and drainage (see 40 CFR 122.26(b)(13)).

        “Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan” or “SWPPP” shall mean a document which meets the requirements of an SWPPP under the State General Permit or other NPDES permit.

        “Tributary to an impaired water body” shall mean a facility or activity which is tributary to an impaired water body if surface runoff from that facility or activity enters (1) the storm drain system at a place and in a manner that will carry pollutants for which that water body is impaired in that discharge to the impaired water body; (2) a flowing stream that will carry pollutants for which that water body is impaired in that discharge to the impaired water body; or (3) an ephemeral stream that reaches the impaired water body during storm events and that will carry pollutants for which that water body is impaired from the facility or activity to the impaired water body during such storm events.

        “Water Quality Management Plan” or “WQMP” shall mean the Standard Storm Water Mitigation Plan, SSMP, Standard Urban Storm Water Mitigation Plan or SUSMP as defined above.

        “Water quality management plan requirements” or “WQMP requirements” shall mean those requirements as set forth in the City’s Model WQMP.

        “Water quality standards” shall mean those water quality standards (i.e., the water quality objectives combined with the beneficial uses, such as swimming, fishing, municipal drinking water supply, etc.) as set forth in the Regional Water Quality Control Plan (Basin Plan) for the San Diego Region, as adopted by the Regional and State Boards, and applicable to the jurisdictional area of the City.

        “Waters of the United States” shall mean water subject to the regulatory jurisdiction of the United States under the federal Clean Water Act and applicable case law. (Added by Ord. 10-12, 11/8/10)

 

15.10.040 General Provisions.
        (a)    Construction and Application. This Chapter shall be interpreted to be consistent with the requirements of the NPDES order. This Chapter is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law. The requirements of this Chapter should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this Chapter imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose more protective standards for human health or the environment, shall take precedence.

        (b)    Recycled Water. This Chapter is not intended to prohibit or prevent the use of recycled water. This Chapter is intended to require the use of best management practices (BMPs) for such uses and discharges as necessary to protect human health and the environment in accordance with governing laws. (Added by Ord. 10-12, 11/8/10)

 

15.10.050 Prohibited Discharges and Prohibitions on Illicit Connections.
        (a)    No person shall:

        (1)    Cause, permit, allow or facilitate any prohibited discharge.

        (2)    Construct, maintain, operate and/or utilize any illicit connection.

        (3)    Act, cause, permit or suffer any agent, employee, or independent contractor, to construct, maintain, operate or utilize any illicit connection, including but not limited to, causing, allowing, permitting or facilitating any prohibited discharge through an illicit connection.

        (b)    Any owner and/or operator of an illicit connection shall immediately cause the connection to be removed and/or eliminated. This prohibition on illicit connections shall apply irrespective of whether the illicit connection was established prior to the date of the enactment of this Chapter; however, legal nonconforming connections shall not become illicit connections until the earlier of the following:

        (1)    For all structural improvements to private property installed for the purpose of discharge to the storm drain system, five (5) years from the initial adoption of this requirement; or

        (2)    For all nonstructural improvements to private property (including natural surface flow patterns, depressions or channels traversing one (1) or more properties) existing for the purpose of discharging to the storm drain system, six (6) months following delivery of a notice to the owner or person in charge of the day-to-day activities of the property, which states a legal nonconforming connection has been identified. The notice of a legal nonconforming connection shall state the date of expiration of the use under this Chapter.

        (c)    A civil or administrative violation of this Section shall exist irrespective of the negligence or intent of the violator to construct, maintain, operate or utilize an illicit connection, or to cause, allow, permit or facilitate any discharge prohibited by this Section.

        (d)    If the authorized enforcement official reasonably determines that a discharge which is otherwise considered a discharge exception may adversely affect the beneficial uses of receiving waters, or may be a significant source of pollutants, then the authorized enforcement staff may give written notice to the owner of the private property or site/source, that the discharge shall no longer be considered a discharge exception following the expiration of the thirty (30) day period commencing upon delivery of the notice. Upon expiration of the thirty (30) day period, any continuation of the discharge shall constitute a violation of this Section.

        (e)    The owner, operator, or person responsible for installing, maintaining, operating or utilizing an illicit connection that was a legal nonconforming connection may request an administrative hearing, pursuant to the procedures set forth in connection with an administrative compliance order, to attempt to obtain an extension of the period of time allowed for the continued use of said connection. A reasonable extension of use may be authorized by the City Manager upon consideration of the following factors:

        (1)    The potential adverse effects of the continued use of the connection upon the beneficial uses of receiving waters;

        (2)    The economic investment of the discharger in the legal nonconforming connection; and

        (3)    The financial effect upon the discharger of a termination of the legal nonconforming connection. (Added by Ord. 10-12, 11/8/10)

15.10.060 Control of Surface Runoff from Development.
        (a)    Development Requirements.

        (1)    All new development and redevelopment projects within the City shall be undertaken in accordance with:

        (A)   The development project guidance, including but not limited to, where applicable, the City Model WQMP; provided, however, that compliance with the requirements of the development project guidance shall not exempt a person from independently complying with all other applicable provisions of this Chapter.

        (B)   Any conditions and requirements established by the Director which are reasonably related to the reduction or elimination of pollutants in surface runoff from the project site.

        (2)    The owner of a new development or redevelopment project or its assigns, or upon transfer of the property, its successors-in-interest to the property, shall implement and adhere to all terms, conditions and requirements imposed by this Chapter.

        (3)    Each failure by the owner of the property, its assigns, or its successors in interest to the property to implement and adhere to the terms, conditions and requirements imposed on a new development or redevelopment project, shall constitute a violation of this Chapter.

        (4)    The Director may require that the terms, conditions and requirements imposed pursuant to this Section be recorded with the County Recorder’s office by the property owner. The signature of the owner of the property or any successive owner shall be sufficient for the recording of these terms, conditions and requirements and a signature on behalf of the City shall not be required for recordation.

        (5)    If the Director determines that the project will have a de minimis impact on the quality of surface runoff, then he/she may issue a written waiver and/or a conditional waiver of some or all of the applicable requirements of the development project guidance.

        (b)    Approval Process Criteria and Requirements for all Development Projects. For all proposed development projects, each developer, as a condition of project approval, shall identify the necessary measures to be implemented to assure that the expected surface runoff from the project will be in compliance with the terms and conditions of this Chapter.

        (c)    Compliance with the conditions and requirements of an approved Water Quality Management Plan shall not exempt any person from the requirement to independently comply with all other applicable provisions of this Chapter.

        (d)    Best Management Practice Requirements. The developer shall comply with all other applicable best management practice requirements set forth in the DAMP and the City’s Local Implementation Plan as required by the City, to prevent, reduce or remove, to the maximum extent practicable, pollutants from entering the MS4.

        (e)    Compliance with WQMP Requirements. No developer of a priority development project shall commence any land disturbing activities in connection with the proposed project without first submitting and obtaining the City’s approval of a Water Quality Management Plan for the project. All Water Quality Management Plans must be consistent with the City’s Model WQMP, including demonstrating compliance with all applicable WQMP requirements and low impact development and hydromodifcation requirements provided for in the City’s Local Implementation Plan.

        (f)    Implementation of WQMP. All best management practices set forth in the approved project-specific Water Quality Management Plan, including, but not limited to, any applicable low impact development requirements, shall be implemented and maintained at all priority development projects, by the developer, owner, and/or other responsible party.

        (g)    Where a development project will result in activities that are subject to one or more State General Permit(s), the applicant shall provide evidence that coverage under such State General Permit(s) has been obtained;

        (h)    Each applicant of a development project shall comply with all grading and construction activity requirements necessary to comply with the City’s Grading and Excavation Control Ordinance; and

        (i)     Each applicant of a development project shall describe the mechanism to be utilized to ensure ongoing long-term maintenance of all structural post-construction BMPs, where such long-term maintenance is otherwise to be performed to comply with this Chapter.

        (j)     Cost Recovery. The City shall be reimbursed by the project applicant for all costs and expenses incurred by the Planning Division, Engineering Division and/or the Building Division in the review of new development or redevelopment projects for compliance with the development project guidance. The City Planning Division, Engineering Division and/or Building Division may elect to require a deposit of estimated costs and expenses, and the actual costs and expenses shall be deducted from the deposit, and the balance, if any, refunded to the project applicant. (Added by Ord. 10-12, 11/8/10)

 

15.10.070 BMPs, Monitoring, Inspections.
        (a)    Scope of Inspections and Monitoring.

        (1)    Compliance Assessments. The Authorized Enforcement Staff may inspect private property for the purpose of verifying compliance with this Chapter.

        (2)    Right to Inspect. Except where exigent circumstances dictate otherwise, and except for annual inspections of industrial sites/sources (described below), prior to commencing any inspection of private property, the Authorized Enforcement Staff shall obtain either the consent of the owner or person in charge of the day-to-day activities of the private property, or shall obtain an administrative inspection warrant or criminal search warrant. For industrial sites/sources, because such dischargers are identified under the NPDES order as creating increased threats to water quality, the Authorized Enforcement Staff is hereby authorized to inspect each such industrial site/source once annually, during normal business hours, upon twenty-four (24) hours notice to the owner, operator, or person responsible for the day-to-day activities of such facility.

        (3)    Entry to Inspect. Upon obtaining the right to inspect in accordance with Subsection (a)(2) above, the Authorized Enforcement Staff may enter upon private property to (1) investigate a violation or potential violation of this Chapter; (2) investigate the source of any discharge of a pollutant or the potential discharge of a pollutant to the storm drain system; (3) conduct an annual inspection; (4) conduct a follow up inspection; or (5) conduct an inspection to determine compliance with any best management practices identified as conditions of approval for a project and/or that were included in the project-specific Water Quality Management Plan.

        (4)    Portable Equipment. For purposes of verifying compliance with this Chapter, the Authorized Enforcement Staff may inspect any vehicle, truck, trailer, tank truck or other mobile equipment.

        (5)    Records Review. The Authorized Enforcement Staff may inspect all records of the owner or person in charge of the day-to-day activities of the property relating to the purpose of the inspection, including but not limited to, compliance with the project-specific Water Quality Management Plan or the conditions of the project approval, and/or the use of chemicals or processes presently or previously being utilized on-site. The records to be reviewed may include, but are not limited to, material and/or chemical inventories, facility maps or schematics and diagrams, material safety data sheets, hazardous waste manifests, business plans, State General Permits, Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plans, monitoring program plans, as well as any record(s) relating to illicit connections, illicit discharges, prohibited discharges, legal nonconforming connections or any other source or potential source of pollutants discharged or with the reasonable potential to be discharged to the MS4.

        (6)    Sampling and Testing. The Authorized Enforcement Staff may inspect, sample and/or test any surface runoff, soils, groundwater, process discharge, materials within any waste storage area (including any contained contents) and/or treatment system discharge, for the purpose of determining the potential for the discharge of pollutants to the MS4. The Authorized Enforcement Staff may investigate the integrity of all storm drain and sanitary sewer systems, any legal nonconforming connection or other pipelines on the property, using appropriate tests, including but not limited to smoke and dye tests or video surveys. The Authorized Inspector and/or Enforcement Staff may take photographs or video tapes, make measurements or drawings and create any other record reasonably necessary to document their inspection or the conditions on the property.

        (7)    Monitoring. The Authorized Inspector and/or Enforcement Staff may erect and maintain monitoring devices for the purpose of measuring any discharge or potential source of discharge to the MS4.

        (8)    Test Results. The owner, operator or person in charge of the day-to-day activities of private property subject to inspection shall, on submission of a written request, be provided copies of all monitoring and test results conducted by the Authorized Inspector.

        (b)    Industrial Sites/Sources—BMPs, Monitoring.

        (1)    BMP Implementation. Each owner, operator, or person in charge of day-to-day activities of each industrial site/source in the City shall implement those minimum BMPs as may be designated by the Director. For those industrial sites/sources that are tributary to impaired water bodies and/or that are within or directly adjacent to or discharging directly to receiving waters within environmentally sensitive areas, the Director may require additional controls.

        (2)    Monitoring. All industrial sites/sources shall implement a monitoring program as required by the Director. Such monitoring programs may include a program that provides quantitative data from a minimum of two (2) storm events per year for the following constituents:

        (A)   Any pollutant listed in effluent guidelines subcategories where applicable;

        (B)   Any pollutant for which an effluent limit has been established in an existing NPDES Permit for the facility;

        (C)   Oil and grease or total organic carbon (TOC);

        (D)   pH;

        (E)   Total suspended solids (TSS);

        (F)    Specific conductance;

        (G)   Toxic chemicals and other pollutants that are likely to be present in surface runoff; and

        (H)   Any pollutant that may be used, stored, generated or disposed of, at a site/source which is tributary to an impaired water body (where the water body is impaired for that pollutant), unless the owner, operator or person in charge of the day-to-day operations can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Director that there is no reasonable potential the pollutant will be discharged to the impaired water body.

        (I)    Any pollutant for which a non-storm water dry weather action level or a storm water action level has been established under the NPDES order.

        (c)    Priority Commercial Sites/Sources—BMPs. Each owner, operator, or person in charge of day-to-day operations of a priority commercial site/source in the City shall implement those minimum BMPs as may be designated by the Director. For those commercial sites that are tributary to impaired water bodies and/or that are within or directly adjacent to, or discharging directly to, receiving waters within ESAs, the Director may require additional controls.

        (d)    Priority Residential Areas and Activities—BMPs. Each owner, operator, or person in charge of day-to-day operations of each priority residential area and activity in the City shall implement those minimum BMPs as may be designated by the Director. For those priority residential areas and activities that are tributary to impaired water bodies and/or that are within or directly adjacent to, or discharging directly to, receiving waters within ESAs, the Director may require additional controls.

        (e)    Homeowners’ Associations (HOAs), Including Common Interest Areas. Each person who owns, operates, or is in charge of day-to-day activities of HOAs and/or common interest areas on private property in the City, shall ensure that surface runoff from private roads, drainage facilities, and other components of the storm drain system, including those owned and/or managed by homeowners’ associations, meets the objectives of the NPDES order, as may be required by the Director.

        (f)    Construction Sites—Permit Approvals, BMPs, Inspections.

        (1)    Construction and Grading Permits. Prior to issuance of any construction, grading or building permit or approval, the Director may require, as a condition to such permit or approval, the implementation of BMPs to ensure that the discharge of pollutants from the site are in compliance with this Chapter. Each developer shall implement, maintain and operate all such BMPs in a timely and reasonably diligent manner. All construction, grading and building activities shall comply with all other applicable laws, including all other applicable City ordinances, the NPDES order and applicable State General Permit(s). Construction, grading and building permit requirements that may be required include the following or their equivalent:

        (A)   Developing and implementing a plan to manage surface runoff from the site and avoid soil contamination at all times;

        (B)   Implementing BMPs for any rain events, as necessary to ensure compliance with the NPDES order;

        (C)   Emphasizing erosion prevention as the most important measure for keeping sediment on site during construction;

        (D)   Utilizing sediment controls as a supplement to erosion prevention for keeping sediment on-site during construction, but not as the single or primary method;

        (E)   Minimizing areas that are cleared and graded to only the portion of the site that is necessary for construction;

        (F)    Preservation of natural hydrological features and riparian buffers and corridors as feasible;

        (G)   Minimizing exposure time of disturbed soil areas;

        (H)   Temporarily stabilizing and reseeding disturbed soil areas as rapidly as possible;

        (I)    Permanently revegetating or landscaping as early as feasible;

        (J)    Stabilizing all slopes; and

        (K)   For each project subject to a State General Permit, providing evidence of existing coverage under such permit.

        (2)    BMP Implementation. Each owner, operator, or person in charge of day-to-day activities of each construction and/or grading site in the City shall implement those minimum BMPs as may be designated by the Director. For those construction sites that are tributary to impaired water bodies and/or that are within or directly adjacent to, or discharging directly to, receiving waters within ESAs, the Director may require additional controls.

        (3)    Inspections. Construction and grading sites, and discharges from such sites and operations, are identified under the NPDES order as creating increased threats to water quality during the rainy season and/or during rain events. The Authorized Enforcement Staff are authorized to inspect, in accordance with the provisions of this Section, each construction site throughout both the rainy season and the dry (non-rainy) season. (Added by Ord. 10-12, 11/8/10)

15.10.080 Enforcement.
        (a)    Administrative Remedies.

        (1)    Administrative Citation Program. In addition to all other enforcement mechanisms provided for in this Chapter, any violation of this Chapter may be enforced through the Administrative Citation Program set forth in Chapter 1.10 of the City Municipal Code.

        (2)    Administrative Compliance Orders. In addition to all other enforcement mechanisms provided for in this Chapter, Authorized Enforcement Staff may issue an administrative compliance order in accordance with the following:

        (A)   The administrative compliance order may be issued to:

        (i)     The owner, operator or person in charge of the day-to-day activities of any property requiring abatement of conditions that have caused, are continuing to cause, or may in the future cause a violation of this Chapter;

        (ii)    The owner of the property or any responsible party that is subject to the requirements of any water quality management plan, to ensure implementation of and adherence to the terms, conditions and requirements of the WQMP;

        (iii)   A permittee subject to the requirements of any permit issued pursuant to this Chapter, to ensure compliance with the terms, conditions and requirements of such permit; and

        (iv)   Any person responsible for an illicit connection or prohibited discharge.

        (B)   The administrative compliance order may include the following terms and requirements:

        (i)     Specific steps and time schedules for compliance as reasonably necessary to prevent the imminent threat of a prohibited discharge, including, but not limited to, a prohibited discharge from any pipe, pond, pit, well, surface impoundment, or holding or storage area;

        (ii)    Specific steps and time schedules to come into compliance with any provision of this Chapter;

        (iii)   Specific requirements for assessment, containment, cleanup, removal, storage, installation of overhead covering, or proper disposal of any pollutant having contacted or having the reasonable potential to contact surface runoff;

        (iv)   Any terms or requirements reasonably calculated to achieve full compliance with the terms, conditions and requirements of any permit issued pursuant this Chapter; and

        (v)    Any other terms or requirements reasonably calculated to prevent the imminent threat of, or a continuing violation of, this Chapter.

        (3)    Cease and Desist Orders. In addition to all other enforcement mechanisms provided for in this Chapter, the Authorized Enforcement Staff may issue a cease and desist order. A cease and desist order may direct the owner, operator or person in charge of the day-to-day activities of any property and/or other person responsible for a discharge, to:

        (A)   Immediately discontinue any illicit connection or prohibited discharge;

        (B)   Immediately contain or divert any flow of surface runoff from the property, where the flow is occurring in violation of any provision of this Chapter;

        (C)   Immediately discontinue any other violation of this Chapter;

        (D)   Fully assess and clean up all areas affected by any violation; and

        (E)   Cease and desist with any or all continued work on a project (i.e., a stop work order) until such time as appropriate BMPs are implemented, the prohibited discharge is eliminated, or other appropriate actions are taken to ensure compliance with this Chapter.

        (4)    No cease and desist order is to be stayed, tolled or otherwise put on hold as a result of any administrative or other legal challenge to its terms. A cease and desist order is only to be stayed, tolled or put on hold where required as a result of the administrative review process or by a court of competent jurisdiction.

        (5)    Abatement of the Discharge of Pollutants on Public Property. Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter to the contrary, the City may take all action necessary to inspect, investigate, assess, remedy or otherwise abate any discharge of a pollutant on or into any public property, including all publicly owned portions of the MS4. All costs and fees incurred by the City or any other responsible governmental agency and/or contractor of the City in this regard may be included within an invoice for costs and recovered against the responsible party or parties in accordance with provisions of this Chapter.

        (6)    Service and Administrative Hearing Procedures for Administrative Compliance Orders, Cease and Desist Orders and Other Violations of this Chapter. Except where the nuisance abatement procedure under Chapter 6.14 of the City Municipal Code is being followed, all administrative compliance orders, cease and desist orders and all other enforcement of violations of this Chapter shall be subject to the service and administrative hearing procedures provided for in Chapter 1.10 of the City Municipal Code.

        (7)    Recovery of Costs. The Authorized Enforcement Staff may deliver to the owner, operator or person in charge of the day-to-day activities of any private property, any permittee or any other responsible party or other person who becomes subject to an administrative compliance order, a cease and desist order, or who otherwise is determined to have violated this Chapter, an invoice for costs. Any invoice for costs shall be shall be subject to the service and administrative hearing procedures provided for in Chapter 1.10 of the City Municipal Code. Any invoice for costs shall be immediately due and payable to the City. If any owner, operator or person in charge of the day-to-day activities, permittee or any other responsible party fails to either pay or successfully appeal the invoice for costs in accordance with this Chapter, then the Enforcing Attorney may initiate any available legal process to collect such invoice for costs.

        (8)    City Abatement. In the event the owner of private property, the operator of a facility, a permittee, or any other responsible party fails to comply with any provision of an administrative compliance order or cease and desist order issued pursuant to this Chapter, the Authorized Enforcement Staff may request the Enforcing Attorney to obtain an abatement warrant or other appropriate judicial authorization to enter the private property, abate the condition and restore the area. Any costs incurred by the City in obtaining and carrying out an abatement warrant or other judicial authorization may be included in the invoice for costs and recovered pursuant to this Section.

        (b)    Nuisance Abatement. Any condition in violation of the prohibitions of this Chapter, including but not limited to the maintenance or use of any illicit connection or the occurrence of any prohibited discharge, shall constitute a threat to the public health, safety and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance pursuant to Government Code Section 38771. The City is hereby authorized to take any and all enforcement action as provided for in accordance with Chapter 6.14 of the City Municipal Code to abate said nuisance.

        (c)    Criminal Sanctions.

        (1)    Prosecutor. The Enforcing Attorney may act on the request of an Authorized Enforcement Staff to pursue enforcement actions in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.

        (2)    Misdemeanors. Any person who negligently or knowingly violates any provision of this Chapter, undertakes to conceal any violation of this Chapter, continues any violation of this Chapter after notice thereof, or violates the terms, conditions and requirements of any applicable Water Quality Management Plan or permit, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

        (3)    Damages. The Enforcing Action may petition the Court for any of the following damages:

        (A)   The recovery of all costs incurred and/or to be incurred in the enforcement of this Chapter, including but not limited to costs relating to investigation, sampling, monitoring, inspection, cleanup, administrative expenses, legal fees and costs, and all other expenses as authorized by law, as well as damages to public property and consequential damages;

        (B)   All costs incurred in cleaning up and/or mitigating harm to the environment or public property, or to reduce the threat to human health;

        (C)   Damages for harm to the environment or public property; and

        (D)   Restitution and injunctive, declaratory and such other equitable relief as may be allowed by law.

        (d)    Consecutive Violations. Each day in which a violation occurs, and each failure to comply with any provision of this Chapter or any administrative compliance order, cease and desist order, or terms of a permit issued pursuant to this Chapter, shall constitute a separate violation of this Chapter.

        (e)    Nonexclusive Remedies. Each remedy available for the enforcement of this Chapter shall be nonexclusive. It is within the discretion of the Authorized Enforcement Staff or Enforcing Attorney to seek cumulative remedies.

        (f)    Citations. Pursuant to Penal Code Section 836.5, the Authorized Enforcement Staff shall have the authority to cause the arrest of any person committing a violation of this Chapter. The person shall be released and issued a citation to appear before a magistrate in accordance with Penal Code Sections 853.5, 853.6, and 853.9, unless the person demands to be taken before a magistrate. Following issuance of any citation, the Authorized Enforcement Staff shall refer the matter to the Enforcing Attorney. Each citation to appear shall state the name and address of the violator, the provisions of this Chapter violated, and the time and place of appearance before the court, which shall be at least ten (10) business days after the date of violation. The person cited shall sign the citation giving his or her written promise to appear as stated therein. If the person cited fails to appear, the Enforcing Attorney may request issuance of a warrant for the arrest of the person cited.

        (g)    Violations of Other Laws. Any person acting in violation of this Chapter also may be acting in violation of the Clean Water Act or the State Water Code and other laws and also may be subject to sanctions including civil liability. Accordingly, the Enforcing Attorney is authorized to file a civil suit pursuant to Section 505 of the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. Section 1365, seeking penalties, damages and orders compelling compliance and other appropriate relief. The Enforcing Attorney may notify any appropriate federal, State or local agency of any alleged violation of this Chapter.

        (h)    Injunctions. At the request of an Authorized Enforcement Staff, the Enforcing Attorney may cause the filing in a court of competent jurisdiction of a civil action seeking an injunction against any threatened or continuing noncompliance with the provisions of this Chapter. Any temporary, preliminary or permanent injunction issued pursuant hereto may include an order for reimbursement to the City of all fees and costs incurred in enforcing this Chapter, including costs of inspection, investigation and monitoring, the costs of abatement undertaken at the expense of the City, costs relating to restoration of the environment, all legal and consulting fees and costs and all other expenses as authorized by law.

        (i)     Other Civil Remedies.

        (1)    The City Manager may ask the Enforcing Attorney to file a civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction seeking:

        (A)   The recovery of all costs incurred and/or to be incurred in the enforcement of this Chapter, including but not limited to costs relating to investigation, sampling, monitoring, inspection, cleanup, administrative expenses, legal and consulting fees and costs, and all other expenses as authorized by law, as well as damages to public property, and consequential damages;

        (B)   All costs incurred in cleaning up and/or mitigating harm to the environment or public property, or to reduce the threat to human health;

        (C)   Damages for harm to the environment or public property; and

        (D)   Restitution and injunctive, declaratory and such other equitable relief as may be allowed by law.

        (2)    The Enforcing Attorney is authorized to file actions for damages resulting from any violation causing trespass or a nuisance on public property or to the MS4 from any violation of this Chapter, as well as for injunctive, declaratory and other equitable relief, where the violation has caused or is threatening to cause damage, contamination or harm to the environment, public property or the MS4.

        (3)    The remedies available to the City pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter shall not limit the right of the City to seek any other remedy that may be available by law, including, but not limited, to the nuisance remedies provided under Chapter 6.14 of the City’s Municipal Code. (Added by Ord. 10-12, 11/8/10)

 

15.10.090 Permits.
        (a)    Discharge Permit Procedure.

        (1)    Permit. On application of the owner of private property or the operator of any facility and/or site/source, where such private property is not otherwise subject to the requirements of an existing NPDES permit, the Director may issue a permit authorizing the discharges to the MS4 if:

        (A)   The discharge of material or constituents is reasonably necessary for the conduct of otherwise legal activities on the private property; and

        (B)   The discharge will not cause a nuisance, impair the beneficial uses of receiving waters or cause any reduction in established water quality standards.

        (2)    Application. The applicant shall provide all information requested by the Director for review and consideration of the application, including, but not limited to, specific detail as to the activities to be conducted on the private property, plans and specifications for facilities located on the private property, identification of equipment or processes to be used on-site and other information as may be requested in order to determine the constituents and quantities thereof which may be discharged if permission is granted.

        (3)    Permit Issuance. The permit shall be granted or denied by the Director no later than sixty (60) business days following the completion and acceptance of the application as determined by the Director. The applicant shall be notified in person or by first-class mail of the action taken.

        (4)    Permit Conditions. The permit may include terms, conditions and requirements to ensure compliance with the objectives of this Chapter and as necessary to protect the receiving waters, including but not limited to:

        (A)   Identification of the discharge location on the private property and the location at which the discharge will enter the MS4;

        (B)   Identification of the constituents and quantities thereof to be discharged into the MS4;

        (C)   Specification of pollution prevention techniques and structural or non-structural control requirements as reasonably necessary to prevent prohibited discharges;

        (D)   Requirements for self-monitoring of any discharge;

        (E)   Requirements for submission of documents or data, such as technical reports, production data, discharge reports, self-monitoring reports and waste manifests; and

        (F)    Other terms and conditions appropriate to ensure compliance with the provisions of this Chapter and the protection of receiving waters, including requirements for compliance with best management practices guidance documents approved by any federal or regional agency.

        (5)    General Permit. In the discretion of the Director, the permit in accordance with the conditions identified in this Section, may be prepared as a general permit applicable to a specific category of activities. If a general permit is issued, any person intending to discharge within the scope of the authorization provided by the general permit may do so by filing an application to discharge with the Director. No discharge within the scope of the general permit shall occur until such application is filed. Notwithstanding the foregoing in this Section, the Director in his or her discretion may eliminate the requirement that an application for a general permit be filed for any specific activity for which a general permit has been issued.

        (6)    Permit Fees. The permission to discharge shall be conditioned upon the applicant’s payment of the City’s costs, in accordance with a fee schedule adopted by City Council resolution, as follows:

        (A)   For individually issued permits, the costs of reviewing the permit application, preparing and issuing the permit and the costs reasonably related to administrating this permit program; and

        (B)   For general permits, the costs of reviewing the permit application, that portion of the costs of preparing the general permit which is reasonably attributable to the permittee’s application for the general permit and the costs reasonably related to administering the general permit program.

        (b)    Permit Suspension, Revocation or Modification.

        (1)    The Director may suspend or revoke any permit when it is determined that:

        (A)   The permittee has violated any term, condition or requirement of the permit or any applicable provision of this Chapter;

        (B)   The permittee’s discharge or the circumstances under which the discharge occurs have changed so that it is no longer appropriate to exempt the discharge from the prohibitions contained within this Chapter;

        (C)   The permittee failed to comply with any schedule for compliance issued pursuant to this Chapter; or

        (D)   Any regulatory agency, including EPA or a Regional Water Quality Control Board having jurisdiction over the discharge, provides written notice to the City that the discharge must be terminated.

        (2)    The Director may modify any permit when it is determined that:

        (A)   Federal law, state law, or NPDES permit requirements have changed in a manner that necessitates a change in the permit;

        (B)   The permittee’s discharge or the circumstances under which the discharge occurs have changed so that it is appropriate to modify the permit’s terms, conditions or requirements; or

        (C)   A change to the permit is necessary to ensure compliance with the objectives of this Chapter, the NPDES order, and/or to protect the quality of receiving waters. The permittee shall be informed of any change in the permit terms and conditions at least forty-five (45) business days prior to the effective date of the modified permit.

        (3)    The determination that a permit shall be denied, suspended, revoked or modified may be appealed by a permittee pursuant to the same procedures applicable to appeal of an administrative compliance order hereunder. In the absence of a judicial order to the contrary, the permittee may not continue to discharge pending issuance of the final administrative decision by the Hearing Officer.

        (c)    Permit Enforcement, Penalties. Any violation of the terms, conditions and requirements of any permit issued by the Director shall constitute a violation of this Chapter and subject the violator to the administrative, civil and criminal remedies available under this Chapter.

        (d)    Compliance with the terms, conditions and requirements of a permit issued pursuant to this Chapter shall not relieve the permittee from compliance with all federal, state and local laws, regulations and permit requirements applicable to the activity for which the permit is issued.

        (1)    Limited Permittee Rights. Permits issued under this Chapter are for the person identified therein as the “permittee” only, and authorize the specific operation at the specific location identified in the permit. The issuance of a permit does not vest the permittee with a continuing right to discharge.

        (2)    Transfer of Permits. No permit may be transferred to allow:

        (A)   A discharge to the MS4 at a location other than the location stated in the original permit; or

        (B)   A discharge by a person other than the permittee named in the permit, provided however that the City may approve a transfer if written approval is obtained in advance from the Director. (Added by Ord. 10-12, 11/8/10)

 

15.10.100 Interagency Cooperation.
        (a)    The Clean Water Act provides for cooperative implementation of requirements and interagency allocations of program resources and burdens. The coordinated effort of the County and the co-permittees under the NPDES order is reflected in the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Permit Implementation Agreement Santa Ana/San Diego Regions, the NPDES order, the DAMP, this Chapter, the appendices to the DAMP (including, but not limited to, the City’s Local Implementation Plan), the development project guidance, and the monitoring and data collection cooperation and regular emergency and spill response planning activities.

        (b)    The City may elect to contract for the services of any public entity or private person to carry out the planning approvals, inspections, permits and enforcement authorized by this Chapter. (Added by Ord. 10-12, 11/8/10)

 

15.10.110 Compliance Disclaimer.
        Full compliance by any person with the provisions of this Chapter shall not preclude the need to comply with other local, state or federal statutory or regulatory requirements which may be required for the control of the discharge of pollutants and/or the protection of water quality. (Added by Ord. 10-12, 11/8/10)

 

15.10.120 Judicial Review.
        The provisions of Sections 1094.5 and 1094.6 of the Code of Civil Procedure set forth the procedure for judicial review of any act taken pursuant to this Chapter. Parties seeking judicial review of any action taken pursuant to this Chapter shall file such action within ninety (90) days of the occurrence of the event for which review is sought. (Added by Ord. 10-12, 11/8/10)

Title 16 (Reserved)



